Q01	What is the history of JavaScript? What are the features that makes JavaScript so cool?
Q02	Define Static and Dynamic polymorphism in c++?
Q03	Computer software has to be "loaded" into the computer's storage (such as the hard drive or memory). Once the software has loaded, the computer is able to execute the software. This involves passing instructions from the application software, through the system software, to the hardware which ultimately receives the instruction as machine code.
Q04	Who was Tasuku Honjo? What was his contriution to the society?
Q05	How harmful is coronavirus for animals? What are the symptoms of this virus on animals? How can we protect animals from this?
Q06	What is Project MKUltra? How is it related with humans?
Q07	What is the scope of Bachelor of Arts degree? What are the opportunities available across the world?
Q08	Epic poetry agrees with Tragedy in so far as it is an imitation in verse of characters of a higher type. They differ in that Epic poetry admits but one kind of meter and is narrative in form. They differ, again, in their length: for Tragedy endeavors, as far as possible, to confine itself to a single revolution of the sun, or but slightly to exceed this limit, whereas the Epic action has no limits of time. This, then, is a second point of difference
Q09	A rich widow lived with her daughter and her stepdaughter. The widow favored her younger biological daughter, allowing her to become spoiled and idle while her older stepdaughter was left to do all the work. Every day the stepdaughter would sit outside the cottage and spin beside the well. One day, she pricked her finger on the point of the spindle.
Q10	What is Overcompleteness in mathematics?
Q11	The two descendants of Raghu then took hold of her feet; but remembering Gautama's words, she on her part took hold of theirs. And with a collected mind she gave them water for their feet as well as Arghya, and extended to them the rites of hospitality.
Q12	The sweet-speeched Subhadra also, saluting him in return and worshipping him repeatedly with bent head, told him all that she wished to be conveyed to her relatives on the paternal side. And bidding her farewell and uttering benedictions on his handsome sister, he of the Vrishni race, next saw Draupadi and Dhaumya. That best of men duly made obeisance unto Dhaumya, and consoling Draupadi obtained leave from her. Then the learned and mighty Krishna, accompanied by Partha, went to his cousins.
Q13	Who was Matthew Martin Lee Carpenter? Why he is so famous in baseball?
Q14	Musa is a crater in the northern hemisphere of Saturn's moon Enceladus.
Q15	Zeta is also known for its annual Women in Academia banquet which honors Trinity's female professors and college employees for their pursuits in academia, their roles as female leaders on campus, and their achievements for the Trinity College community. Participants and speakers at the event explore the continuing issue of women's roles in higher education, and to celebrate the triumphs of the women in academia at our college. Interest in the work and achievements of Zeta Omega Eta have led to the publication of several articles regarding the organization in Bust magazine, the Hartford Courant, the Trinity Tripod, Bitch magazine, and salon.com among others.
Q16	Weiner was raised in Pikesville, Maryland. He attended Wellwood Elementary School, Sudbrook Junior High, Pikesville High School and the University of Pennsylvania. In college, he played drums and sang in a rock band called Droylesden Wake. His first produced work was the 1967 Pikesville High Junior Play, an original parody using music from H.M.S. Pinafore and other Gilbert and Sullivan operas.
Q17	What are the difficulties associated with using animal models for human disease?
Q18	History of Mechanical analog computer. what is the necessity of this computer?
Q19	List of municipalities in Andhra Pradesh. what is the population of Andhra Pradesh?
Q20	Sirumalai Lake contains a small lake that was artificially created in the year 2010. In the region of Sirumalai, the Agasthiarpuram is a holy place where siddhas (monks) have lived since ancient times. The area is surrounded with medicinal herbs and plants.
