
Title:
Nazi human experimentation
Text:


Unethical experiments on human subjects by Nazi Germany in its concentration camps


.mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:22em;float:right;clear:right;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em;background:#f8f9fa;border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.2em;text-align:center;line-height:1.4em;font-size:88%;border-collapse:collapse;display:table}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .sidebar{display:table!important;float:right!important;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em!important}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-subgroup{width:100%;margin:0;border-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-left{float:left;clear:left;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-none{float:none;clear:both;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-outer-title{padding:0 0.4em 0.2em;font-size:125%;line-height:1.2em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-image{padding:0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-caption,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle-with-top-image,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-caption{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle{padding:0.4em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.2em 0.8em;font-size:145%;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-image{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-heading{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content{padding:0 0.5em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content-with-subgroup{padding:0.1em 0.4em 0.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-below{padding:0.3em 0.8em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-below{border-top:1px solid #aaa;border-bottom:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-navbar{text-align:right;font-size:115%;padding:0 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:left;font-weight:bold;line-height:1.6em;font-size:105%}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title-c{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:center;margin:0 3.3em}@media(max-width:720px){body.mediawiki .mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:100%!important;clear:both;float:none!important;margin-left:0!important;margin-right:0!important}}Part of a series onNazism
Organizations
National Socialist GermanWorkers' Party (NSDAP)
Sturmabteilung (SA)
Schutzstaffel (SS)
Geheime Staatspolizei (Gestapo)
Hitler Youth (HJ)
Deutsches Jungvolk (DJ)
League of German Girls (BDM)
National Socialist German Doctors' League
National Socialist German Students' League (NSDStB)
National Socialist League of the Reich for Physical Exercise (NSRL)
National Socialist Flyers Corps (NSFK)
National Socialist Motor Corps (NSKK)
National Socialist Women's League (NSF)
Combat League of Revolutionary National Socialists (KGRNS)

History
Early timeline
Hitler's rise to power
Machtergreifung
German re-armament
Nazi Germany
Religion in Nazi Germany
Adolf Hitler's cult of personality
Enabling Act of 1933
Night of the Long Knives
Nuremberg rallies
Anti-Comintern Pact
Kristallnacht
World War II
The Holocaust
Tripartite Pact
Denazification
Nuremberg trials
Neo-Nazism

Ideology
Fascism
Totalitarianism
Führerprinzip
Authoritarian democracy
Houston Stewart Chamberlain
Gleichschaltung
Arthur de Gobineau
Hitler's political views
Mein Kampf
The Myth of the Twentieth Century
Militarism
National Socialist Program
New Order
Preussentum und Sozialismus
Propaganda
Religious aspects
Strasserism
Symbolism
Women in Nazi Germany

Racial ideology
Antisemitism
Aryan race
Blood and soil
Völkisch movement
An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races
Eugenics
The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century
Greater Germanic Reich
Heim ins Reich
Lebensraum
Master race
The Passing of the Great Race
Racial policy of Nazi Germany
Völkisch equality
Volkskörper

Final Solution
Concentration camps
Deportations
Doctors' trial
Extermination camps
Genocide
Ghettos
Human experimentation
Labour camps
Pogroms
Racial segregation

People
Adolf Hitler
Joseph Goebbels
Hermann Göring
Martin Bormann
Kurt Daluege
Richard Walther Darré
Anton Drexler
Dietrich Eckart
Adolf Eichmann
Gottfried Feder
Hans Frank
Wilhelm Frick
Rudolf Hess
Reinhard Heydrich
Heinrich Himmler
Hans Lammers
Joachim von Ribbentrop
Karl Dönitz
Ernst Röhm
Alfred Rosenberg
Arthur Seyss-Inquart
Albert Speer
Gregor Strasser
Otto Strasser
Julius Streicher

Nazism outside of Germany
American Nazi Party
Nordic Resistance Movement
Aria Party (Persia)
Arrow Cross Party (Hungary)
Azure Party (Persia)
Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party
German American Bund
German National Movement in Liechtenstein
Greek National Socialist Party
South African Gentile National Socialist Movement
Hungarian National Socialist Party
Nasjonal Samling (Norway)
National Movement of Switzerland
National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands
National Socialist Bloc (Sweden)
National Socialist League (UK)
National Socialist Movement of Chile
National Socialist Movement(United States)
National Socialist Party (Romania)
National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark
National Unity Party (Canada)
Nazism in Brazil
Nationalist Liberation Alliance (Argentina)
SUMKA
Ossewabrandwag (South Africa)
World Union of National Socialists

Lists
Books by or about Adolf Hitler
Nazi ideologues
Nazi Party leaders and officials
Nazi Party members
Speeches given by Adolf Hitler
SS personnel

Related topics
Beefsteak Nazi
Glossary of Nazi Germany
Zweites Buch

 Category
 Germany portal.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vte
Nazi human experimentation was a series of medical experiments on large numbers of prisoners, including children, by Nazi Germany in its concentration camps in the early to mid 1940s, during World War II and the Holocaust. Chief target populations included Romani, Sinti, ethnic Poles, Soviet POWs, disabled Germans, and Jews from across Europe.
Nazi physicians and their assistants forced prisoners into participating; they did not willingly volunteer and no consent was given for the procedures. Typically, the experiments were conducted without anesthesia and resulted in death, trauma, disfigurement, or permanent disability, and as such are considered examples of medical torture.
At Auschwitz and other camps, under the direction of Eduard Wirths, selected inmates were subjected to various experiments that were designed to help German military personnel in combat situations, develop new weapons, aid in the recovery of military personnel who had been injured, and to advance the Nazi racial ideology and eugenics,[1] including the twin experiments of Josef Mengele.[2] Aribert Heim conducted similar medical experiments at Mauthausen.[3]
After the war, these crimes were tried at what became known as the Doctors' Trial, and revulsion at the abuses perpetrated led to the development of the Nuremberg Code of medical ethics. The Nazi physicians in the Doctors' Trial argued that military necessity justified their experiments, and compared their victims to collateral damage from Allied bombings.

Contents

1 Experiments

1.1 Experiments on twins
1.2 Bone, muscle, and nerve transplantation experiments
1.3 Head injury experiments
1.4 Freezing experiments
1.5 Malaria experiments
1.6 Immunization experiments
1.7 Epidemic jaundice
1.8 Mustard gas experiments
1.9 Sulfonamide experiments
1.10 Sea water experiments
1.11 Sterilization and fertility experiments
1.12 Experiments with poison
1.13 Incendiary bomb experiments
1.14 High altitude experiments
1.15 Blood coagulation experiments
1.16 Electroshock experiments


2 Aftermath

2.1 Modern ethical issues


3 See also
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links

6.1 Controversy regarding use of findings





Experiments
The table of contents of a document from the Nuremberg military tribunals prosecution includes titles of the sections that document medical experiments revolving around: food, seawater, epidemic jaundice, sulfanilamide, blood coagulation and phlegmon.[4] According to the indictments at the Subsequent Nuremberg Trials,[5][6] these experiments included the following:

Experiments on twins
Experiments on twin children in concentration camps were created to show the superiority of heredity over the environment and to find ways to increase German reproduction rates. The central leader of the experiments was Josef Mengele, who from 1943 to 1944 performed experiments on nearly 1,500 sets of imprisoned twins at Auschwitz. About 200 people survived these studies.[7] The twins were arranged by age and sex and kept in barracks between experiments, which ranged from amputations, infecting them with various diseases and injecting dyes into their eyes to change their color. He also attempted to create conjoined twins by sewing twins together, causing gangrene and eventually, death.[8][9] Often, one twin would be forced to undergo experimentation, while the other was kept as a control. If the experimentation reached the point of death, the second twin would be brought in to be killed at the same time. Doctors would then look at the effects of experimentation and compare both bodies.[10]

Bone, muscle, and nerve transplantation experiments
From about September 1942 to about December 1943 experiments were conducted at the Ravensbrück concentration camp, for the benefit of the German Armed Forces, to study bone, muscle, and nerve regeneration, and bone transplantation from one person to another.[11] In these experiments, subjects had their bones, muscles and nerves removed without anesthesia. As a result of these operations, many victims suffered intense agony, mutilation, and permanent disability.[11]
On 12 August 1946 a survivor named Jadwiga Kamińska[12] gave a deposition about her time at Ravensbrück concentration camp and describes how she was operated on twice. Both operations involved one of her legs and although she never describes having any knowledge as to what exactly the procedure was, she explains that both times she was in extreme pain and developed a fever post surgery, but was given little to no aftercare. Kamińska describes being told that she had been operated on simply because she was a "young girl and a Polish patriot". She describes how her leg oozed pus for months after the operations.[13]
Prisoners were also experimented on by having their bone marrow injected with bacteria to study the effectiveness of new drugs being developed for use in the battle fields. Those who survived remained permanently disfigured.[14]

Head injury experiments
In mid-1942 in Baranowicze, occupied Poland, experiments were conducted in a small building behind the private home occupied by a known Nazi SD Security Service officer, in which "a young boy of eleven or twelve [was] strapped to a chair so he could not move. Above him was a mechanized hammer that every few seconds came down upon his head." The boy was driven insane from the torture.[15]

Freezing experiments
  A cold water immersion experiment at Dachau concentration camp presided over by Ernst Holzlöhner (left) and Sigmund Rascher (right). The subject is wearing an experimental Luftwaffe garment.In 1941, the Luftwaffe conducted experiments with the intent of discovering means to prevent and treat hypothermia.  There were 360 to 400 experiments and 280 to 300 victims indicating some victims suffered more than one experiment.[16]

"Exitus" (death) table compiled by Sigmund Rascher[17]


Attempt no.

Water temperature

Body temperature when removed from the water

Body temperature at death

Time in water

Time of death


5

5.2 °C (41.4 °F)

27.7 °C (81.9 °F)

27.7 °C (81.9 °F)

66'

66'


13

6 °C (43 °F)

29.2 °C (84.6 °F)

29.2 °C (84.6 °F)

80'

87'


14

4 °C (39 °F)

27.8 °C (82.0 °F)

27.5 °C (81.5 °F)

95'




16

4 °C (39 °F)

28.7 °C (83.7 °F)

26 °C (79 °F)

60'

74'


23

4.5 °C (40.1 °F)

27.8 °C (82.0 °F)

25.7 °C (78.3 °F)

57'

65'


25

4.6 °C (40.3 °F)

27.8 °C (82.0 °F)

26.6 °C (79.9 °F)

51'

65'




4.2 °C (39.6 °F)

26.7 °C (80.1 °F)

25.9 °C (78.6 °F)

53'

53'

Another study placed prisoners naked in the open air for several hours with temperatures as low as −6 °C (21 °F). Besides studying the physical effects of cold exposure, the experimenters also assessed different methods of rewarming survivors.[18]  "One assistant later testified that some victims were thrown into boiling water for rewarming."[16]
Beginning in August 1942, at the Dachau camp, prisoners were forced to sit in tanks of freezing water for up to three hours. After subjects were frozen, they then underwent different methods for rewarming. Many subjects died in this process.[19]
The freezing/hypothermia experiments were conducted for the Nazi high command to simulate the conditions the armies suffered on the Eastern Front, as the German forces were ill-prepared for the cold weather they encountered. Many experiments were conducted on captured Soviet troops; the Nazis wondered whether their genetics gave them superior resistance to cold. The principal locales were Dachau and Auschwitz. Sigmund Rascher, an SS doctor based at Dachau, reported directly to Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler and publicised the results of his freezing experiments at the 1942 medical conference entitled "Medical Problems Arising from Sea and Winter".[20] In a letter from 10 September 1942, Rascher describes an experiment on intense cooling performed in Dachau where people were dressed in fighter pilot uniforms and submerged in freezing water. Rascher had some of the victims completely underwater and others only submerged up to the head.[21] Approximately 100 people are reported to have died as a result of these experiments.[22]

Malaria experiments
From about February 1942 to about April 1945, experiments were conducted at the Dachau concentration camp in order to investigate immunization for treatment of malaria. Healthy inmates were infected by mosquitoes or by injections of extracts of the mucous glands of female mosquitoes. After contracting the disease, the subjects were treated with various drugs to test their relative efficacy.[23] Over 1,200 people were used in these experiments and more than half died as a result.[24] Other test subjects were left with permanent disabilities.[25]

Immunization experiments
At the German concentration camps of Sachsenhausen, Dachau, Natzweiler, Buchenwald, and Neuengamme, scientists tested immunization compounds and serums for the prevention and treatment of contagious diseases, including malaria, typhus, tuberculosis, typhoid fever, yellow fever, and infectious hepatitis.[26][27]

Epidemic jaundice
From June 1943 until January 1945 at the concentration camps, Sachsenhausen and Natzweiler, experimentation with epidemic jaundice was conducted. The test subjects were injected with the disease in order to discover new inoculations for the condition. These tests were conducted for the benefit of the German Armed Forces. Most died in the experiments, whilst others survived, experiencing great pain and suffering.[28]

Mustard gas experiments
At various times between September 1939 and April 1945, many experiments were conducted at Sachsenhausen, Natzweiler, and other camps to investigate the most effective treatment of wounds caused by mustard gas. Test subjects were deliberately exposed to mustard gas and other vesicants (e.g. Lewisite) which inflicted severe chemical burns. The victims' wounds were then tested to find the most effective treatment for the mustard gas burns.[29]

  Child victims of Nazi experimentation show incisions where axillary lymph nodes had been surgically removed after they were deliberately infected with tuberculosis at Neuengamme concentration camp. They were later murdered.[30]
Sulfonamide experiments
From about July 1942 to about September 1943, experiments to investigate the effectiveness of sulfonamide, a synthetic antimicrobial agent, were conducted at Ravensbrück.[31] Wounds inflicted on the subjects were infected with bacteria such as Streptococcus, Clostridium perfringens (a major causative agent in gas gangrene) and Clostridium tetani, the causative agent in tetanus.[32] Circulation of blood was interrupted by tying off blood vessels at both ends of the wound to create a condition similar to that of a battlefield wound. Researchers also aggravated the subjects' infection by forcing wood shavings and ground glass into their wounds. The infection was treated with sulfonamide and other drugs to determine their effectiveness.

Sea water experiments
From about July 1944 to about September 1944, experiments were conducted at the Dachau concentration camp to study various methods of making sea water drinkable. These victims were subject to deprivation of all food and only given the filtered sea water.[33] At one point, a group of roughly 90 Roma were deprived of food and given nothing but sea water to drink by Hans Eppinger, leaving them gravely injured.[20] They were so dehydrated that others observed them licking freshly mopped floors in an attempt to get drinkable water.[34]
A Holocaust survivor named Joseph Tschofenig wrote a statement on these seawater experiments at Dachau. Tschofenig explained how while working at the medical experimentation stations he gained insight into some of the experiments that were performed on prisoners, namely those in which they were forced to drink salt water. Tschofenig also described how victims of the experiments had trouble eating and would desperately seek out any source of water including old floor rags. Tschofenig was responsible for using the X-ray machine in the infirmary and describes how even though he had insight into what was going on he was powerless to stop it. He gives the example of a patient in the infirmary who was sent to the gas chambers by Sigmund Rascher simply because he witnessed one of the low-pressure experiments.[35]

Sterilization and fertility experiments
The Law for the Prevention of Genetically Defective Progeny, which was passed on 14 July 1933, legalized the involuntary sterilization of persons with diseases claimed to be hereditary: weak-mindedness, schizophrenia, alcohol abuse, insanity, blindness, deafness, and physical deformities. The law was used to encourage growth of the Aryan race through the sterilization of persons who fell under the quota of being genetically defective.[36] 1% of citizens between the age of 17 to 24 had been sterilized within two years of the law passing.
Within four years, 300,000 patients had been sterilized.[37] From about March 1941 to about January 1945, sterilization experiments were conducted at Auschwitz, Ravensbrück, and other places by Carl Clauberg.[29] The purpose of these experiments was to develop a method of sterilization which would be suitable for sterilizing millions of people with a minimum of time and effort. The targets for sterilization included Jewish and Roma populations.[14] These experiments were conducted by means of X-ray, surgery and various drugs. Thousands of victims were sterilized. Aside from its experimentation, the Nazi government sterilized around 400,000 people as part of its compulsory sterilization program.[38]
Carl Clauberg was the leading research developer in the search for cost effective and efficient means of mass sterilization. He was particularly interested in experimenting on women from age twenty to forty who had already given birth. Prior to any experiments, Clauberg X-rayed women to make sure that there was no obstruction to their ovaries. Next, over the course of three to five sessions, he injected the women's cervixes with the goal of blocking their fallopian tubes. The women who stood against him and his experiments or were deemed as unfit test subjects were sent to be killed in the gas chambers.[39]
Intravenous injections of solutions speculated to contain iodine and silver nitrate were successful, but had unwanted side effects such as vaginal bleeding, severe abdominal pain, and cervical cancer.[40] Therefore, radiation treatment became the favored choice of sterilization. Specific amounts of exposure to radiation destroyed a person's ability to produce ova or sperm, sometimes administered through deception. Many suffered severe radiation burns.[41]
The Nazis also implemented X-ray radiation treatment in their search for mass sterilization. They gave the women abdomen X-rays, men received them on their genitalia, for abnormal periods of time in attempt to invoke infertility. After the experiment was complete, they surgically removed their reproductive organs, often without anesthesia, for lab analysis.[39]
M.D. William E. Seidelman, a professor from the University of Toronto, in collaboration with Dr. Howard Israel of Columbia University, published a report on an investigation on the medical experimentation performed in Austria under the Nazi regime. In that report he mentions a Doctor Hermann Stieve, who used the war to experiment on live humans. Stieve specifically focused on the reproductive system of women. He would tell women their date of death in advance, and he would evaluate how their psychological distress would affect their menstruation cycles. After they were murdered, he would dissect and examine their reproductive organs. Some of the women were raped after they were told the date when they would be killed so that Stieve could study the path of sperm through their reproductive system.[42]

Experiments with poison
Somewhere between December 1943 and October 1944, experiments were conducted at Buchenwald to investigate the effect of various poisons. The poisons were secretly administered to experimental subjects in their food. The victims died as a result of the poison or were killed immediately in order to permit autopsies. In September 1944, experimental subjects were shot with poisonous bullets, suffered torture, and often died.[29]
Some male Jewish prisoners had poisonous substances scrubbed or injected into their skin, causing boils filled with black fluid to form. These experiments were heavily documented as well as photographed by the Nazis.[39]

Incendiary bomb experiments
From around November 1943 to around January 1944, experiments were conducted at Buchenwald to test the effect of various pharmaceutical preparations on phosphorus burns. These burns were inflicted on prisoners using phosphorus material extracted from incendiary bombs.[29]

High altitude experiments
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}Further information: Hubertus Strughold
  A victim loses consciousness during a depressurization experiment at Dachau by Luftwaffe doctor Sigmund Rascher, 1942.
In early 1942, prisoners at Dachau concentration camp were used by Sigmund Rascher in experiments to aid German pilots who had to eject at high altitudes. A low-pressure chamber containing these prisoners was used to simulate conditions at altitudes of up to 68,000 feet (21,000 m). It was rumored that Rascher performed vivisections on the brains of victims who survived the initial experiment.[43] Of the 200 subjects, 80 died outright, and the others were murdered.[20] In a letter from 5 April 1942 between Rascher and Heinrich Himmler, Rascher explains the results of a low-pressure experiment that was performed on people at Dachau Concentration camp in which the victim was suffocated while Rascher and another unnamed doctor took note of his reactions. The person was described as 37 years old and in good health before being murdered. Rascher described the victim's actions as he began to lose oxygen and timed the changes in behavior. The 37-year-old began to wiggle his head at four minutes; a minute later Rascher observed that he was suffering from cramps before falling unconscious. He describes how the victim then lay unconscious, breathing only three times per minute, until he stopped breathing 30 minutes after being deprived of oxygen. The victim then turned blue and began foaming at the mouth. An autopsy followed an hour later.[44]
In a letter from Himmler to Rascher on 13 April 1942, Himmler ordered Rascher to continue the high altitude experiments and to continue experimenting on prisoners condemned to death and to "determine whether these men could be recalled to life". If a victim could be successfully resuscitated, Himmler ordered that he be pardoned to "concentration camp for life".[45]

Blood coagulation experiments
Sigmund Rascher experimented with the effects of Polygal, a substance made from beet and apple pectin, which aided blood clotting. He predicted that the preventive use of Polygal tablets would reduce bleeding from gunshot wounds sustained during combat or surgery. Subjects were given a Polygal tablet, shot through the neck or chest, or had their limbs amputated without anesthesia. Rascher published an article on his experience of using Polygal, without detailing the nature of the human trials, and set up a company staffed by prisoners to manufacture the substance.[46]
Bruno Weber was the head of the Hygienic Institution at Block 10 in Auschwitz and injected his subjects with blood types that were differed from their own. This caused the blood cells to congeal, and the blood was studied. When the Nazis removed blood from someone, they often entered a major artery, causing the subject to die of major blood loss.[39]

Electroshock experiments
Some female prisoners of Block 10 were also subject to electroshock therapy. These women were often sick and underwent this experimentation before being sent to the gas chambers and killed.[39]

Aftermath
  Jadwiga Dzido shows scars on her leg from medical experiments to the Doctors' Trial
Other documented transcriptions from Heinrich Himmler include phrases such as "These researches… can be performed by us with particular efficiency because I personally assumed the responsibility for supplying asocial individuals and criminals who deserve only to die from concentration camps for these experiments."[47] Many of the subjects died as a result of the experiments conducted by the Nazis, while many others were murdered after the tests were completed to study the effects post mortem.[48] Those who survived were often left mutilated, suffering permanent disability, weakened bodies, and mental distress.[20][49] On 19 August 1947, the doctors captured by Allied forces were put on trial in USA vs. Karl Brandt et al., commonly known as the Doctors' Trial. At the trial, several of the doctors argued in their defense that there was no international law regarding medical experimentation.[citation needed] Some doctors also claimed that they had been doing the world a favor. An SS doctor was quoted saying that "Jews were the festering appendix in the body of Europe." He then went on to argue he was doing the world a favor by eliminating them.[10]
The issue of informed consent had previously been controversial in German medicine in 1900, when Albert Neisser infected patients (mainly prostitutes) with syphilis without their consent. Despite Neisser's support from most of the academic community, public opinion, led by psychiatrist Albert Moll, was against Neisser. While Neisser went on to be fined by the Royal Disciplinary Court, Moll developed "a legally based, positivistic contract theory of the patient-doctor relationship" that was not adopted into German law.[50] Eventually, the minister for religious, educational, and medical affairs issued a directive stating that medical interventions other than for diagnosis, healing, and immunization were excluded under all circumstances if "the human subject was a minor or not competent for other reasons", or if the subject had not given his or her "unambiguous consent" after a "proper explanation of the possible negative consequences" of the intervention, though this was not legally binding.[50]
In response, Drs. Leo Alexander and Andrew Conway Ivy, the American Medical Association representative at the Doctors' Trial, drafted a ten-point memorandum entitled Permissible Medical Experiment that went on to be known as the Nuremberg Code.[51] The code calls for such standards as voluntary consent of patients, avoidance of unnecessary pain and suffering, and that there must be a belief that the experimentation will not end in death or disability.[52] The Code was not cited in any of the findings against the defendants and never made it into either German or American medical law.[53] This code comes from the Nuremberg Trials where the most heinous of Nazi leaders were put on trial for their war crimes.[54] To this day, the Nuremberg Code remains a major stepping stone for medical experimentation.[55]

Modern ethical issues
Andrew Conway Ivy stated the Nazi experiments were of no medical value.[16] Data obtained from the experiments, however, has been used and considered for use in multiple fields, often causing controversy. Some object to the data's use purely on ethical grounds, disagreeing with the methods used to obtain it, while others have rejected the research only on scientific grounds, criticizing methodological inconsistencies.[16] Those in favor of using the data argue that if it has practical value to save lives, it would be equally unethical not to use it.[34] Arnold S. Relman, editor of The New England Journal of Medicine from 1977 till 1991, refused to allow the journal to publish any article that cited the Nazi experiments.[16]

.mw-parser-output .quotebox{background-color:#F9F9F9;border:1px solid #aaa;box-sizing:border-box;padding:10px;font-size:88%;max-width:100%}.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatleft{margin:.5em 1.4em .8em 0}.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatright{margin:.5em 0 .8em 1.4em}.mw-parser-output .quotebox.centered{overflow:hidden;position:relative;margin:.5em auto .8em auto}.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatleft span,.mw-parser-output .quotebox.floatright span{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .quotebox>blockquote{margin:0;padding:0;border-left:0;font-family:inherit;font-size:inherit}.mw-parser-output .quotebox-title{background-color:#F9F9F9;text-align:center;font-size:110%;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .quotebox-quote>:first-child{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .quotebox-quote:last-child>:last-child{margin-bottom:0}.mw-parser-output .quotebox-quote.quoted:before{font-family:"Times New Roman",serif;font-weight:bold;font-size:large;color:gray;content:" “ ";vertical-align:-45%;line-height:0}.mw-parser-output .quotebox-quote.quoted:after{font-family:"Times New Roman",serif;font-weight:bold;font-size:large;color:gray;content:" ” ";line-height:0}.mw-parser-output .quotebox .left-aligned{text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .quotebox .right-aligned{text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .quotebox .center-aligned{text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .quotebox .quote-title,.mw-parser-output .quotebox .quotebox-quote{display:block}.mw-parser-output .quotebox cite{display:block;font-style:normal}@media screen and (max-width:640px){.mw-parser-output .quotebox{width:100%!important;margin:0 0 .8em!important;float:none!important}}

"I don't want to have to use the Nazi data, but there is no other and will be no other in an ethical world ... not to use it would be equally bad. I'm trying to make something constructive out of it."


Dr John Hayward, justifying citing the Dachau freezing experiments in his research.[34]


The results of the Dachau freezing experiments have been used in some late 20th century research into the treatment of hypothermia; at least 45 publications had referenced the experiments as of 1984, though the majority of publications in the field did not cite the research.[16] Those who have argued in favor of using the research include Robert Pozos from the University of Minnesota and John Hayward from the University of Victoria.[34] In a 1990 review of the Dachau experiments, Robert Berger concludes that the study has "all the ingredients of a scientific fraud" and that the data "cannot advance science or save human lives."[16]
In 1989, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) considered using data from Nazi research into the effects of phosgene gas, believing the data could help US soldiers stationed in the Persian Gulf at the time. They eventually decided against using it, on the grounds it would lead to criticism and similar data could be obtained from later studies on animals. Writing for Jewish Law, Baruch Cohen concluded that the EPA's "knee-jerk reaction" to reject the data's use was "typical, but unprofessional", arguing that it could have saved lives.[34]
Controversy has also risen from the use of results of biological warfare testing done by the Imperial Japanese Army's Unit 731.[56] The results from Unit 731 were kept classified by the United States until the majority of doctors involved were given pardons.[57]

See also
Bullenhuser Damm
Erwin Ding-Schuler
Guatemala syphilis experiment
Herta Oberheuser
Henry K. Beecher
Human experimentation in North Korea
Human radiation experiments
Japanese human experimentation
Jewish skeleton collection
Karl Genzken
Karl Gebhardt
Viktor Frankl
List of medical eponyms with Nazi associations
List of Nazi doctors
Nazi eugenics
Project MKUltra (CIA)
Shiro Ishii
Unethical human experimentation in the United States
Margarethe Kraus
References
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}"Nazi Medical Experimentation". US Holocaust Memorial Museum. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ Wachsmann, Nikolaus (2015). KL: A History of the Nazi Concentration Camps. New York, NY, United States of America: Farrar Straus & Giroux. p. 505. ISBN 978-0374118259.

^ "Nazi 'Doctor Death' found refuge in Cairo, died in 1992". France 24. 4 February 2009. Retrieved 16 March 2021.

^ "Nuremberg - Document Viewer - Table of contents for prosecution document book 8, concerning medical experiments". nuremberg.law.harvard.edu. Retrieved 2017-04-14.

^ "Medical Experiment". Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ "The Doctors Trial: The Medical Case of the Subsequent Nuremberg Proceedings". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 20 April 2008. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ Josef Mengele and Experimentation on Human Twins at Auschwitz Archived 14 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Children of the Flames; Dr. Josef Mengele and the Untold Story of the Twins of Auschwitz, Lucette Matalon Lagnado and Sheila Cohn Dekel, and Mengele: the Complete Story by Gerald Posner and John Ware.

^ Black, Edwin (2004). War Against the Weak: Eugenics and America's Campaign to Create a Master Race. United States: Thunder's Mouth Press. ISBN 978-1-56858-258-0.

^ Berenbaum, Michael (1993). The world must know: the history of the Holocaust as told in the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Boston: Little, Brown. pp. 194–5. ISBN 978-0-316-09134-3.

^ a b Baron, Saskia, director. Science and the Swastika: The Deadly Experiment. Darlow Smithson Productions, 2001.

^ a b Perper, Joshua A.; Cina, Stephen J. (14 June 2010). When Doctors Kill: Who, Why, and How. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 9781441913692.

^ "Women's Concentration Camp Medical Experiment Victims". Retrieved 12 November 2017.

^ "Nuremberg - Document Viewer - Deposition concerning medical experiments at Ravensbrueck [bone/muscle/nerve experiments]". nuremberg.law.harvard.edu. Retrieved 2017-04-14.

^ a b "Nazi Medical Experiments". www.ushmm.org. Retrieved 3 May 2018.

^ Small, Martin; Vic Shayne. "Remember Us: My Journey from the Shtetl through the Holocaust", Page 135, 2009.

^ a b c d e f g Berger, Robert L. (May 1990). "Nazi Science — the Dachau Hypothermia Experiments". New England Journal of Medicine. 322 (20): 1435–40. doi:10.1056/NEJM199005173222006. PMID 2184357.

^ The Dachau Concentration Camp, 1933 to 1945. Comite International Dachau. 2000. p. 183. ISBN 978-3-87490-751-4.

^ Bogod, David (2004). "The Nazi Hypothermia Experiments: Forbidden Data?". Anaesthesia. 59 (12): 1155–1156. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2044.2004.04034.x. PMID 15549970. S2CID 21906854.

^ "Freezing Experiments". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 3 May 2018.

^ a b c d Tyson, Peter. "Holocaust on Trial: The Experiments". NOVA Online. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ "Documents Regarding Nazi Medical Experiments". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 2017-04-14.

^ Neurnberg Military Tribunal, Volume I · Page 200

^ George J. Annas Edward R. Utley Professor of Health Law; Medicine Michael A. Grodin Associate Professor of Philosophy and Associate Director of Law, and Ethics Program both of the Boston University Schools of Medicine and Public Health (7 May 1992). The Nazi Doctors and the Nuremberg Code : Human Rights in Human Experimentation: Human Rights in Human Experimentation. Oxford University Press, USA. p. 98. ISBN 978-0-19-977226-1.

^ United States. Office of Chief of Counsel for the Prosecution of Axis Criminality; United States. Dept. of State; United States. War Dept; International Military Tribunal (1946). Nazi conspiracy and aggression: Office of United States Chief of Counsel for Prosecution of Axis Criminality. U.S. Govt. Print. Off.

^ "Malaria Experiments". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 3 May 2018.

^ "Nazi Medical Experiments". ushmm.org.

^ Metzger, W. G.; Ehni, H.‐J.; Kremsner, P. G.; Mordmüller, B. G. (December 2019). "Experimental infections in humans—historical and ethical reflections". Tropical Medicine & International Health. 24 (12): 1384–1390. doi:10.1111/tmi.13320. ISSN 1360-2276. PMID 31654450.

^ "Epidemic Jaundice Experiments". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 3 May 2018.

^ a b c d "Introduction to NMT Case 1: U.S.A. v. Karl Brandt et al". Harvard Law Library, Nuremberg Trials Project: A Digital Document Collection. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ "Children of Bullenhuser Damm". www.auschwitz.dk. Retrieved 31 March 2016.

^ Schaefer, Naomi. The Legacy of Nazi Medicine, The New Atlantis, Number 5, Spring 2004, pp. 54–60.

^ Spitz, Vivien (2005). Doctors from Hell: The Horrific Account of Nazi Experiments on Humans. Sentient Publications. p. 4. ISBN 978-1-59181-032-2. sulfonamide nazi tetanus.

^ "Sea Water Experiments". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 3 May 2018.

^ a b c d e Cohen, Baruch C. "The Ethics of Using Medical Data From Nazi Experiments". Jewish Law: Articles. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ "Nuremberg - Document Viewer - Affidavit concerning the seawater experiments". nuremberg.law.harvard.edu. Retrieved 2017-04-14.

^ Gardella JE. The cost-effectiveness of killing: an overview of Nazi "euthanasia." Medical Sentinel 1999;4:132-5

^ Dahl M. [Selection and destruction-treatment of "unworthy-to-live" children in the Third Reich and the role of child and adolescent psychiatry], Prax Kinderpsychol Kinderpsychiatr 2001;50:170-91.

^ Piotrowski, Christa (21 July 2000). "Dark Chapter of American History: U.S. Court Battle Over Forced Sterilization". CommonDreams.org News Center. Archived from the original on 15 April 2008. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ a b c d e Lifton, Robert Jay, 1926- author. (16 May 2017). The Nazi doctors : medical killing and the psychology of genocide. ISBN 978-0-465-09339-7. OCLC 1089625744. {{cite book}}: |last= has generic name (help)CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ Meric, Vesna (27 January 2005). "Forced to take part in experiments". BBC News.

^ "Medical Experiments at Auschwitz". Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ "Medicine and Murder in the Third Reich". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 2017-04-14.

^ Cockburn, Alexander (1998). Whiteout:The CIA, Drugs, and the Press. Verso. ISBN 978-1-85984-139-6.

^ "Documents Regarding Nazi Medical Experiments". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 2017-04-14

^ "Nuremberg - Document Viewer - Letter to Sigmund Rascher concerning the high altitude experiments". nuremberg.law.harvard.edu. Retrieved 2017-04-14.

^ Michalczyk, p. 96

^ "Nuremberg - Document Viewer - Letter to Erhard Milch concerning the high altitude and freezing experiments". nuremberg.law.harvard.edu. Retrieved 2017-04-14.

^ Rosenberg, Jennifer. "Mengele's Children – The Twins of Auschwitz". about.com. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ "Sterilization Experiments". Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ a b Vollman, Jochen; Rolf Winau. "Informed consent in human experimentation before the Nuremberg code". BMJ. Archived from the original on 4 March 2008. Retrieved 8 April 2008.

^ "The Nuremberg Code". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 21 February 2008. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ "Regulations and Ethical Guidelines: Reprinted from Trials of War Criminals before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals under Control Council Law No. 10, Vol. 2, pp. 181–182". Office of Human Subjects Research. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office. 1949. Archived from the original on 29 October 2007. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ Ghooi, Ravindra B. (1 January 2011). "The Nuremberg Code–A critique". Perspectives in Clinical Research. 2 (2): 72–76. doi:10.4103/2229-3485.80371. ISSN 2229-3485. PMC 3121268. PMID 21731859.

^ "The Nuremberg Trials". www.ushmm.org. Retrieved 3 May 2018.

^ "Nuremberg Code – United States Holocaust Memorial Museum". www.ushmm.org. Retrieved 3 May 2018.

^ "Unit 731: Japan's biological force". BBC News. 1 February 2002. Retrieved 27 March 2008.

^ Reilly, Kevin; Stephen Kaufman; Angela Bodino (2003). Racism: A Global Reader. M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 978-0-7656-1059-1.


Further reading
Annas, George J. (1992). The Nazi Doctors and the Nuremberg Code: Human Rights in Human Experimentation. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195101065.
Baumslag, N. (2005). Murderous Medicine: Nazi Doctors, Human Experimentation, and Typhus. Praeger Publishers.  ISBN 0-275-98312-9
Michalczyk, J. (Dir.) (1997). In The Shadow of the Reich: Nazi Medicine. First Run Features. (video)
Nyiszli, M. (2011). "3". Auschwitz: A Doctor's Eyewitness Account. New York: Arcade Publishing.
Rees, L. (2005). Auschwitz: A New History. Public Affairs. ISBN 1-58648-357-9
Weindling, P.J. (2005). Nazi Medicine and the Nuremberg Trials: From Medical War Crimes to Informed Consent. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1-4039-3911-X
USAF School of Aerospace Medicine (1950). German Aviation Medicine, World War II. United States Air Force.
External links
The Infamous Medical Experiments from Holocaust Survivors and Remembrance Project: "Forget You Not"
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum – Online Exhibition: Doctors Trial
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum – Online Exhibition: Deadly Medicine: Creating the Master Race
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum – Library Bibliography: Medical Experiments
Jewish Virtual Library: Medical Experiments Table of Contents
Controversy regarding use of findings
Campell, Robert. "Citations of shame; scientists are still trading on Nazi atrocities", New Scientist, 28 February 1985, 105(1445), p. 31.Citations of shame; scientists are still trading on Nazi atrocities[1]
"Citing Nazi 'Research': To Do So Without Condemnation Is Not Defensible"
"On the Ethics of Citing Nazi Research"
"Remembering the Holocaust, Part 2"
"The Ethics Of Using Medical Data From Nazi Experiments"
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vteNazismOrganisation
National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP)
Sturmabteilung (SA)
Schutzstaffel (SS)
Geheime Staatspolizei (Gestapo)
Hitler Youth (HJ)
National Socialist Flyers Corps (NSFK)
National Socialist Motor Corps (NSKK)
League of German Girls (BDM)
National Socialist German Doctors' League
National Socialist League for Physical Exercise (NSRL)
National Socialist Women's League (NSF)
Reich Labour Service (RAD)
Werwolf
History
Early timeline
Adolf Hitler's rise to power
Re-armament
Nazi Germany
Night of the Long Knives
Nuremberg rallies
Anti-Comintern Pact
Kristallnacht
World War II
Tripartite Pact
The Holocaust
Nuremberg trials
Denazification
Consequences
Ideology
Architecture
Führer
Führerprinzip
Gleichschaltung
Anti-democratic thought
Strasserism
Hitler's political views
Mein Kampf (Hitler)
The Myth of the Twentieth Century (Rosenberg)
National Socialist Program
New Order
Preussentum und Sozialismus
Propaganda
Themes
Hitler's prophecy
Anti-American
Religious aspects
Women in Nazi Germany
Race
Blood and soil
Eugenics
Greater Germanic Reich
Heim ins Reich
Lebensborn
Master race
Racial policy
Religion
Atrocities and war crimes
Action T4
Nazi concentration camps
Extermination camp
Final Solution
Human experimentation
Romani genocide
OutsideGermany
Arrow Cross Party (Hungary)
Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party
Czechoslovakia
German National Socialist Workers' Party (Czechoslovakia)
Sudeten German Party
Finland
Finnish National Socialist Labor Organisation
Finnish People's Organisation
People's Community Society
Greek National Socialist Party
Hungarian National Socialist Party
Liechtenstein
German National Movement in Liechtenstein
Liechtenstein Homeland Service
Nasjonal Samling (Norway)
National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands
National Socialist Bloc (Sweden)
National Socialist League (UK)
National Socialist Movement of Chile
National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark
National Unity Party (Canada)
Nationalist Liberation Alliance (Argentina)
Nazism in Brazil
South Africa
Ossewabrandwag (South Africa)
South African Gentile National Socialist Movement
Switzerland
Eidgenössische Sammlung
National Front (Switzerland)
National Movement of Switzerland
National Union (Switzerland)
United States
American Nazi Party
German American Bund
National Socialist Movement
Volksdeutsche Bewegung (Luxembourg)
World Union of National Socialists
Lists
Books by or about Hitler
Ideologues
Leaders and officials
Nazi Party members
Speeches given by Hitler
SS personnel
Role and impact in  German society
The Wehrmacht
Cinema
Economy
People
Adolf Hitler
Joseph Goebbels
Heinrich Himmler
Hermann Göring
Martin Bormann
Reinhard Heydrich
Gregor Strasser
Otto Strasser
Albert Speer
Rudolf Hess
Ernst Kaltenbrunner
Adolf Eichmann
Joachim von Ribbentrop
Houston Stewart Chamberlain
Alfred Rosenberg
Wilhelm Frick
Hans Frank
Rudolf Höss
Josef Mengele
Richard Walther Darré
Erich Ludendorff
Baldur von Schirach
Artur Axmann
Ernst Röhm
Dietrich Eckart
Gottfried Feder
Ernst Hanfstaengl
Julius Streicher
Hermann Esser
Walther Funk
Robert Ley
Karl Brandt
Wolfram Sievers
Roland Freisler
Otto Skorzeny
Karl Dönitz
Leonardo Conti
Wernher von Braun
Fritz Julius Kuhn
George Lincoln Rockwell
Relatedtopics
Fascism
Esoteric Nazism
Far-right politics
German resistance
Glossary of Nazi Germany
Nazi salute
Nazi symbolism
Neo-Nazism
Social Darwinism
Stormfront
Swastika
Völkisch movement
Zweites Buch
 Category





