
Title:
Cigarette
Text:
Small roll of cut tobacco designed to be smoked
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}For other uses, see Cigarette (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Cigar.


  A filtered cigarette
  An electronic cigarette
A cigarette is a narrow cylinder containing burnable material, typically tobacco, that is rolled into thin paper for smoking. The cigarette is ignited at one end, causing it to smolder; the resulting smoke is orally inhaled via the opposite end. Cigarette smoking is the most common method of tobacco consumption. Manufacturers have described the cigarette as "a drug administration system for the delivery of nicotine in acceptable and attractive form."[1][2][3][4] The term cigarette, as commonly used, refers to a tobacco cigarette, but the word is sometimes used to refer to other substances, such as a cannabis (Jazz) cigarette or an herbal cigarette. A cigarette is distinguished from a cigar by its usually smaller size, use of processed leaf, and paper wrapping, which is typically white. A cigarette may be called a fag in British slang.[5] Many other terms are used for cigarettes, including cigs, ciggies, smokes, stogs, boges, and tabs.
Since the 1920s, scientists and doctors have been able to link smoking with respiratory illness.[6] Researchers have identified negative health effects from smoking cigarettes such as  cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart disease, and other health problems relating to nearly every organ of the body.[7] Nicotine, the psychoactive drug in tobacco, makes cigarettes highly addictive. About half of cigarette smokers die of tobacco-related disease[8] and lose on average 14 years of life.[9] Every year, tobacco cigarettes kill more than 8 million people worldwide; with 1.2 million of those being non-smokers dying as the result of exposure to second-hand smoke.[10] Second-hand smoke from cigarettes causes many of the same health problems as smoking, including cancer,[11][12][13][14] which has led to legislation and policy that has prohibited smoking in many workplaces and public areas. Cigarette smoke contains over 7,000 chemical compounds, including arsenic, formaldehyde, hydrogen cyanide, lead, carbon monoxide, acrolein, and other poisonous substances.[15] Over 70 of these are carcinogenic.[16] Most modern cigarettes are filtered, although this does not make the smoke inhaled from them contain fewer carcinogens and harmful chemicals. Cigarette use by pregnant women has also been shown to cause birth defects, including low birth weight, fetal abnormalities, and premature birth.[17] Smoking rates have generally declined in the developed world, but continue to rise in some developing nations.[18][19][20]
Because of their adverse health effects many countries have strict legislation concerning the marketing and purchasing age of tobacco. Most nations outright ban commercials on cigarettes and have levied taxes on them to dissuade smokers to continue the habit. The first country to introduce a large scale antismoking campaign was Nazi Germany[21] and despite its minimal success it did create a blueprint for many other nations to follow.
In the 21st century, a product called an electronic cigarette (e-cigarette or vape) was developed, in which the substance contained within it (typically a liquid solution containing nicotine) is vaporized by a battery-powered heating element, as opposed to being burned. Such devices are commonly promoted by their manufacturers as safer alternatives to conventional cigarettes, although there are some health risks associated with their use. Because e-cigarettes are a relatively new product, scientists do not possess data on their possible long-term health effects.

Contents

1 History
2 Construction

2.1 Paper
2.2 Tobacco blend
2.3 Additives
2.4 Cigarette tube
2.5 Cigarette filter
2.6 Cigarette butt


3 Electronic cigarette
4 Health effects

4.1 Smokers

4.1.1 Gateway theory


4.2 Second-hand smoke


5 Legislation

5.1 Smoking restrictions
5.2 Smoking age
5.3 Taxation
5.4 Fire-safe cigarette
5.5 Cigarette advertising
5.6 Warning messages in packages


6 Environmental impact

6.1 Aquatic life health concerns
6.2 Other health concerns
6.3 Degradation
6.4 Biodegradation
6.5 Factors in biodegradation
6.6 Photodegradation
6.7 Solution and remediation projects


7 Consumption
8 Lights
9 Notable cigarette brands
10 Smoking cessation
11 See also
12 Bibliography
13 References
14 Further reading
15 External links



History
See also: History of tobacco
  A reproduction of a carving from the temple at Palenque, Mexico, depicting a Maya deity using a smoking tube
The earliest forms of cigarettes were similar to their predecessor, the cigar. Cigarettes appear to have had antecedents in Mexico and Central America around the 9th century in the form of reeds and smoking tubes. The Maya, and later the Aztecs, smoked tobacco and other psychoactive drugs in religious rituals and frequently depicted priests and deities smoking on pottery and temple engravings. The cigarette and the cigar were the most common methods of smoking in the Caribbean, Mexico, and Central and South America until recent times.[22]
The North American, Central American, and South American cigarette used various plant wrappers; when it was brought back to Spain, maize wrappers were introduced, and by the 17th century, fine paper. The resulting product was called papelate and is documented in Goya's paintings La Cometa, La Merienda en el Manzanares, and El juego de la pelota a pala (18th century).[23]
By 1830, the cigarette had crossed into France, where it received the name cigarette; and in 1845, the French state tobacco monopoly began manufacturing them.[23] The French word was adopted by English in the 1840s.[24] Some American reformers promoted the spelling cigaret,[25][26] but this was never widespread and is now largely abandoned.[27]
The first patented cigarette-making machine was invented by Juan Nepomuceno Adorno of Mexico in 1847.[28] However, production climbed markedly when another cigarette-making machine was developed in the 1880s by James Albert Bonsack, which vastly increased the productivity of cigarette companies, which went from making about 40,000 hand-rolled cigarettes daily to around 4 million.[29]
In the English-speaking world, the use of tobacco in cigarette form became increasingly widespread during and after the Crimean War, when British soldiers began emulating their Ottoman Turkish comrades and Russian enemies, who had begun rolling and smoking tobacco in strips of old newspaper for lack of proper cigar-rolling leaf.[23] This was helped by the development of tobaccos suitable for cigarette use, and by the development of the Egyptian cigarette export industry.

  Francisco Goya's La Cometa, depicting a (foreground left) man smoking an early quasicigarette
Cigarettes may have been initially used in a manner similar to pipes, cigars, and cigarillos and not inhaled; for evidence, see the Lucky Strike ad campaign asking
consumers "Do You Inhale?" from the 1930s. As cigarette tobacco became milder and more acidic, inhaling may have become perceived as more agreeable. However, Moltke noticed in the 1830s (cf. Unter dem Halbmond) that Ottomans (and he himself) inhaled the Turkish tobacco and Latakia from their pipes[30] (which are both initially sun-cured, acidic leaf varieties).

  A 1942 ad encourages women to smoke Camel brand cigarettes.
The widespread smoking of cigarettes in the Western world is largely a 20th-century phenomenon. At the start of the 20th century, the per capita annual consumption in the U.S. was 54 cigarettes (with less than 0.5% of the population smoking more than 100 cigarettes per year), and consumption there peaked at 4,259 per capita in 1965. At that time, about 50% of men and 33% of women smoked (defined as smoking more than 100 cigarettes per year).[31] By 2000, consumption had fallen to 2,092 per capita, corresponding to about 30% of men and 22% of women smoking more than 100 cigarettes per year, and by 2006 per capita consumption had declined to 1,691;[32] implying that about 21% of the population smoked 100 cigarettes or more per year.
By the late 19th century cigarettes were known as coffins nails[33] but the link between lung cancer and smoking wasn't established until the 20th century. German doctors were the first to make the link, and it led to the first antitobacco movement in Nazi Germany.[34][35] During World War I and World War II, cigarettes were rationed to soldiers. During the Vietnam War, cigarettes were included with C-ration meals. In 1975, the U.S. government stopped putting cigarettes in military rations. During the second half of the 20th century, the adverse health effects of tobacco smoking started to become widely known and text-only health warnings became common on cigarette packets.
The United States has not implemented graphical cigarette warning labels, which are considered a more effective method to communicate to the public the dangers of cigarette smoking.[36] Canada, Mexico, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, Thailand, Malaysia, India, Pakistan, Australia, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Peru,[37] Greece, the Netherlands,[38] New Zealand, Norway, Hungary, the United Kingdom, France, Romania, Singapore, Egypt, Jordan, Nepal and Turkey, however, have both textual warnings and graphic visual images displaying, among other things, the damaging effects tobacco use has on the human body.
The cigarette has evolved much since its conception; for example, the thin bands that travel transverse to the "axis of smoking" (thus forming circles along the length of the cigarette) are alternate sections of thin and thick paper to facilitate effective burning when being drawn, and retard burning when at rest. Synthetic particulate filters may remove some of the tar before it reaches the smoker.
The "holy grail" for cigarette companies has been a cancer-free cigarette. On record, the closest historical attempt was produced by scientist James Mold. Under the name project TAME, he produced the XA cigarette. However, in 1978, his project was terminated.[39][40][41]
Since 1950, the average nicotine and tar content of cigarettes has steadily fallen. Research has shown that the fall in overall nicotine content has led to smokers inhaling larger volumes per puff.[42]

Construction
  Diagram of a cigarette Mainstream smokeFiltration materialAdhesivesVentilation holesInkAdhesiveSidestream smokeFilterTipping PaperTobacco and ingredientsPaperBurning point and ashes
Modern commercially manufactured cigarettes are seemingly simple objects consisting mainly of a tobacco blend, paper, PVA glue to bond the outer layer of paper together, and often also a cellulose acetate–based filter.[43] While the assembly of cigarettes is straightforward, much focus is given to the creation of each of the components, in particular the tobacco blend. A key ingredient that makes cigarettes more addictive is the inclusion of reconstituted tobacco, which has additives to make nicotine more volatile as the cigarette burns.[44]

Paper
Main article: Rolling paper
See also: List of rolling papers
The paper for holding the tobacco blend may vary in porosity to allow ventilation of the burning ember or contain materials that control the burning rate of the cigarette and stability of the produced ash. The papers used in tipping the cigarette (forming the mouthpiece) and surrounding the filter stabilize the mouthpiece from saliva and moderate the burning of the cigarette, as well as the delivery of smoke with the presence of one or two rows of small laser-drilled air holes.[45]

Tobacco blend
  Leones Africanos brand cigarettes from the mid-20th century, part of the permanent collection of the Museo del Objeto del Objeto
The process of blending gives the end product a consistent taste from batches of tobacco grown in different areas of a country that may change in flavor profile from year to year due to different environmental conditions.[46]
Modern cigarettes produced after the 1950s, although composed mainly of shredded tobacco leaf, use a significant quantity of tobacco processing byproducts in the blend. Each cigarette's tobacco blend is made mainly from the leaves of flue-cured brightleaf, burley tobacco, and oriental tobacco. These leaves are selected, processed, and aged prior to blending and filling. The processing of brightleaf and burley tobaccos for tobacco leaf "strips" produces several byproducts such as leaf stems, tobacco dust, and tobacco leaf pieces ("small laminate").[46] To improve the economics of producing cigarettes, these byproducts are processed separately into forms where they can then be added back into the cigarette blend without an apparent or marked change in the cigarette's quality. The most common tobacco byproducts include:

Blended leaf (BL) sheet: a thin, dry sheet cast from a paste made with tobacco dust collected from tobacco stemming, finely milled burley-leaf stem, and pectin.[47]
Reconstituted leaf (RL) sheet: a paper-like material made from recycled tobacco fines, tobacco stems and "class tobacco", which consists of tobacco particles less than 30 mesh in size (about 0.6 mm) that are collected at any stage of tobacco processing:[48] RL is made by extracting the soluble chemicals in the tobacco byproducts, processing the leftover tobacco fibers from the extraction into a paper, and then reapplying the extracted materials in concentrated form onto the paper in a fashion similar to what is done in paper sizing. At this stage, ammonium additives are applied to make reconstituted tobacco an effective nicotine delivery system.[44]
Expanded (ES) or improved stem (IS): ES is rolled, flattened, and shredded leaf stems that are expanded by being soaked in water and rapidly heated. Improved stem follows the same process, but is simply steamed after shredding. Both products are then dried. These products look similar in appearance, but are different in taste.[46]
Most commercially available cigarettes today contain tobacco that is treated with butterfat and sugar to mask the bitter taste of nicotine. Tobacco companies also use tobacco that has been freebased or modified to increase the speed of nicotine delivery.[49]
In recent years, the manufacturers' pursuit of maximum profits has led to the practice of using not just the leaves, but also recycled tobacco offal[44] and the plant stem.[50] The stem is first crushed and cut to resemble the leaf before being merged or blended into the cut leaf.[51] According to data from the World Health Organization,[52] the amount of tobacco per 1000 cigarettes fell from 1.03 kg (2.28 pounds) in 1960 to 0.41 kg (0.91 pounds) in 1999, largely as a result of reconstituting tobacco, fluffing, and additives.
A recipe-specified combination of brightleaf, burley-leaf, and oriental-leaf tobacco is mixed with various additives to improve its flavors.

Additives
  The most consumed cigarette brand in Pakistan is Gold Leaf
Various additives are combined into the shredded tobacco product mixtures, with humectants such as propylene glycol or glycerol, as well as flavoring products and enhancers such as cocoa solids, licorice, tobacco extracts, and various sugars, which are known collectively as "casings". The leaf tobacco is then shredded, along with a specified amount of small laminate, expanded tobacco, BL, RL, ES, and IS. A perfume-like flavor/fragrance, called the "topping" or "toppings", which is most often formulated by flavor companies, is then blended into the tobacco mixture to improve the consistency in flavor and taste of the cigarettes associated with a certain brand name.[46] Additionally, they replace lost flavors due to the repeated wetting and drying used in processing the tobacco. Finally, the tobacco mixture is filled into cigarette tubes and packaged. 
A list of 599 cigarette additives, created by five major American cigarette companies, was approved by the Department of Health and Human Services in April 1994.  None of these additives is listed as an ingredient on the cigarette pack(s). Chemicals are added for organoleptic purposes and many boost the addictive properties of cigarettes, especially when burned.[citation needed]
One of the classes of chemicals on the list, ammonia salts, convert bound nicotine molecules in tobacco smoke into free nicotine molecules. This process, known as freebasing, could potentially increase the effect of nicotine on the smoker, but experimental data suggests that absorption is, in practice, unaffected.[53]

Cigarette tube
Cigarette tubes are prerolled cigarette paper usually with an acetate or paper filter at the end. They have an appearance similar to a finished cigarette, but are without any tobacco or smoking material inside. The length varies from Regular (70 mm) to King Size (84 mm) as well as 100s (100 mm) and 120s (120 mm).[54][self-published source?]
Filling a cigarette tube is usually done with a cigarette injector (also known as a shooter). Cone-shaped cigarette tubes, known as cones, can be filled using a packing stick or straw because of their shape. Cone smoking is popular because as the cigarette burns, it tends to get stronger and stronger. A cone allows more tobacco to be burned at the beginning than the end, allowing for an even flavor[55]
The United States Tobacco Taxation Bureau defines a cigarette tube as "Cigarette paper made into a hollow cylinder for use in making cigarettes."[56]

Cigarette filter
Main article: Cigarette filterA cigarette filter or filter tip is a component of a cigarette. Filters are typically made from cellulose acetate fibre. Most factory-made cigarettes are equipped with a filter; those who roll their own can buy them separately. Filters can reduce some substances from smoke but do not make cigarettes any safer to smoke.
Cigarette butt
  A discarded cigarette butt, lying on dirty snow
See also: Ashtray and Cigarette pack § Features
The common name for the remains of a cigarette after smoking is a cigarette butt. The butt is typically about 30% of the cigarette's original length. It consists of a tissue tube which holds a filter and some remains of tobacco mixed with ash. They are the most numerically frequent litter in the world.[57] Cigarette butts accumulate outside buildings, on parking lots, and streets where they can be transported through storm drains to streams, rivers, and beaches.[58] It is also called a fag-end or dog-end.[59]
In a 2013 trial the city of Vancouver, British Columbia, partnered with TerraCycle to create a system for recycling of cigarette butts. A reward of 1¢ per collected butt was offered to determine the effectiveness of a deposit system similar to that of beverage containers.[60][61]

Electronic cigarette
Main article: Electronic cigarette
Further information: Safety of electronic cigarettes and Composition of electronic cigarette aerosol
  Various types of electronic cigarettes.
An electronic cigarette is a handheld battery-powered vaporizer that simulates smoking by providing some of the behavioral aspects of smoking, including the hand-to-mouth action of smoking, but without combusting tobacco.[62] Using an e-cigarette is known as "vaping" and the user is referred to as a "vaper."[63] Instead of cigarette smoke, the user inhales an aerosol, commonly called vapor.[64] E-cigarettes typically have a heating element that atomizes a liquid solution called e-liquid.[65] E-cigarettes are automatically activated by taking a puff;[66] others turn on manually by pressing a button.[63] Some e-cigarettes look like traditional cigarettes,[67] but they come in many variations.[63] Most versions are reusable, though some are disposable.[68] There are first-generation,[69] second-generation,[70] third-generation,[71] and fourth-generation devices.[72] E-liquids usually contain propylene glycol, glycerin, nicotine, flavorings, additives, and differing amounts of contaminants.[73] E-liquids are also sold without propylene glycol,[74] nicotine,[75] or flavors.[76]
The benefits and the health risks of e-cigarettes are uncertain.[77][78][79] There is moderate-certainty evidence that e-cigarettes with nicotine may help people quit smoking when compared with e-cigarettes without nicotine and nicotine replacement therapy.[80][needs update]  However, other studies have not supported the finding that e-cigarettes are proven to be more effective than smoking cessation medicine.[81] There is concern with the possibility that non-smokers and children may start nicotine use with e-cigarettes at a rate higher than anticipated than if they were never created.[82] Following the possibility of nicotine addiction from e-cigarette use, there is concern children may start smoking cigarettes.[82] Youth who use e-cigarettes are more likely to go on to smoke cigarettes.[83][84] Their part in tobacco harm reduction is unclear,[85] while another review found they appear to have the potential to lower tobacco-related death and disease.[86] Regulated US Food and Drug Administration nicotine replacement products may be safer than e-cigarettes,[85] but e-cigarettes are generally seen as safer than combusted tobacco products.[87][88] It is estimated their safety risk to users is similar to that of smokeless tobacco.[89] The long-term effects of e-cigarette use are unknown.[80][90][91] The risk from serious adverse events was reported in 2016 to be low.[92] Less serious adverse effects include abdominal pain, headache, blurry vision,[93] throat and mouth irritation, vomiting, nausea, and coughing.[94] Nicotine itself is associated with some health harms.[95] In 2019 and 2020, an outbreak of severe lung illness throughout the US was linked to the use of vaping products[96]
E-cigarettes create vapor made of fine and ultrafine particles of particulate matter,[94] which have been found to contain propylene glycol, glycerin, nicotine, flavors, small amounts of toxicants,[94] carcinogens,[97] and heavy metals, as well as metal nanoparticles, and other substances.[94] Its exact composition varies across and within manufacturers, and depends on the contents of the liquid, the physical and electrical design of the device, and user behavior, among other factors.[64] E-cigarette vapor potentially contains harmful chemicals not found in tobacco smoke.[98] E-cigarette vapor contains fewer toxic chemicals,[94] and lower concentrations of potential toxic chemicals than cigarette smoke.[99] The vapor is probably much less harmful to users and bystanders than cigarette smoke,[97] although concern exists that the exhaled vapor may be inhaled by non-users, particularly indoors.[100]

Health effects
Smokers
Main article: Health effects of tobacco
  Artistas brand cigarette package of Mexico from the Museo del Objeto del Objeto collection
The harm from smoking comes from the many toxic chemicals in the natural tobacco leaf and those formed in smoke from burning tobacco. People keep smoking because the nicotine, the primary psychoactive chemical in cigarettes, is highly addictive.[101] Cigarettes, like narcotics, have been described as "strategically addictive," with the addictive properties being a core component of the business strategy.[102] About half of smokers die from a smoking-related cause. Smoking harms nearly every organ of the body. Smoking leads most commonly to diseases affecting the heart,[103] liver, and lungs, being a major risk factor for heart attacks, strokes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (including emphysema and chronic bronchitis), and cancer[103] (particularly lung cancer, cancers of the larynx and mouth, and pancreatic cancer). It also causes peripheral vascular disease and hypertension. Children born to women who smoke during pregnancy are at higher risk of congenital disorders, cancer, respiratory disease, and sudden death. On average, each cigarette smoked is estimated to shorten life by 11 minutes.[9][104][105] Starting smoking earlier in life and smoking cigarettes higher in tar increases the risk of these diseases. The World Health Organization  estimates that tobacco kills 8 million people each year as of 2019[106] and 100 million deaths over the course of the 20th century.[107] Cigarettes produce an aerosol containing over 4,000 chemical compounds, including nicotine, carbon monoxide, acrolein, and oxidant substances.[15] Over 70 of these are carcinogens.[16]
The most important chemical compounds causing cancer are those that produce DNA damage since such damage appears to be the primary underlying cause of cancer.[108] Cunningham et al.[109] combined the microgram weight of the compound in the smoke of one cigarette with the known genotoxic effect per microgram to identify the most carcinogenic compounds in cigarette smoke. The seven most important carcinogens in tobacco smoke are shown in the table, along with DNA alterations they cause. 


The most genotoxic cancer causing chemicals in cigarette smoke


Compound

Micrograms per cigarette

Effect on DNA

Ref.


Acrolein

122.4

Reacts with deoxyguanine and forms DNA crosslinks, DNA-protein crosslinks and DNA adducts

[110]


Formaldehyde

60.5

DNA-protein crosslinks causing chromosome deletions and re-arrangements

[111]


Acrylonitrile

29.3

Oxidative stress causing increased 8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine

[112]


1,3-butadiene

105.0

Global loss of DNA methylation (an epigenetic effect) as well as DNA adducts

[113]


Acetaldehyde

1448.0

Reacts with deoxyguanine to form DNA adducts

[114]


Ethylene oxide

7.0

Hydroxyethyl DNA adducts with adenine and guanine

[115]


Isoprene

952.0

Single and double strand breaks in DNA

[116]

"Ulcerative colitis is a condition of nonsmokers in which nicotine is of therapeutic benefit."[117] A recent review of the available scientific literature concluded that the apparent decrease in Alzheimer disease risk may be simply because smokers tend to die before reaching the age at which it normally occurs. "Differential mortality is always likely to be a problem where there is a need to investigate the effects of smoking in a disorder with very low incidence rates before age 75 years, which is the case of Alzheimer's disease", it stated, noting that smokers are only half as likely as nonsmokers to survive to the age of 80.[118]

Gateway theory
A very strong argument can be made about the association between adolescent exposure to nicotine by smoking conventional cigarettes and the subsequent onset of using other dependence-producing substances.[119] Strong, temporal, and dose-dependent associations have been reported, and a plausible biological mechanism (via rodent and human modeling) suggests that long-term changes in the neural reward system take place as a result of adolescent smoking.[119] Adolescent smokers of conventional cigarettes have disproportionately high rates of comorbid substance use, and longitudinal studies have suggested that early adolescent smoking may be a starting point or "gateway" for substance use later in life, with this effect more likely for persons with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).[119] Although factors such as genetic comorbidity, innate propensity for risk-taking, and social influences may underlie these findings, both human neuroimaging and animal studies suggest a neurobiological mechanism also plays a role.[119] In addition, behavioral studies in adolescent and young adult smokers have revealed an increased propensity for risk-taking, both generally and in the presence of peers, and neuroimaging studies have shown altered frontal neural activation during a risk-taking task as compared with nonsmokers.[119] In 2011, Rubinstein and colleagues used neuroimaging to show decreased brain response to a natural reinforcer (pleasurable food cues) in adolescent light smokers (1–5 cigarettes per day), with their results highlighting the possibility of neural alterations consistent with nicotine dependence and altered brain response to reward even in adolescent low-level smokers.[119]

Second-hand smoke
Second-hand smoke is a mixture of smoke from the burning end of a cigarette and the smoke exhaled from the lungs of smokers. It is involuntarily inhaled, lingers in the air for hours after cigarettes have been extinguished, and can cause a wide range of adverse health effects, including cancer, respiratory infections, and asthma.[120] Nonsmokers who are exposed to second-hand smoke at home or work increase their heart disease risk by 25–30% and their lung cancer risk by 20–30%. Second-hand smoke has been estimated to cause 38,000 deaths per year, of which 3,400 are deaths from lung cancer in nonsmokers.[121] Sudden infant death syndrome, ear infections, respiratory infections, and asthma attacks can occur in children who are exposed to second-hand smoke.[122][123][124]  Scientific evidence shows that no level of exposure to second-hand smoke is safe.[122][123]

Legislation
Smoking restrictions
Further information: List of smoking bans
Many governments impose restrictions on smoking tobacco, especially in public areas. The primary justification has been the negative health effects of second-hand smoke.[125] Laws vary by country and locality. Nearly all countries have laws restricting places where people can smoke in public, and over 40 countries have comprehensive smoke-free laws that prohibit smoking in virtually all public venues. Bhutan is currently the only country in the world to completely outlaw the cultivation, harvesting, production, and sale of tobacco and tobacco products under the Tobacco Control Act of Bhutan 2010. However, small allowances for personal possession are permitted as long as the possessors can prove that they have paid import duties.[126] The Pitcairn Islands had previously banned the sale of cigarettes, but it now permits sales from a government-run store. The Pacific island of Niue hopes to become the next country to prohibit the sale of tobacco.[127] Iceland is also proposing banning tobacco sales from shops, making it prescription-only and therefore dispensable only in pharmacies on doctor's orders.[128] New Zealand hopes to achieve being tobacco-free by 2025 and Finland by 2040. Singapore and the Australian state of Tasmania have proposed a 'tobacco free millennium generation initiative' by banning the sale of all tobacco products to anyone born in and after the year 2000. 
In March 2012, Brazil became the world's first country to ban all flavored tobacco including menthols. It also banned the majority of the estimated 600 additives used, permitting only eight. This regulation applies to domestic and imported cigarettes. Tobacco manufacturers had 18 months to remove the noncompliant cigarettes, 24 months to remove the other forms of noncompliant tobacco.[129][130] Under sharia law, the consumption of cigarettes by Muslims is prohibited.[131]

Smoking age
Main article: Smoking age
In the United States, the age to buy tobacco products is 21 in all states as of 2020.
Similar laws exist in many other countries. In Canada, most of the provinces require smokers to be 19 years of age to purchase cigarettes (except for Quebec and the prairie provinces, where the age is 18). However, the minimum age only concerns the purchase of tobacco, not use. Alberta, however, does have a law which prohibits the possession or use of tobacco products by all persons under 18, punishable by a $100 fine. Australia, New Zealand, Poland, and Pakistan have a nationwide ban on the selling of all tobacco products to people under the age of 18.

  Tabak-Trafik in Vienna: Since 1 January 2007, all cigarette machines in Austria must attempt to verify a customer's age by requiring the insertion of a debit card or mobile phone verification.
Since 1 October 2007, it has been illegal for retailers to sell tobacco in all forms to people under the age of 18 in three of the UK's four constituent countries (England, Wales, Northern Ireland, and Scotland), rising from 16. It is also illegal to sell lighters, rolling papers, and all other tobacco-associated items to people under 18. It is not illegal for people under 18 to buy or smoke tobacco, just as it was not previously for people under 16; it is only illegal for the said retailer to sell the item. The age increase from 16 to 18 came into force in Northern Ireland on 1 September 2008. In the Republic of Ireland, bans on the sale of the smaller 10-packs and confectionery that resembles tobacco products (candy cigarettes) came into force on May 31, 2007, in a bid to cut underaged smoking.
Most countries in the world have a legal vending age of 18. In North Macedonia, Italy, Malta, Austria, Luxembourg, and Belgium, the age for legal vending is 16. Since January 1, 2007, all cigarette machines in public places in Germany must attempt to verify a customer's age by requiring the insertion of a debit card. Turkey, which has one of the highest percentage of smokers in its population,[132] has a legal age of 18. Japan is one of the highest tobacco-consuming nations, and requires purchasers to be 20 years of age (suffrage in Japan is 20 years old).[133] Since July 2008, Japan has enforced this age limit at cigarette vending machines through use of the taspo smart card. In other countries, such as Egypt, it is legal to use and purchase tobacco products regardless of age.[citation needed] Germany raised the purchase age from 16 to 18 on the 1 September 2007.
Some police departments in the United States occasionally send an underaged teenager into a store where cigarettes are sold, and have the teen attempt to purchase cigarettes, with their own or no ID. If the vendor then completes the sale, the store is issued a fine.[134] Similar enforcement practices are regularly performed by Trading Standards officers in the UK, Israel, and  the Republic of Ireland.[135]

Taxation
See also: Cigarette taxes in the United States
Play media  Average price of cigarettes in USD in 2012 and 2014[136]
Cigarettes are taxed both to reduce use, especially among youth, and to raise revenue. Higher prices for cigarettes discourage smoking. Every 10% increase in the price of cigarettes reduces youth smoking by about 7% and overall cigarette consumption by about 4%.[137] The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that globally cigarettes be taxed at a rate of three-quarters of cigarettes sale price as a way of deterring cancer and other negative health outcomes.[138]
Cigarette sales are a significant source of tax revenue in many localities. This fact has historically been an impediment for health groups seeking to discourage cigarette smoking, since governments seek to maximize tax revenues. Furthermore, some countries have made cigarettes a state monopoly, which has the same effect on the attitude of government officials outside the health field.[139]
In the United States, states are a primary determinant of the total tax rate on cigarettes. Generally, states that rely on tobacco as a significant farm product tend to tax cigarettes at a low rate.[140] Coupled with the federal cigarette tax of $1.01 per pack, total cigarette-specific taxes range from $1.18 per pack in Missouri to $8.00 per pack in Silver Bay, New York. As part of the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act, the federal government collects user fees to fund Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulatory measures over tobacco.

Fire-safe cigarette
Main article: Fire safe cigarette
Cigarettes are a frequent source of deadly fires in private homes, which prompted both the European Union and the United States to require cigarettes to be fire-standard compliant.[141][142]
According to Simon Chapman, a professor of public health at the University of Sydney, reduction of burning agents in cigarettes would be a simple and effective means of dramatically reducing the ignition propensity of cigarettes.[143] Since the 1980s, prominent cigarette manufacturers such as Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds developed fire safe cigarettes, but did not market them.[144]
The burn rate of cigarette paper is regulated through the application of different forms of microcrystalline cellulose to the paper.[145] Cigarette paper has been specially engineered by creating bands of different porosity to create "fire-safe" cigarettes. These cigarettes have a reduced idle burning speed which allows them to self-extinguish.[146] This fire-safe paper is manufactured by mechanically altering the setting of the paper slurry.[147]
New York was the first U.S. state to mandate that all cigarettes manufactured or sold within the state comply with a fire-safe standard. Canada has passed a similar nationwide mandate based on the same standard. All U.S. states are gradually passing fire-safe mandates.[148]
The European Union in 2011 banned cigarettes that do not meet a fire-safety standard. According to a study made by the European Union in 16 European countries, 11,000 fires were due to people carelessly handling cigarettes between 2005 and 2007. This caused 520 deaths with 1,600 people injured.[149]

Cigarette advertising
Main article: Tobacco advertising
Many countries have restrictions on cigarette advertising, promotion, sponsorship, and marketing. For example, in the Canadian provinces of British Columbia, Saskatchewan and Alberta, the retail store display of cigarettes is completely prohibited if persons under the legal age of consumption have access to the premises.[150] In Ontario, Manitoba, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Quebec, Canada and the Australian Capital Territory the display of tobacco is prohibited for everyone, regardless of age, as of 2010. This retail display ban includes noncigarette products such as cigars and blunt wraps.[151][152]

Warning messages in packages
Main article: Tobacco packaging warning messages
As a result of tight advertising and marketing prohibitions, tobacco companies look at the pack differently: they view it as a strong component in displaying brand imagery and a creating significant in-store presence at the point of purchase. Market testing shows the influence of this dimension in shifting the consumer's choice when the same product displays in an alternative package. Studies also show how companies have manipulated a variety of elements in packs designs to communicate the impression of lower in tar or milder cigarettes, whereas the components were the same.[citation needed]
Some countries require cigarette packs to contain warnings about health hazards. The United States was the first,[153] later followed by other countries including Canada, most of Europe, Australia,[154] Pakistan,[155] India, Hong Kong, and Singapore. In 1985, Iceland became the first country to enforce graphic warnings on cigarette packaging.[156][157] At the end of December 2010, new regulations from Ottawa increased the size of tobacco warnings to cover three-quarters of the cigarette package in Canada.[158] As of November 2010, 39 countries have adopted similar legislation.[153]
In February 2011, the Canadian government passed regulations requiring cigarette packs to contain 12 new images to cover 75% of the outside panel and eight new health messages on the inside panel with full color.[159]
As of April 2011, Australian regulations require all packs to use a bland olive green that researchers determined to be the least attractive color,[160] with 75% coverage on the front of the pack and all of the back consisting of graphic health warnings. The only feature that differentiates one brand from another is the product name in a standard color, position, font size, and style.[161] Similar policies have since been adopted in France and the United Kingdom.[162][163] In response to these regulations, Philip Morris International, Japan Tobacco Inc., British American Tobacco Plc., and Imperial Tobacco attempted to sue the Australian government. On August 15, 2012, the High Court of Australia dismissed the suit and made Australia the first country to introduce brand-free plain cigarette packaging with health warnings covering 90 and 70% of back and front packaging, respectively. This took effect on December 1, 2012.[164]

Environmental impact
  Simple molecular representation of cellulose acetate with one of the acetate groups on the cellulose backbone shown by the red circle
Cigarette filters are made up of thousands of polymer chains of cellulose acetate, which has the chemical structure shown to the right. Once discarded into the environment, the filters create a large waste problem. Cigarette filters are the most common form of litter in the world, as approximately 5.6 trillion cigarettes are smoked every year worldwide.[165] Of those, an estimated 4.5 trillion cigarette filters become litter every year.[166] To develop an idea of the waste weight amount produced a year the table below was created. 


Estimated waste produced from filters


Number of filters
weight


1 pack (20)
3.4 grams (0.12 oz)


sold daily (15 billion)
2,551,000 kilograms (5,625,000 lb)


sold yearly (5.6 trillion)
950,000,000 kilograms (2,100,000,000 lb)


estimated trash (4.5 trillion)
765,400,000 kilograms (1,687,500,000 lb)

Discarded cigarette filters usually end up in the water system through drainage ditches and are transported by rivers and other waterways to the ocean.

Aquatic life health concerns
In the 2006 International Coastal Cleanup, cigarettes and cigarette butts constituted 24.7% of the total collected pieces of garbage, over twice as many as any other category, which is not surprising seeing the numbers in the table above of waste produced each year.[167]
Cigarette filters contain the chemicals filtered from cigarettes and can leach into waterways and water supplies.[168] The toxicity of used cigarette filters depends on the specific tobacco blend and additives used by the cigarette companies. After a cigarette is smoked, the filter retains some of the chemicals, and some of which are considered carcinogenic.[57] When studying the environmental impact of cigarette filters, the various chemicals that can be found in cigarette filters are not studied individually, due to its complexity. Researchers instead focus on the whole cigarette filter and its LD50. LD50 is defined as the lethal dose that kills 50% of a sample population. This allows for a simpler study of the toxicity of cigarettes filters. One recent study has looked at the toxicity of smoked cigarette filters (smoked filter + tobacco), smoked cigarette filters (no tobacco), and unsmoked cigarette filters (no tobacco). The results of the study showed that for the LD50of both marine topsmelt (Atherinops affinis) and freshwater fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas), smoked cigarette filters + tobacco are more toxic than smoked cigarette filters, but both are severely more toxic than unsmoked cigarette filters.[169]


LD50 of cigarette filters to marine life (cigarette per liter)


Cigarette type
Marine topsmelt
Fathead minnow


Smoked cigarette filter (smoked filter + tobacco)
1.0
1.0


Smoked cigarette filters (no tobacco)
1.8
4.3


Unsmoked cigarette filters (no tobacco)
5.1
13.5

Other health concerns
Toxic chemicals are not the only human health concern to take into considerations; the others are cellulose acetate and carbon particles that are breathed in while smoking. These particles are suspected of causing lung damage.[170] 
The next health concern is that of plants. Under certain growing conditions, plants on average grow taller and have longer roots than those exposed to cigarette filters in the soil. A connection exists between cigarette filters introduced to soil and the depletion of some soil nutrients over a period time.
Another health concern to the environment is not only the toxic carcinogens that are harmful to the wildlife, but also the filters themselves pose an ingestion risk to wildlife that may presume filter litter as food.[171]
The last major health concern to make note of for marine life is the toxicity that deep marine topsmelt and fathead minnow pose to their predators. This could lead to toxin build-up (bioaccumulation) in the food chain and have long reaching negative effects.
Smoldering cigarette filters have also been blamed for triggering fires from residential areas[172] to major wildfires and bushfires which has caused major property damage and also death[173][174][175] as well as disruption to services by triggering alarms and warning systems.[176]

Degradation
Once in the environment, cellulose acetate can go through biodegradation and photodegradation.[177][178][179] Several factors go into determining the rate of both degradation process. This variance in rate and resistance to biodegradation in many conditions is a factor in littering[180] and environmental damage.[181]

  Discarded Newport cigarettes packs found in Olneyville, Rhode Island - 2008
Biodegradation
  Chemical hydrolysis of cellulose acetate
The first step in the biodegradation of cellulose acetate is the deactylation of the acetate from the polymer chain (which is the opposite of acetylation). An acetate is a negative ion with the chemical formula of C2H3O2−. Deacetylation can be performed by either chemical hydrolysis or acetylesterase. Chemical hydrolysis is the cleavage of a chemical bond by addition of water. In the reaction, water (H2O) reacts with the acetic ester functional group attached the cellulose polymer chain and forms an alcohol and acetate. The alcohol is simply the cellulose polymer chain with the acetate replaced with an alcohol group. The second reaction is exactly the same as chemical hydrolysis with the exception of the use of an acetylesterase enzyme. The enzyme, found in most plants, catalyzes the chemical reaction shown below.[182]

acetic ester + H2O  ⇌ alcohol + acetate
In the case of the enzymatic reaction, the two substrates (reactants) are again acetic ester and H2O, the two products of the reaction are alcohol and acetate. This reaction is exactly the same as the chemical hydrolysis.  Both of these products are perfectly fine in the environment. Once the acetate group is removed from the cellulose chain, the polymer can be readily degraded by cellulase, which is another enzyme found in fungi, bacteria, and protozoans. Cellulases break down the cellulose molecule into monosaccharides ("simple sugars") such as beta-glucose, or shorter polysaccharides and oligosaccharides.   The chemical structure change of cellulose into glucoseThese simple sugars are not harmful to the environment and are in fact are a useful product for many plants and animals.  The breakdown of cellulose is of interest in the field of biofuel.[183] Due to the conditions that affect the process, large variation in the degradation time of cellulose acetate occurs.
Factors in biodegradation
The duration of the biodegradation process is cited as taking as little as one month[177] to as long as 15 years or more, depending on the environmental conditions. The major factor that affects the biodegradation duration is the availability of acetylesterase and cellulase enzymes. Without these enzymes, biodegradation only occurs through chemical hydrolysis and stops there.  Temperature is another major factor, if the organisms that contain the enzymes are too cold to grow, then biodegradation is severely hindered. Availability of oxygen in the environment also affects the degradation. Cellulose acetate is degraded within 2–3 weeks under aerobic assay systems of in vitro enrichment cultivation techniques and an activated sludge wastewater treatment system.[184] It is degraded within 14 weeks under anaerobic conditions of incubation with special cultures of fungi.[185] Ideal conditions were used for the degradation (i.e. right temperature, and available organisms to provide the enzymes). Thus, filters last longer in places with low oxygen concentration (ex. swamps and bogs).  Overall, the biodegraditon process of cellulose acetate is not an instantaneous process.

Photodegradation
The other process of degradation is photodegradation, which is when a molecular bond is broken by the absorption of photon radiation (i.e. light). Due to cellulose acetate carbonyl groups, the molecule naturally absorbs light at 260 nm,[186] but it contains some impurities which can absorb light. These impurities are known to absorb light in the far UV light region (< 280 nm).[187] The atmosphere filters radiation from the sun and allows radiation of > 300 nm only to reach the surface. Thus, the primary photodegradation of cellulose acetate is considered insignificant to the total degradation process, since cellulose acetate and its impurities absorb light at shorter wavelengths. Research is focused on the secondary mechanisms of photodegradation of cellulose acetate to help make up for some of the limitations of biodegradation. The secondary mechanisms would be the addition of a compound to the filters that would be able to absorb natural light and use it to start the degradation process. The main two areas of research are in photocatalytic oxidation[188] and photosensitized degradation.[189] Photocatalytic oxidation uses a species that absorbs radiation and creates hydroxyl radicals that react with the filters and start the breakdown. Photosensitized degradation, though, uses a species that absorbs radiation and transfers the energy to the cellulose acetate to start the degradation process. Both processes use other species that absorbed light > 300 nm to start the degradation of cellulose acetate.[citation needed]

Solution and remediation projects
  A cigarette disposal canister, encouraging the public to dispose of their cigarettes properly
Several options are available to help reduce the environmental impact of cigarette butts. Proper disposal into receptacles leads to decreased numbers found in the environment and their effect on the environment. Another method is making fines and penalties for littering filters; many governments have sanctioned stiff penalties for littering of cigarette filters; for example, Washington imposes a penalty of $1,025 for littering cigarette filters.[190] Another option is developing better biodegradable filters; much of this work relies heavily on the research in the secondary mechanism for photodegradation as stated above, but a new research group has developed an acid tablet that goes inside the filters, and once wet enough, releases acid that speeds up the degradation to around two weeks.[191] The research is still only in test phase and the hope is soon it will go into production. The next option is using cigarette packs with a compartment in which to discard cigarette butts, implementing monetary deposits on filters, increasing the availability of butt receptacles, and expanding public education. It may even be possible to ban the sale of filtered cigarettes altogether on the basis of their adverse environmental impact.[192] Recent research has been put into finding ways to use the filter waste to develop a desired product. One research group in South Korea has developed a simple one-step process that converts the cellulose acetate in discarded cigarette filters into a high-performing material that could be integrated into computers, handheld devices, electrical vehicles, and wind turbines to store energy. These materials have demonstrated superior performance as compared to commercially available carbon, grapheme, and carbon nanotubes. The product is showing high promise as a green alternative for the waste problem.[193]

Consumption
  A Woolworths supermarket cigarette counter in New South Wales, Australia: In January 2011, Australia prohibited the display of cigarettes in retail outlets countrywide.[194]
  Cigarette salespeople in Jakarta, Indonesia
Smoking has become less popular, but is still a large public health problem globally. Worldwide, smoking rates fell from 41% in 1980 to 31% in 2012, although the actual number of smokers increased because of population growth.[195] In 2017, 5.4 trillion cigarettes were produced globally, and were smoked by almost 1 billion people.[196] Smoking rates have leveled off or declined in most countries, but is increasing in some low- and middle-income countries. The significant reductions in smoking rates in the United States, United Kingdom, Australia, Brazil, and other countries that implemented strong tobacco control programs[according to whom?] have been offset by the increasing consumption in low income countries, especially China. The Chinese market now consumes more cigarettes than all other low- and middle-income countries combined.
Other regions are increasingly playing larger roles in the growing global smoking epidemic. The WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMRO) now has the highest growth rate in the cigarette market, with more than a one-third increase in cigarette consumption since 2000. Due to its recent dynamic economic development and continued population growth, Africa presents the greatest risk in terms of future growth in tobacco use.
Within countries, patterns of cigarette consumption also can vary widely.  For example, in many of the countries where few women smoke, smoking rates are often high in males (e.g., in Asia). By contrast, in most developed countries, female smoking rates are typically only a few percentage points below those of males. In many high and middle income countries lower socioeconomic status is a strong predictor of smoking. 
Smoking rates in the United States have dropped by more than half from 1965 to 2016, falling from 42% to 15.5% of US adults.[197] Australia is cutting their overall smoking consumption faster than most of the developed world, in part due to landmark Plain Packaging Act, which standardized the appearance of cigarette packs. Other countries have considered similar measures. In New Zealand, a bill has been presented to parliament in which the government's associate health minister said "takes away the last means of promoting tobacco as a desirable product."[198]


Smoking prevalence by sex (ages 15 or older, 2016)[199]




Percent smoking


Region

Men

Women


Africa
18%
2%


Americas
21%
12%


Eastern Mediterranean
34%
2%


Europe
38%
21%


Southeast Asia
32%
2%


Western Pacific
46%
3%


Leading consumers of cigarettes (2016)[200]



Country
Population(millions)
Cigarettes consumed(billions)
Cigarettes consumed(per capita)


China
1,386
2,351
2,043


Indonesia
264
316
1,675


Russia
145
278
2,295


United States
327
266
1,017


Japan
127
174
1,583

Lights
Main article: Lights (cigarette type)
Some cigarettes are marketed as "Lights", "Milds", or "Low-tar."[201] These cigarettes were historically marketed as being less harmful, but there is no research showing that they are any less harmful. The filter design is one of the main differences between light and regular cigarettes, although not all cigarettes contain perforated holes in the filter. In some light cigarettes, the filter is perforated with small holes that theoretically diffuse the tobacco smoke with clean air. In regular cigarettes, the filter does not include these perforations. In ultralight cigarettes, the filter's perforations are larger. The majority of major cigarette manufacturers offer a light, low-tar, or mild cigarette brand. Due to recent U.S. legislation prohibiting the use of these descriptors, tobacco manufacturers are turning to color-coding to allow consumers to differentiate between regular and light brands.[202]
Research shows that smoking "light" or "low-tar" cigarettes is just as harmful as smoking other cigarettes.[203][204][205]

Notable cigarette brands
Main article: List of cigarette brands
  Marlboro, one of the most well-known cigarette brands.
.mw-parser-output .div-col{margin-top:0.3em;column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .div-col-small{font-size:90%}.mw-parser-output .div-col-rules{column-rule:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .div-col dl,.mw-parser-output .div-col ol,.mw-parser-output .div-col ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .div-col li,.mw-parser-output .div-col dd{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
520
555
Ashford
Amber Leaf
Army Club
Ardath
Basic
Bel Air
Benson & Hedges
Berkeley
Camel
Capri
Chesterfield
Davidoff
Dunhill
Djarum
Doral
du Maurier
Eclipse
Embassy
Eve
Export A
Fatima
Fortuna
Gauloises
Gitanes
Gold Flake
Golden Virginia
Gold Leaf
Kyriazi Freres
Kent
Kool
Lambert and Butler
L&M
Lark
Lucky Strike
Marlboro
Max
Mayfair
Merit
Mild Seven
More
Nat Sherman
Natural American Spirit
Newport
Next
Nil
Old Gold
Pall Mall
Parliament
Perilly's
Peter Stuyvesant
Peter Jackson
Philip Morris
Pyramid
Player's
Prince
Raleigh
Ronhill
Salem
Sampoerna
Seneca
Senior Service
Smokin Joes
Sobranie
Sovereign
Sterling
Surya
Tareyton
Vantage
Viceroy
Virginia Slims
West
Woodbine
Windsor Blue
Winfield
Winston

Smoking cessation
Main article: Smoking cessation
Smoking cessation (quitting smoking) is the process of discontinuing the practice of tobacco smoking.[206] Quitting can be difficult for many smokers due to the addictive nature of nicotine.[207]: 2300–2301  The addiction begins when nicotine acts on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors to release neurotransmitters such as dopamine, glutamate, and gamma-aminobutyric acid.[207]: 2296  Cessation of smoking leads to symptoms of nicotine withdrawal such as anxiety and irritability.[207]: 2298  Professional smoking cessation support methods generally endeavour to address both nicotine addiction and nicotine withdrawal symptoms.
Smoking cessation can be achieved with or without assistance from healthcare professionals or the use of medications.[208] Methods that have been found to be effective include interventions directed at or through health care providers and health care systems; medications including nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) and varenicline; individual and group counselling; and web-based or stand-alone computer programs. Although stopping smoking can cause short-term side effects such as reversible weight gain, smoking cessation services and activities are cost-effective because of the positive health benefits.
At the University of Buffalo, researchers found out that fruit and vegetable consumption can help a smoker cut down or even quit smoking[209]

A growing number of countries have more ex-smokers than smokers.[210]
Early "failure" is a normal part of trying to stop, and more than one attempt at stopping smoking prior to longer-term success is common.[208]
NRT, other prescribed pharmaceuticals, and professional counselling or support also help many smokers.[208]
However, up to three-quarters of ex-smokers report having quit without assistance ("cold turkey" or cut down then quit), and cessation without professional support or medication may be the most common method used by ex-smokers.[208]
The number of nicotinic receptors in the brain returns to the level of a nonsmoker between 6 and 12 weeks after quitting.[211] In 2019, the FDA authorized the selling of low-nicotine cigarettes in hopes of lowering the number of people addicted to nicotine.[212]

See also





Cigarette camp
History of commercial tobacco in the United States
List of additives in cigarettes
List of cigarette smoke carcinogens
Smoking culture
Tobacco smoking
List of countries by cigarette consumption per capita
Cigarettes are used as commodity money in prisons


Similar products
Beedi
Cigar
Cigarillo
Electronic cigarette
Herbal cigarette
Kretek
Shag
 


Bibliography
.mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}Wilder, Natalie; Daley, Claire; Sugarman, Jane; Partridge, James (April 2016). "Nicotine without smoke: Tobacco harm reduction". UK: Royal College of Physicians. pp. 1–191.
"E-Cigarette Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General" (PDF). United States Department of Health and Human Services. Surgeon General of the United States. 2016. pp. 1–298. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.
"Electronic nicotine delivery systems" (PDF). World Health Organization. 21 July 2014. pp. 1–13.
References
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ Hurt, RD; Robertson, CR (7 October 1998). "Prying open the door to the tobacco industry's secrets about nicotine: the Minnesota Tobacco Trial". JAMA. 280 (13): 1173–81. doi:10.1001/jama.280.13.1173. PMID 9777818.

^ Cummings, KM (September 2015). "Is it not time to reveal the secret sauce of nicotine addiction?". Tobacco Control. 24 (5): 420–1. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2015-052631. PMID 26293383.

^ Teague, CE (1972). Research planning memorandum on the nature of the tobacco business and the crucial role of the nicotine therein. Bates: 500915683–500915691: R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location (link)

^ Dunn, W (1977). Smoker psychology program review. Bates: 1000046538–1000046546: Philip Morris Tobacco Company.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location (link)

^ "fag". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.)

^ "The Study That Helped Spur the U.S. Stop-Smoking Movement". www.cancer.org. Archived from the original on 2021-05-20. Retrieved 2021-05-25.

^ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018, March 5). 2014 SGR: The Health Consequences of Smoking—50 Years of Progress. Retrieved November 25, 2019, from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website: https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/sgr/50th-anniversary/index.htm

^ Doll, R.; Peto, R.; Boreham, J.; Sutherland, I. (2004). "Mortality in relation to smoking: 50 years' observations on male British doctors". BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.). 328 (7455): 1519. doi:10.1136/bmj.38142.554479.AE. PMC 437139. PMID 15213107.

^ Jump up to: a b "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-12-29. Retrieved 2009-11-13.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ World Health Organization. (2019, July 26). Tobacco. Retrieved November 25, 2019, from https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/tobacco

^ "WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2005-02-27. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 6, 2005. Retrieved 2009-01-12. Parties recognize that scientific evidence has unequivocally established that exposure to tobacco has the potential to cause death, disease and disability

^ "The Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: A Report of the Surgeon General". Surgeon General of the United States. 2006-06-27. Retrieved 2014-06-16. Secondhand smoke exposure causes disease and premature death in children and adults who do not smoke

^ Board, California Environmental Protection Agency: Air Resources (2005-06-24). "Proposed Identification of Environmental Tobacco Smoke as a Toxic Air Contaminant". California Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved 2009-01-12. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Tobacco Smoke and Involuntary Smoking (PDF). International Agency for Research on Cancer. 2004. ISBN 9789283215837. Retrieved 2009-01-12. There is sufficient evidence that involuntary smoking (exposure to secondhand or 'environmental' tobacco smoke) has the potential to cause lung cancer in humans

^ Jump up to: a b Csordas, Adam; Bernhard, David (2013). "The biology behind the atherothrombotic effects of cigarette smoke". Nature Reviews Cardiology. 10 (4): 219–230. doi:10.1038/nrcardio.2013.8. ISSN 1759-5002. PMID 23380975. S2CID 25491622.

^ Jump up to: a b "Tobacco Smoking" (PDF). Personal Habits and Indoor Combustions. Vol. 100E. International Agency for Research on Cancer. 2012. p. 44.

^ "Smoking While Pregnant Causes Finger, Toe Deformities". Science Daily. Retrieved March 6, 2007.

^ "Cigarette Smoking Among Adults - United States, 2006". Cdc.gov. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ "WHO/WPRO-Smoking Statistics". Wpro.who.int. 2002-05-28. Archived from the original on November 8, 2009. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ "Home". The Tobacco Atlas.

^ Morabia, Alfredo (November 2017). "Anti-Tobacco Propaganda: Soviet Union Versus Nazi Germany". American Journal of Public Health. 107 (11): 1708–1710. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2017.304087. ISSN 0090-0036. PMC 5637694. PMID 29019774.

^ Robicsek, Francis Smoke; Ritual Smoking in Central America pp. 30–37

^ Jump up to: a b c Goodman, Jordan Elliot (1993). Tobacco in history: the cultures of dependence. New York: Routledge. p. 97. ISBN 978-0-415-04963-4.

^ Oxford English Dictionary, s.v.

^ Circulars of Information of the Bureau of Education, The Spelling Reform, No. 7-1880, 1881, p. 25

^ Henry Gallup Paine, Simplified Spelling Board, Handbook of Simplified Spelling, New York, 1920, p. 6

^ Google Books Ngram Viewer for cigaret vs. cigarette in US and British corpora

^ Office, Patent (29 December 1870). "Patents for inventions. Abridgments of specifications" – via Google Books.

^ James, Randy (2009-06-15). "A Brief History Of Cigarette Advertising". TIME. Archived from the original on September 21, 2011. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ "Projekt Gutenberg-DE - SPIEGEL ONLINE - Nachrichten - Kultur". Gutenberg.spiegel.de. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ "Tobacco Use, United States 1990-1999". Oncology (Williston Park). 13 (12). December 1999.

^ Tobacco Outlook Report, Economic Research Service, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture

^ "Definition of COFFIN NAIL".

^ Roffo, A. H. (January 8, 1940). "Krebserzeugende Tabakwirkung [Carcingogenic effects of tobacco"] (in German). Berlin: J. F. Lehmanns Verlag. Retrieved 2009-09-13.

^ Proctor, R. N. (2006). "Angel H Roffo: The forgotten father of experimental tobacco carcinogenesis". Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 84 (6): 494–496. doi:10.2471/BLT.06.031682. PMC 2627373. PMID 16799735.

^ Hammond D, Fong GT, McNeill A, Borland R, Cummings KM (June 2006). "Effectiveness of cigarette warning labels in informing smokers about the risks of smoking: findings from the International Tobacco Control (ITC) Four Country Survey". Tob Control. 15 Suppl 3 (Suppl 3): iii19–25. doi:10.1136/tc.2005.012294. PMC 2593056. PMID 16754942.

^ ccpa.unc.edu

^ "WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic, 2019 Country profile Netherlands" (PDF). who.int. World Health Organization. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 22, 2012. Retrieved 14 December 2020.

^ Storr, Will (2012-09-06). "Quest for a safer cigarette". The Daily Telegraph. London.

^ "Project XA".

^ "Safer cigarette history".

^ Hoffmann, D (March 1997). "The changing cigarette, 1950-1995". Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health. 50 (4): 307–364. doi:10.1080/009841097160393. PMID 9120872.

^ Clean Virginia Waterways, Cigarette Butt Litter - Cigarette Filters Archived 2009-01-26 at the Wayback Machine, Longwood University. Retrieved October 31, 2006.

^ Jump up to: a b c Wigand, J.S. Additives, Cigarette Design and Tobacco Product Regulation, A Report To: World Health Organization, Tobacco Free Initiative, Tobacco Product Regulation Group, Kobe, Japan, 28 June-2 July 2006

^ "Composite List of Ingredients in Non-Tobacco Materials". Archived from the original on May 24, 2008. www.jti.com. Retrieved November 2, 2006.

^ Jump up to: a b c d David E. Merrill, (1994), "How cigarettes are made". Video presentation at Philip Morris USA, Richmond offices. Retrieved October 31, 2006.

^ "Legacy Tobacco Documents Library". G2public.library.ucsf.edu. Archived from the original on February 12, 2009. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ Grant Gellatly, "Method and apparatus for coating reconstituted tobacco".. Retrieved November 2, 2006.

^ "Making Cigarettes". www.pmi.com. Retrieved 2021-05-25.

^ David Pemberton, "Spies, Smoking & Radiation Sickness". Archived from the original on 2014-02-25.

^ STS Archived January 12, 2009, at the Wayback Machine

^ "13 Manufacturing Tobacco". Archived from the original on December 3, 2011.. Retrieved May 11, 2011.

^ Seeman, Jeffrey I.; Carchman, Richard A. (2008). "The possible role of ammonia toxicity on the exposure, deposition, retention, and the bioavailability of nicotine during smoking". Food and Chemical Toxicology. 46 (6): 1863–81. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2008.02.021. PMID 18450355.

^ "How to Roll Your Own Filter Cigarettes: 6 Steps (with Pictures)". wikihow.com. Archived from the original on 2014-02-22. Retrieved 2014-02-14.[self-published source]

^ "Zig-Zag Filtered Cigarette Tubes, RYO Magazine, The Magazine of Roll Your Own Cigarettes, Reviews, the Premier filter tube, filtered cigarettes". ryomagazine.com. Retrieved 2014-02-14.

^ "Forms Tutorial: Glossary Text Version". ttb.gov. Archived from the original on 2013-05-08. Retrieved 2014-02-14.

^ Jump up to: a b Micevska, T.; Warne, M. St. J.; Pablo, F.; Patra, R. (2005). "Variation in, and Causes of, Toxicity of Cigarette Butts to a Cladoceran and Microtox". Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology. 50 (2): 205–212. doi:10.1007/s00244-004-0132-y. PMID 16328625. S2CID 26207468.

^ Kathleen M. Register. "Cigarette Butts as Litter—Toxic as Well as Ugly", Longwood University. Retrieved 28 June 2011. First published in Underwater Naturalist, Volume 25, Number 2, August 2000.

^ The Nelson contemporary English dictionary - Page 187, W. T. Cunningham - 1977

^ "Penny for your butts? Vancouver group pushes cigarette-butt recycling plan". CTVNews. 21 June 2013. Retrieved 30 May 2015.

^ City of Vancouver (2013-11-13). "City and TerraCycle launch cigarette butt collection and recycling program". Archived from the original on 2015-05-03. Retrieved 30 May 2015.

^ Caponnetto, Pasquale; Campagna, Davide; Papale, Gabriella; Russo, Cristina; Polosa, Riccardo (2012). "The emerging phenomenon of electronic cigarettes". Expert Review of Respiratory Medicine. 6 (1): 63–74. doi:10.1586/ers.11.92. ISSN 1747-6348. PMID 22283580. S2CID 207223131.

^ Jump up to: a b c Orellana-Barrios, Menfil A.; Payne, Drew; Mulkey, Zachary; Nugent, Kenneth (2015). "Electronic cigarettes-a narrative review for clinicians". The American Journal of Medicine. 128 (7): 674–81. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2015.01.033. ISSN 0002-9343. PMID 25731134.

^ Jump up to: a b Cheng, T. (2014). "Chemical evaluation of electronic cigarettes". Tobacco Control. 23 (Supplement 2): ii11–ii17. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013-051482. ISSN 0964-4563. PMC 3995255. PMID 24732157.

^ Weaver, Michael; Breland, Alison; Spindle, Tory; Eissenberg, Thomas (2014). "Electronic Cigarettes". Journal of Addiction Medicine. 8 (4): 234–240. doi:10.1097/ADM.0000000000000043. ISSN 1932-0620. PMC 4123220. PMID 25089953.

^ Rahman, Muhammad; Hann, Nicholas; Wilson, Andrew; Worrall-Carter, Linda (2014). "Electronic cigarettes: patterns of use, health effects, use in smoking cessation and regulatory issues". Tobacco Induced Diseases. 12 (1): 21. doi:10.1186/1617-9625-12-21. PMC 4350653. PMID 25745382.

^ Pepper, J. K.; Brewer, N. T. (2013). "Electronic nicotine delivery system (electronic cigarette) awareness, use, reactions and beliefs: a systematic review". Tobacco Control. 23 (5): 375–384. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013-051122. ISSN 0964-4563. PMC 4520227. PMID 24259045.

^ Drope, Jeffrey; Cahn, Zachary; Kennedy, Rosemary; Liber, Alex C.; Stoklosa, Michal; Henson, Rosemarie; Douglas, Clifford E.; Drope, Jacqui (2017). "Key issues surrounding the health impacts of electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) and other sources of nicotine". CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians. 67 (6): 449–471. doi:10.3322/caac.21413. ISSN 0007-9235. PMID 28961314.

^ Bhatnagar, A.; Whitsel, L.P.; Ribisl, K.M.; Bullen, C.; Chaloupka, F.; Piano, M.R.; Robertson, R.M.; McAuley, T.; Goff, D.; Benowitz, N. (24 August 2014). "Electronic Cigarettes: A Policy Statement From the American Heart Association" (PDF). Circulation. 130 (16): 1418–1436. doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000107. PMC 7643636. PMID 25156991. S2CID 16075813.

^ McRobbie, Hayden (2014). "Electronic cigarettes" (PDF). National Centre for Smoking Cessation and Training. pp. 1–16.

^ Farsalinos KE, Spyrou A, Tsimopoulou K, Stefopoulos C, Romagna G, Voudris V (2014). "Nicotine absorption from electronic cigarette use: Comparison between first and new-generation devices". Scientific Reports. 4: 4133. Bibcode:2014NatSR...4E4133F. doi:10.1038/srep04133. PMC 3935206. PMID 24569565.

^ Farsalinos, Konstantinos. "Electronic cigarette evolution from the first to fourth generation and beyond" (PDF). gfn.net.co. Global Forum on Nicotine. p. 23. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2015. Retrieved 23 September 2015.

^ England, Lucinda J.; Bunnell, Rebecca E.; Pechacek, Terry F.; Tong, Van T.; McAfee, Tim A. (2015). "Nicotine and the Developing Human". American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 49 (2): 286–93. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2015.01.015. ISSN 0749-3797. PMC 4594223. PMID 25794473.

^ Oh, Anne Y.; Kacker, Ashutosh (December 2014). "Do electronic cigarettes impart a lower potential disease burden than conventional tobacco cigarettes?: Review on e-cigarette vapor versus tobacco smoke". The Laryngoscope. 124 (12): 2702–2706. doi:10.1002/lary.24750. PMID 25302452. S2CID 10560264.

^ Leduc, Charlotte; Quoix, Elisabeth (2016). "Is there a role for e-cigarettes in smoking cessation?". Therapeutic Advances in Respiratory Disease. 10 (2): 130–135. doi:10.1177/1753465815621233. ISSN 1753-4658. PMC 5933562. PMID 26668136.

^ Wilder 2016, p. 82.

^ Ebbert, Jon O.; Agunwamba, Amenah A.; Rutten, Lila J. (2015). "Counseling Patients on the Use of Electronic Cigarettes". Mayo Clinic Proceedings. 90 (1): 128–134. doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2014.11.004. ISSN 0025-6196. PMID 25572196.

^ Siu, A.L. (22 September 2015). "Behavioral and Pharmacotherapy Interventions for Tobacco Smoking Cessation in Adults, Including Pregnant Women: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement". Annals of Internal Medicine. 163 (8): 622–34. doi:10.7326/M15-2023. PMID 26389730.

^ Harrell, P.T.; Simmons, V.N.; Correa, J.B.; Padhya, T.A.; Brandon, T.H. (4 June 2014). "Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems ("E-cigarettes"): Review of Safety and Smoking Cessation Efficacy". Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery. 151 (3): 381–393. doi:10.1177/0194599814536847. PMC 4376316. PMID 24898072.

^ Jump up to: a b Hartmann-Boyce, Jamie; McRobbie, Hayden; Lindson, Nicola; Bullen, Chris; Begh, Rachna; Theodoulou, Annika; Notley, Caitlin; Rigotti, Nancy A.; Turner, Tari; Butler, Ailsa R.; Fanshawe, Thomas R. (2021-04-29). "Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation". The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 4 (8): CD010216. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD010216.pub5. ISSN 1469-493X. PMC 8092424. PMID 33913154.

^ McDonough, Mike (2015). "Update on medicines for smoking cessation". Australian Prescriber. 38 (4): 106–111. doi:10.18773/austprescr.2015.038. ISSN 0312-8008. PMC 4653977. PMID 26648633.

^ Jump up to: a b WHO 2014, p. 6.

^ "E-Cigarette Use Among Youth and Young Adults A Report of the Surgeon General: Fact Sheet" (PDF). Surgeon General of the United States. 2016. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.

^ Stratton 2018, p. Summary, 16. sfn error: no target: CITEREFStratton2018 (help)

^ Jump up to: a b Drummond, M.B.; Upson, D (February 2014). "Electronic cigarettes: Potential harms and benefits". Annals of the American Thoracic Society. 11 (2): 236–42. doi:10.1513/annalsats.201311-391fr. PMC 5469426. PMID 24575993.

^ M., Z.; Siegel, M (February 2011). "Electronic cigarettes as a harm reduction strategy for tobacco control: a step forward or a repeat of past mistakes?". Journal of Public Health Policy. 32 (1): 16–31. doi:10.1057/jphp.2010.41. PMID 21150942.

^ Knorst, Marli Maria; Benedetto, Igor Gorski; Hoffmeister, Mariana Costa; Gazzana, Marcelo Basso (2014). "The electronic cigarette: the new cigarette of the 21st century?". Jornal Brasileiro de Pneumologia. 40 (5): 564–572. doi:10.1590/S1806-37132014000500013. ISSN 1806-3713. PMC 4263338. PMID 25410845.

^ Burstyn, Igor (9 January 2014). "Peering through the mist: systematic review of what the chemistry of contaminants in electronic cigarettes tells us about health risks". BMC Public Health. 14 (1): 18. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-14-18. ISSN 1471-2458. PMC 3937158. PMID 24406205.

^ Caponnetto P.; Russo C.; Bruno C.M.; Alamo A.; Amaradio M.D.; Polosa R. (March 2013). "Electronic cigarette: a possible substitute for cigarette dependence". Monaldi Archives for Chest Disease. 79 (1): 12–19. doi:10.4081/monaldi.2013.104. PMID 23741941.

^ Brady, Benjamin R.; De La Rosa, Jennifer S.; Nair, Uma S.; Leischow, Scott J. (2019). "Electronic Cigarette Policy Recommendations: A Scoping Review". American Journal of Health Behavior. 43 (1): 88–104. doi:10.5993/AJHB.43.1.8. ISSN 1087-3244. PMID 30522569.

^ Bals, Robert; Boyd, Jeanette; Esposito, Susanna; Foronjy, Robert; Hiemstra, Pieter S.; Jiménez-Ruiz, Carlos A.; Katsaounou, Paraskevi; Lindberg, Anne; Metz, Carlos; Schober, Wolfgang; Spira, Avrum; Blasi, Francesco (2019). "Electronic cigarettes: a task force report from the European Respiratory Society". European Respiratory Journal. 53 (2): 1801151. doi:10.1183/13993003.01151-2018. ISSN 0903-1936. PMID 30464018.

^ Paley, Grace L.; Echalier, Elizabeth; Eck, Thomas W.; Hong, Augustine R.; Farooq, Asim V.; Gregory, Darren G.; Lubniewski, Anthony J. (2016). "Corneoscleral Laceration and Ocular Burns Caused by Electronic Cigarette Explosions". Cornea. 35 (7): 1015–1018. doi:10.1097/ICO.0000000000000881. ISSN 0277-3740. PMC 4900417. PMID 27191672.

^ Breland, Alison B.; Spindle, Tory; Weaver, Michael; Eissenberg, Thomas (2014). "Science and Electronic Cigarettes". Journal of Addiction Medicine. 8 (4): 223–233. doi:10.1097/ADM.0000000000000049. ISSN 1932-0620. PMC 4122311. PMID 25089952.

^ Jump up to: a b c d e Grana, R; Benowitz, N; Glantz, SA (13 May 2014). "E-cigarettes: a scientific review". Circulation. 129 (19): 1972–86. doi:10.1161/circulationaha.114.007667. PMC 4018182. PMID 24821826.

^ Edgar, Julie (12 November 2013). "E-Cigarettes: Expert Q&A With the CDC". WebMD.

^ "Outbreak of Lung Illness Associated with Using E-cigarette Products". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 28 January 2020. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.

^ Jump up to: a b Hajek, P; Etter, JF; Benowitz, N; Eissenberg, T; McRobbie, H (31 July 2014). "Electronic cigarettes: review of use, content, safety, effects on smokers and potential for harm and benefit" (PDF). Addiction. 109 (11): 1801–10. doi:10.1111/add.12659. PMC 4487785. PMID 25078252.

^ Hildick-Smith, Gordon J.; Pesko, Michael F.; Shearer, Lee; Hughes, Jenna M.; Chang, Jane; Loughlin, Gerald M.; Ipp, Lisa S. (2015). "A Practitioner's Guide to Electronic Cigarettes in the Adolescent Population". Journal of Adolescent Health. 57 (6): 574–9. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2015.07.020. ISSN 1054-139X. PMID 26422289.

^ Fernández, Esteve; Ballbè, Montse; Sureda, Xisca; Fu, Marcela; Saltó, Esteve; Martínez-Sánchez, Jose M. (2015). "Particulate Matter from Electronic Cigarettes and Conventional Cigarettes: a Systematic Review and Observational Study". Current Environmental Health Reports. 2 (4): 423–9. doi:10.1007/s40572-015-0072-x. ISSN 2196-5412. PMID 26452675.

^ Rom, Oren; Pecorelli, Alessandra; Valacchi, Giuseppe; Reznick, Abraham Z. (2014). "Are E-cigarettes a safe and good alternative to cigarette smoking?". Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 1340 (1): 65–74. Bibcode:2015NYASA1340...65R. doi:10.1111/nyas.12609. ISSN 0077-8923. PMID 25557889. S2CID 26187171.

^ "Why is it so hard to quit?". Heart.org. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ Day, Ruby. "Strategically Addictive Drugs".

^ Jump up to: a b Benowitz, Neal L. (17 June 2010). "Nicotine Addiction". The New England Journal of Medicine. 362 (24): 2295–2303. doi:10.1056/NEJMra0809890. ISSN 0028-4793. PMC 2928221. PMID 20554984.

^ "HEALTH | Cigarettes 'cut life by 11 minutes'". BBC News. 1999-12-31. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ Shaw, M. (2000). "Time for a smoke? One cigarette reduces your life by 11 minutes". BMJ. 320 (7226): 53. doi:10.1136/bmj.320.7226.53. PMC 1117323. PMID 10617536.

^ "Tobacco". www.who.int. Retrieved 2019-07-17.

^ "WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 10, 2008.

^ Kastan MB (2008). "DNA damage responses: mechanisms and roles in human disease: 2007 G.H.A. Clowes Memorial Award Lecture". Mol. Cancer Res. 6 (4): 517–24. doi:10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0020. PMID 18403632.

^ Cunningham FH, Fiebelkorn S, Johnson M, Meredith C (2011). "A novel application of the Margin of Exposure approach: segregation of tobacco smoke toxicants". Food Chem. Toxicol. 49 (11): 2921–33. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2011.07.019. PMID 21802474.

^ Liu XY, Zhu MX, Xie JP (2010). "Mutagenicity of acrolein and acrolein-induced DNA adducts". Toxicol. Mech. Methods. 20 (1): 36–44. doi:10.3109/15376510903530845. PMID 20158384. S2CID 8812192.

^ Speit G, Merk O (2002). "Evaluation of mutagenic effects of formaldehyde in vitro: detection of crosslinks and mutations in mouse lymphoma cells". Mutagenesis. 17 (3): 183–7. doi:10.1093/mutage/17.3.183. PMID 11971987.

^ Pu X, Kamendulis LM, Klaunig JE (2009). "Acrylonitrile-induced oxidative stress and oxidative DNA damage in male Sprague-Dawley rats". Toxicol. Sci. 111 (1): 64–71. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfp133. PMC 2726299. PMID 19546159.

^ Koturbash I, Scherhag A, Sorrentino J, Sexton K, Bodnar W, Swenberg JA, Beland FA, Pardo-Manuel Devillena F, Rusyn I, Pogribny IP (2011). "Epigenetic mechanisms of mouse interstrain variability in genotoxicity of the environmental toxicant 1,3-butadiene". Toxicol. Sci. 122 (2): 448–56. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfr133. PMC 3155089. PMID 21602187.

^ Garcia CC, Angeli JP, Freitas FP, Gomes OF, de Oliveira TF, Loureiro AP, Di Mascio P, Medeiros MH (2011). "[13C2]-Acetaldehyde promotes unequivocal formation of 1,N2-propano-2'-deoxyguanosine in human cells". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133 (24): 9140–3. doi:10.1021/ja2004686. PMID 21604744.

^ Tompkins EM, McLuckie KI, Jones DJ, Farmer PB, Brown K (2009). "Mutagenicity of DNA adducts derived from ethylene oxide exposure in the pSP189 shuttle vector replicated in human Ad293 cells". Mutat. Res. 678 (2): 129–37. doi:10.1016/j.mrgentox.2009.05.011. PMID 19477295.

^ Fabiani R, Rosignoli P, De Bartolomeo A, Fuccelli R, Morozzi G (2007). "DNA-damaging ability of isoprene and isoprene mono-epoxide (EPOX I) in human cells evaluated with the comet assay". Mutat. Res. 629 (1): 7–13. doi:10.1016/j.mrgentox.2006.12.007. PMID 17317274.

^ Green, J. T.; Richardson, C.; Marshall, R. W.; Rhodes, J.; McKirdy, H. C.; Thomas, G. A.; Williams, G. T. (2000). "Nitric oxide mediates a therapeutic effect of nicotine in ulcerative colitis". Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 14 (11): 1429–1434. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2036.2000.00847.x. PMID 11069313. S2CID 21358737.

^ Almeida OP, Hulse GK, Lawrence D, Flicker L (2002). "Smoking as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease: contrasting evidence from a systematic review of case-control and cohort studies". Addiction. 97 (1): 15–28. doi:10.1046/j.1360-0443.2002.00016.x. PMID 11895267. S2CID 22936675.

^ Jump up to: a b c d e f SGUS 2016, p. 106; Chapter 3.

^ "Secondhand Smoke". American Lung Association. June 2007. Archived from the original on October 16, 2009. Retrieved 2012-05-06.

^ ""Tobacco-Free Florida", Centers for Disease Control & Prevention Fact Sheets". Tobaccofreefloridanewsroom.com. Retrieved 2013-01-02.

^ Jump up to: a b "Secondhand Smoke". Cancer.org. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ Jump up to: a b "Secondhand Smoke and Cancer - National Cancer Institute". Cancer.gov. 2005-08-18. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ "CDC - Fact Sheet - Secondhand Smoke Facts - Smoking & Tobacco Use". Cdc.gov. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control; First international treaty on public health, adopted by 192 countries and signed by 168. Its Article 8.1 states, "Parties recognize that scientific evidence has unequivocally established that exposure to tobacco causes death, disease and disability."

^ Parameswaran, Gayatri. "Bhutan smokers huff and puff over tobacco ban - Features". Al Jazeera English. Retrieved 2013-01-02.

^ Marks, Kathy (2008-07-09). "World's smallest state aims to become the first smoke-free paradise island - Australasia - World". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 2012-11-11. Retrieved 2013-01-02.

^ Pidd, Helen (2011-07-04). "What a drag … Iceland considers prescription-only cigarettes | World news". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2013-01-02.

^ "WHO | Brazil - Flavoured cigarettes banned". Who.int. 2012-03-13. Retrieved 2013-01-02.

^ "Eyes on Trade: Brazil's flavored cigarette ban now targeted". Citizen.typepad.com. 2012-04-16. Retrieved 2013-01-02.

^ Dubai: The Complete Residents' Guide - Page 27, 2006

^ "Total adult smokers by country". NationMaster.com. Retrieved 2008-06-04.

^ "CIA - The World Factbook - Japan". Cia.gov. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ [1] Archived March 26, 2009, at the Wayback Machine

^ "UK | England | Bristol/Somerset | Retailers sell tobacco to youths". BBC News. 2005-09-01. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ Ritchie, Hannah; Roser, Max (23 May 2013). "Smoking". Our World in Data. Retrieved 27 January 2020.

^ "Higher Cigarette Taxes". Tobaccofreekids.org. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ "Closing in on cancer". The Economist. Retrieved 2017-09-25.

^ "U.S. Aided Cigarette Firms in Conquests Across Asia". Washingtonpost.com. 1996-11-17. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ "State Excise Tax Rates On Cigarettes (January 1, 2007)". Taxadmin.org. Archived from the original on November 9, 2009. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ "Les cigarettes anti-incendie seront obligatoires en 2011". L'Express (in French). L'Expansion. AFP. Archived from the original on February 23, 2009. Retrieved January 2, 2010. According to a study made by European union in 16 European countries, 11,000 fires were due to cigarettes between 2005 and 2007. They caused 520 deaths and 1600 injuries.

^ "European Union Pushes for Self-Extinguishing Cigarettes". Deutsche Welle. Deutsche Welle. Retrieved January 2, 2010.

^ "European Union Pushes for Self-Extinguishing Cigarettes". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 2009-01-01.

^ O'Connell, Vanessa (2004-04-23). "U.S. Suit Alleges Philip Morris Hid Cigarette-Fire Risk". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 2019-02-24. Philip Morris began examining ways to make cigarettes less likely to cause fires in the early 1980s. The research initially was dubbed Project Hamlet, a joking reference to the line "to burn or not to burn," the company confirms.

^ "Smoking article wrapper for controlling burn rate and method for making same - Philip Morris Incorporated". Freepatentsonline.com. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ "NFPA :: Safety Information :: For consumers :: Causes :: Smoking :: Coalition for Fire-Safe Cigarettes". Firesafecigarettes.org. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ "Method and apparatus for making banded smoking article wrappers - US Patent 5342484 Full Text". Patentstorm.us. Archived from the original on 2008-05-12. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ "States that have passed fire-safe cigarette laws". Fire Safe Cigarettes. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ "Les cigarettes anti-incendie seront obligatoires en 2011" (in French). Lexpansion.com. Archived from the original on 2009-02-23. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ "A legal history of smoking in Canada". CBC News. 2012-11-09. Retrieved 2014-12-29. On Jan. 19, 2005, The Supreme Court of Canada rules that Saskatchewan can reinstate a controversial law that forces store owners to keep tobacco products behind curtains or doors. The so-called "shower curtain law" was passed in 2002 to hide cigarettes from children, but was struck down a year later by an appeals court.

^ "Ontario set to ban cigarette display cases". CTV News. 2008-04-20. Archived from the original on 2009-02-12. Retrieved 2009-01-31. The new ban prevents all tobacco products from being displayed in any way and prohibits customers from even touching them before they're paid for.

^ "A Proposal to Regulate the Display and Promotion of Tobacco and Tobacco-Related Products at Retail". Hc-sc.gc.ca. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ Jump up to: a b Harris, Gardiner (November 10, 2010). "F.D.A. Unveils Proposed Graphic Warning Labels for Cigarette Packs". The New York Times.

^ Scollo, Michelle; Haslam, Indra (2008). A12.1.1.3 Pictorial warnings in force since 2006. Tobacco in Australia. Cancer Council Victoria. Retrieved 2010-07-23.

^ Warning on cigarette pack. Tobacco in Pakistan.

^ "Iceland Tough On Cigarettes – Sun Sentinel". Articles.sun-sentinel.com. 1985-09-17. Archived from the original on 2013-05-24. Retrieved 2013-01-02.

^ Bardi, Jason (2012-11-16). "Cigarette Pack Health Warning Labels in US Lag Behind World". Tobacco Control. 23 (1): e2. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2012-050541. PMC 3725195. PMID 23092884. Retrieved 2013-01-02.

^ Ottawa to increase size of tobacco warning to cover 3/4 of cigarette package https://vancouversun.com/health/Ottawa+increase+size+tobacco+warnings/4039002/story.html[permanent dead link]

^ "Story of a shattered life: A single childhood incident pushed Dawn Crey into a downward spiral | Vancouver Sun". 2001-11-24. Retrieved February 19, 2011.[dead link]

^ "Tobacco Plain Packaging Regulations 2011". Australian Government Federal Register of Legislation. 2013-08-08. 2.2.1 (2) & passim. Retrieved 2018-03-29.

^ "Australia unveils tough new cigarette pack rules". Channel NewsAsia. 2011-04-07. Archived from the original on 2011-08-30. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ "The world's ugliest colour has been revealed". The Independent. 2016-06-11. Retrieved 2016-06-19.

^ "This new law could save your life". The Independent. 2016-05-20. Retrieved 2016-06-19.

^ "Australia's Top Court Backs Plain-Pack Tobacco Laws". Bloomberg. August 15, 2012.

^ Novotny TE, Lum K, Smith E,  et al. (2009). "Cigarettes butts and the case for an environmental policy on hazardous cigarette waste". International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 6 (5): 1691–705. doi:10.3390/ijerph6051691. PMC 2697937. PMID 19543415.

^ "The world litters 4.5 trillion cigarette butts a year. Can we stop this?". The Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 2014-09-16.

^ "International Coastal Cleanup 2006 Report, page 8" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 26, 2008. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ "CigaretteLitter.org". Archived from the original on 2007-05-22. Retrieved 2007-05-28.

^ Slaughter E, Gersberg RM, Watanabe K, Rudolph J, Stransky C, Novotny TE (2011). "Toxicity of cigarette butts, and their chemical components, to marine and freshwater fish". Tobacco Control. 20 (Suppl_1): 25–29. doi:10.1136/tc.2010.040170. PMC 3088407. PMID 21504921.

^ Pauly JL, Mepani AB, Lesses JD, Cummings KM, Streck RJ (March 2002). "Cigarettes with defective filters marketed for 40 years: what Philip Morris never told smokers". Tob Control. 11 (Suppl 1): I51–61. doi:10.1136/tc.11.suppl_1.i51. PMC 1766058. PMID 11893815. Table 1 Chronology of events related to the marketing of cigarettes filters in the USA, and filter fiber and carbon particle "fall-out" assays of Phillip Morris, Inc Date Milestones and documents {{cite journal}}: External link in |quote= (help)

^ Dahlberg ER (April 11, 2006). "Cigarette Filters With Vegetation, soil, and Subterranean Environment". Saint Paul, Minnesota: Hamline University. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ "Cigarette butt 'causes $1m house fire'". News.smh.com.au. 2008-09-14. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ "The Facts About Cigarette Butts and Litter - Fire Danger". CigaretteLitter.Org. Archived from the original on 2009-07-08. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ Perkin, Corrie (2009-02-09). "Cigarette butt blamed for West Bendigo fire; two dead, 50 homes lost | Victoria". News.com.au. Archived from the original on February 25, 2009. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ "Can cigarette butts start bushfires? - NSW Fire Brigades". Nswfb.nsw.gov.au. 2007-06-21. Archived from the original on 2009-10-17. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ "Discarded cigarette butt causes airport chaos - ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)". Abc.net.au. 2009-01-15. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ Jump up to: a b "British American Tobacco - Cigarettes". Bat.com. Archived from the original on March 3, 2012. Retrieved 2012-03-25.

^ "Kicking butts". Retrieved 2014-09-16.

^ Puls J, Wilson SA, Holter D (2011). "Degradation of Cellulose Acetate-Based Materials: A Review". Journal of Polymers and the Environment. 19: 152–165. doi:10.1007/s10924-010-0258-0.

^ Ceredigion County Council Archived January 8, 2009, at the Wayback Machine

^ "Bulletin of the American Littoral Society, Volume 26, Number 2, August 2000". Longwood.edu. Retrieved 2009-11-13.

^ Gou, JY; Miller, LM; Hou, G; Yu, XH; Chen, XY; Liu, CJ (January 2012). "Acetylesterase-mediated deacetylation of pectin impairs cell elongation, pollen germination, and plant reproduction". Plant Cell. 24 (1): 50–65. doi:10.1105/tpc.111.092411. PMC 3289554. PMID 22247250.[dead link]

^ "Breaking Down Cellulose". large.stanford.edu.

^ Buchanan CM, Garder RM, Komarek RJ (1993). "Aerobic biodegradation of cellulose acetate". Journal of Applied Polymer Science. 47 (10): 1709–1719. doi:10.1002/app.1993.070471001.

^ Rivard CJ, Adney WS, Himmel ME, Mitchell DJ, Vinzant TB, Grohmann K, Moens L, Chum H (1992). "Effects of Natural Polymer Acetlation on the anaerobic Dioconversion to Methane and Carbon Dioxide". Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology. 34/35: 725–736. doi:10.1007/bf02920592. S2CID 84432678.

^ Hon NS (1977). "Photodegradation of Cellulose Acetate Fibers". Journal of Polymer Science Part A: Polymer Chemistry. 15 (3): 725–744. Bibcode:1977JPoSA..15..725H. doi:10.1002/pol.1977.170150319.

^ Hosono K, Kanazawa A, Mori H, Endo T (2007). "Photodegradation of Cellulose Acetate film in the presence of bensophenone as a photosensitizer". Journal of Applied Polymer Science. 105 (6): 3235–3239. doi:10.1002/app.26386.

^ "Study on Photocatalytic Oxidation (PCO) Raises Questions About Formaldehyde as a Byproduct in Indoor Air". Archived from the original on 26 April 2015. Retrieved 30 May 2015.

^ "photosensitization - chemistry". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 30 May 2015.

^ "Accidents, fires: Price of littering goes beyond fines". Washington: State of Washington Department of Ecology. 2004-06-01. Archived from the original on 2009-10-12. Retrieved 2009-05-06.

^ "No more butts: biodegradable filters a step to boot litter problem". Environmental Health News. 2012-08-14.

^ Novotny, Thomas; Lum, Kristen; Smith, Elizabeth; Wang, Vivian; Barnes, Richard (2009). "Cigarette Butts and the Case for an Environmental Policy on Hazardous Cigarette Waste". International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 6 (5): 1691–1705. doi:10.3390/ijerph6051691. PMC 2697937. PMID 19543415.

^ Minzae L, Gil-Pyo K, Hyeon DS, Soomin P, Jongheop Y (2014). "Preparation of energy storage material derived from a used cigarette filter for a supercapacitor electrode". Nanotechnology. 25 (34): 34. Bibcode:2014Nanot..25H5601L. doi:10.1088/0957-4484/25/34/345601. PMID 25092115. S2CID 8692351.

^ Willingham, Richard (31 Dec 2010). "Tobacco display ban from tomorrow". The Age(Melbourne). Fairfax Media. Retrieved 2012-06-28.

^ Ng, Marie; Freeman, Michael K.; Fleming, Thomas D.; Robinson, Margaret; Dwyer-Lindgren, Laura; Thomson, Blake; Wollum, Alexandra; Sanman, Ella; Wulf, Sarah (2014-01-08). "Smoking Prevalence and Cigarette Consumption in 187 Countries, 1980-2012". JAMA. 311 (2): 183–92. doi:10.1001/jama.2013.284692. ISSN 0098-7484. PMID 24399557.[permanent dead link]

^ "The Global Cigarette Industry". August 2018.

^ "Tobacco Merchant Account". Allied Payments. 2019-05-21. Retrieved 2018-05-25.

^ Innis, Michelle (11 June 2014). "Australia's Graphic Cigarette Pack Warnings Appear to Work". The New York Times.

^ "Age-standardized prevalence of current tobacco smoking among persons aged 15 years or older, 2016". 2018.

^ Cigarette numbers and per capita consumption from The Tobacco Atlas: https://tobaccoatlas.org/topic/consumption/

Population numbers from World Bank 2017

^ "NICOTINE, TAR, AND CO CONTENT OF DOMESTIC CIGARETTES". Archived from the original on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 5 October 2011.

^ Koch 2009

^ U.S. National 2004

^ Benowitz 2005, p. 1

^ NCI’s Smoking 2007, p.7

^ "Guide to quitting smoking". American Cancer Society. 2011-01-31. Archived from the original on 2010-06-27. Retrieved 2011-02-15.

^ Jump up to: a b c Benowitz NL; Benowitz, Neal L. (2010). "Nicotine addiction". N Engl J Med. 362 (24): 2295–303. doi:10.1056/NEJMra0809890. PMC 2928221. PMID 20554984.

^ Jump up to: a b c d Chapman S, MacKenzie R (2010-02-09). "The global research neglect of unassisted smoking cessation: causes and consequences". PLOS Medicine. 7 (2): e1000216. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000216. PMC 2817714. PMID 20161722.

^ Chan, Amanda L. (2012-06-10). "Fruits And Vegetables May Help Smokers Quit -- And Stay Off -- Tobacco". Huffington Post.

^ Chapman, Simon; MacKenzie, Ross (February 9, 2010). "The Global Research Neglect of Unassisted Smoking Cessation: Causes and Consequences". PLOS Medicine. 7 (2): e1000216. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000216. PMC 2817714. PMID 20161722.

^ "Abstinent Smokers' Nicotinic Receptors Take More Than a Month to Normalize". October 2009.

^ LaVito, Angelica (2019-12-17). "FDA authorizes low-nicotine cigarettes by 22nd Century Group for public sale". CNBC. Retrieved 2019-12-19.


Further reading
Bogden JD, Kemp FW, Buse M,  et al. (January 1981). "Composition of tobaccos from countries with high and low incidences of lung cancer. I. Selenium, polonium-210, Alternaria, tar, and nicotine". J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 66 (1): 27–31. doi:10.1093/jnci/66.1.27. PMID 6935462.
Hecht SS (July 1999). "Tobacco smoke carcinogens and lung cancer". J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 91 (14): 1194–210. doi:10.1093/jnci/91.14.1194. PMID 10413421.
Zhou, Xun Yu; Gilman, Sander L. (2004). Smoke: a global history of smoking. London: Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1-86189-200-3.
Matuszko, Jan (November 2006). "Tobacco Products Processing Detailed Study" (PDF). www.epa.gov. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved 29 March 2017.
External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cigarette.

US Center for Disease Control - Smoking and Health Database
GLOBALink
National Clearinghouse on Tobacco and Health Archived 2014-05-17 at the Wayback Machine - Canada
Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco Archived 2019-08-15 at the Wayback Machine
Bibliography on History of Cigarette Smoking
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vteCigarettesTypes
Fashion
Fire safe
Kretek
Lights
Menthol
Beedi
Components
Tobacco
Rolling paper
Filter
Additives
Peripherals
Ashtray
Case
Holder
Lighter
Pack
Receptacles
Vending machine
Culture
Cigarette card
Cigarette smoking among college students
Loosie
Smoking in association football
Smoking fetishism
Tobacco smoking
Health issues
Chain smoking
Cigarette smoking for weight loss
Nicotine poisoning
Passive smoking
Third-hand smoke
Schizophrenia and smoking
Sidestream smoke
Smoking cessation
Tobacco harm reduction
Related products
Electronic cigarette
E-liquid
Candy cigarette
Herbal cigarette
Heated tobacco product
Nicotine patch
Nicotine gum
Nicotine inhaler
Nicotine lozenge
Nicotine pouch
Tobacco industry
Cultivation of tobacco
Egyptian cigarette industry
History of commercial tobacco in the United States
Tobacco advertising
Government and the law
Cigarette smuggling
Plain cigarette packaging
Smoking age
Smoking bans in private vehicles
Tobacco control movement
Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement
Tobacco packaging warning messages
Tobacco politics
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products
Lists
Cigarette brands
Cigarette smoke carcinogens
Countries by tobacco consumption
Rolling papers
Smoking bans
vteElectronic cigarettesGeneral topics
Construction
Usage
Marketing
Regulation
Safety
Cloud-chasing
Composition of electronic cigarette aerosol
Flavored tobacco
Pod mod
Vape shop
Brands and companies
Blu eCigs
Dragonite International
Juul
LOGIC
NJOY
Openvape
Pax Labs
R. J. Reynolds Vapor Company
Ten Motives
Vuse
Controversy
Adverse effects of electronic cigarettes
Vaping-associated pulmonary injury
Effects of electronic cigarettes on human brain development
Positions of medical organizations on electronic cigarettes
List of vaping bans in the United States
2019–20 vaping lung illness outbreak
Hospitalized cases in the vaping lung illness outbreak
Nicotine poisoning
Nicotine salt
Lists
List of electronic cigarette and e-cigarette liquid brands
List of heated tobacco products
See also
Composition of heated tobacco product emissions
Heated tobacco product
Nicotine marketing

 Category

 Category
 Commons

Authority control General
Integrated Authority File (Germany)
National libraries
France (data)
United States
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
National Archives (US)






