
Title:
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery
Text:
Professional medical degree in UK, Commonwealth, and other countries



This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR  (December 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) 
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (Latin: Medicinae Baccalaureus, Baccalaureus Chirurgiae; abbreviated in many ways, most commonly MBBS, but also MB ChB, BMBS, MB BCh, MB BChir and BM BCh), is the primary medical degree awarded by medical schools in countries that follow the tradition of the United Kingdom. The historical degree nomenclature states that they are two separate undergraduate degrees. In practice, however, they are usually combined as one and conferred together, and may also be awarded at graduate-level medical schools.
In countries that follow the tradition of continental Europe or the system in the United States, the equivalent medical degree is awarded as Doctor of Medicine (MD) or Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (DO)[1]—the latter in the United States only.[2]

Contents

1 History and nature
2 Naming

2.1 Australia
2.2 Bahrain
2.3 Bangladesh
2.4 Barbados
2.5 China

2.5.1 Hong Kong


2.6 Egypt
2.7 Rwanda
2.8 France
2.9 Ghana
2.10 Guyana
2.11 India
2.12 Indonesia
2.13 Iraq
2.14 Ireland
2.15 Jordan
2.16 Kenya
2.17 Libya
2.18 Malaysia

2.18.1 Public
2.18.2 Private


2.19 Mexico
2.20 Myanmar
2.21 Namibia
2.22 Netherlands, the
2.23 Nigeria

2.23.1 Public University


2.24 Nepal

2.24.1 Kathmandu University (KU) and affiliated colleges
2.24.2 Tribhuvan University (TU) and affiliated colleges
2.24.3 Medical schools not affiliated to universities or having their own board


2.25 New Zealand
2.26 Pakistan
2.27 Saudi Arabia
2.28 Singapore
2.29 Somalia
2.30 South Africa
2.31 South Sudan
2.32 Sri Lanka
2.33 Sudan
2.34 Syria
2.35 Tunisia
2.36 Ukraine
2.37 Uganda
2.38 United Kingdom

2.38.1 England, Wales and Northern Ireland
2.38.2 Scotland
2.38.3 Historical Primary Medical Qualifications


2.39 United States
2.40 Vietnam
2.41 West Indies
2.42 Zambia
2.43 Zimbabwe
2.44 Liberia


3 Classification
4 Progression
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History and nature[edit]
The degree is currently awarded in institutions in Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Botswana, Brazil, Colombia, China, Egypt, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guyana, Hong Kong, India, Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Liberia, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritius, Myanmar, Namibia, New Zealand, Nigeria, Nepal, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Philippines, Samoa, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tanzania, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Ukraine,  United Arab Emirates,  United Kingdom, Vanuatu, Zambia and Zimbabwe.[3]
Historically, Bachelor of Medicine was also the primary medical degree conferred by institutions in the United States and Canada, such as the University of Pennsylvania, Harvard, the University of Toronto, the University of Maryland, and Columbia. Several early North American medical schools were (for the most part) founded by physicians and surgeons who had trained in England and Scotland. University medical education in England culminated with the Bachelor of Medicine qualification and in Scotland the Doctor of Medicine. In the mid-19th century, the public bodies that regulated medical practice required practitioners in Scotland and England to hold the dual Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery degrees. Throughout the 19th century, North American medical schools switched to the tradition of the ancient universities of Scotland and began conferring Doctor of Medicine rather than Bachelor of Medicine.
In the countries that award bachelor's degrees in medicine, however, Doctor of Medicine denotes a holder of a junior doctorate and is reserved for medical practitioners who undertake research and submit a thesis in the field of medicine. Nevertheless, those holding Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery are usually referred to by the courtesy title of "Doctor" and use the prefix "Dr.", whether or not they also hold a Ph.D. or DSc. In theory, the right to the use of the title "Doctor" is conferred on the medical graduate when he or she is registered as a medical practitioner by the relevant professional body, not by the possession of the MBBS degrees.[4] The reason is found in a parallel tradition for those who are post-graduate specialists in surgery: on acceptance into a College of Surgeons, they stop styling themselves "Doctor" and revert to "Mister" (Mr), "Miss", "Muz" (Ms) or "Missus" (Mrs). This curious situation, where an elevation in professional rank is signified by dropping the title of Doctor, came about because historically a "surgeon" was an ordinary worker, usually a barber, not trained in medicine but performing dissections and surgery under the direction of a gowned academic who was the actual "doctor".
Despite their styling as two degrees, Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery are usually conferred together. At some institutions, such as Oxford and Cambridge, it was possible to be awarded the degrees in different years.[citation needed]
In many countries, the degrees are awarded after an undergraduate course lasting five or six years. For example, most Chinese universities offering medical degrees provide undergraduate courses lasting six years.[5] In some cases, a graduate in another discipline may subsequently enter a special graduate-entry medical course, reduced in duration to account for relevant material covered or learning skills acquired during the first degree. In some cases the old first-year courses (for six-year degrees) in the basic sciences of physics, chemistry, and biology have been abolished: that standard has to be reached by school examinations before entry. However, in most countries, a newly graduated Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery must spend a specified period in internship before they can obtain full registration as a licensed medical practitioner.
Recently, courses have been established in the Commonwealth country Australia that award the title MD (see Australia).

Naming[edit]
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}See also: Surgeon § Surgeon titles
The names and abbreviations given to these degrees depend on the institution, awarding body or country, and vary widely. This is mostly for reasons of tradition rather than to indicate any difference between the relative levels of the degrees. They are considered equivalent.
If the awarding body titles the degrees in Latin, the degrees are commonly named Medicinae Baccalaureus, Chirurgiae Baccalaureus; Medicinae Baccalaureus et Chirurgiae Baccalaureus; or Baccalaureus in Medicina et in Chirurgia; abbreviated as MB ChB, MB BCh or otherwise. If titled in English, they are named Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery; Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery; or Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery; usually abbreviated as MB BS, and sometimes as BM BS, even though most MB BS-awarding institutions do not use Latin to name their degrees.
Below are described the specific names used, arranged by country.

Australia[edit]
See also: Medical education in Australia
Historically, Australian medical schools have followed the British tradition by conferring the degrees of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) to its graduates whilst reserving the title of Doctor of Medicine (MD) for their research training degree, analogous to the PhD, or for their honorary doctorates. Although the majority of Australian MBBS degrees have been graduate programs since the 1990s, under the previous Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF) they remained categorised as Level 7 Bachelor's degrees together with other undergraduate programs.
The latest version of the AQF includes the new category of Level 9 Master's (Extended) degrees which permits the use of the term 'Doctor' in the styling of the degree title of relevant professional programs. As a result, most Australian medical schools have replaced their MBBS degrees with the MD to resolve the previous anomalous nomenclature. With the introduction of the Master's level MD, universities have also renamed their previous medical research doctorates. The University of Melbourne was the first to introduce the MD in 2011 as a basic medical degree, and has renamed its research degree to Doctor of Medical Science (DMedSc).[6]

Bahrain[edit]
The Medical University of Bahrain or RCSI-Bahrain is a constituent university of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (RCSI) and awards its graduates the MB, BCh, BAO (Hons), the same degree awarded to graduates at RCSI.

Bangladesh[edit]
All medical schools in Bangladesh award MBBS.




University
Degree
Previous degree
Duration
Level


University of Dhaka
M.B.B.S.
H.S.C.
6 years (incl. 1-year internship)
Undergraduate


Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical College
M.D., M.S.
M.B.B.S.
5 years
BSMMC

M.B.B.S.
5 years
Postgraduate


Barbados[edit]
The Bridgetown International University, Victoria University of Barbados, American University of Barbados School of Medicine, University of the West Indies Faculty of Medicine all award the MBBS

China[edit]
In China, medical undergraduates are awarded a Bachelor of Medicine (BMED) for a course of study lasting five years for native Chinese students and six years for international/foreign students, including internship. International students may take the program in English or Chinese. The Chinese version is accelerated, but international students may be awarded scholarship for taking it, thus overall cheaper. However, when dealing with lots of technical subjects, some students[citation needed] may find it easier to take the English version so language is not an issue. In total, 247 Universities are authorized to award MBBS degree to the domestic and International students. Around 180 Universities offer only Chinese medium MBBS courses and 67 offer both English medium MBBS and Chinese medium MBBS. Some Universities that are authorized to conduct Chinese medium MBBS courses, also conduct MBBS in English medium. Almost all the Universities require the students to pass the Chinese language test up to the level of 4. All the 247 Universities are recognized by most of the medical councils  around the world and by ECFMG. The Universities awarding MBBS is at List.

Hong Kong[edit]
The awarding of qualifications in Hong Kong follows the British tradition.
The dual degree is awarded as:

MBBS at The University of Hong Kong; and
MBChB at The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Egypt[edit]
All Egyptian medical schools, public and private, award an MB BCh as the basic medical degree after completion of five academic years followed by two years of obligatory clinical rotations (the MB BCh is issued only after the completion of the two-year clinical rotations).

Rwanda[edit]
All Rwandan medical schools, public and private, award an MBBS as the basic medical degree after completion of five or six academic years. 

University of Rwanda Faculty of Medicine
University of Gitwe
University of Global Health Equity
France[edit]
French students get permitted access to medical studies when succeeding the competitive examination occurring at the end of their first year of studies. They spend their second and third year at their medical school where they learn physiology, semiology and the basics of medical examination. From their fourth year, they begin their rotations in teaching hospitals where they assist junior and senior physicians and learn their art. At the end of their sixth year, they undertake a competitive examination to match with their medical specialty and city of practice. Students are then full-time physicians practising under supervision and will be called "doctors" only when graduating at the end of their residency.

Ghana[edit]
All Ghanaian medical schools award an MBChB as the basic medical degree after 6 academic years. These seven medical schools are Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology,[7] University of Ghana, University for Development Studies, University of Cape Coast, University of Health and Allied Sciences and the private Accra College of Medicine,[8] and Family Health Medical School, another private medical school.[9]

Guyana[edit]
The University of Guyana awards MB BS. Other "offshore" United-States-linked schools in the country award the North American MD, such as Texila American University, Lincoln American University.

India[edit]
In India the full-form of MBBS is Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery. It is generally a 5.5 year course including one year compulsory internship, that can be completed from a college accredited by the National Medical Commission, to receive a degree titled MBBS (Medical colleges in India).[10] Medical colleges may also teach Post Graduate as well as Paramedical courses. Admission to MBBS programs in government colleges can be highly competitive because of subsidized education and extensive hands-on experience.
The MBBS course starts with the basic pre and para-clinical subjects such as biochemistry, physiology, anatomy, microbiology, pathology, forensic medicine including toxicology and pharmacology. The students simultaneously obtain hands-on training in the wards and out-patient departments, where they interact with real patients for five years. The curriculum aims to inculcate standard protocols of history taking, examination, differential diagnosis and complete patient Management. The student is taught to determine what investigations will be useful for a patient and what are the best treatment options. The curriculum also contains a thorough practical knowledge and practice of performing standard clinical procedures. The course also contains a 12-month-long internship, in which an intern is rotated across various specialties. Besides standard clinical care, one also gets a thorough experience of ward management, staff management, and thorough counselling skills.
The degree awarded is "Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery". The minimum requirements for the MBBS course are 50% marks in physics, chemistry, biology and English in a student's secondary school examinations – usually, under the Council for Indian School Certificate Examinations, the Central Board of Secondary Education or curricula established by the several states. For 'Reserved Category' students, the requirement is 40%. MBBS admissions for both public and private institutions are centralised under the National Medical Commission , whereby a student is eligible for admission to an institution based on their 'All India Rank' in the National Eligibility and Entrance Test conducted by the National Testing Agency. The All India Institute of Medical Sciences at New Delhi and Armed Forces Medical College at Pune are widely regarded as India's most prestigious undergraduate medical colleges, with admissions being highly competitive. The Government of India has recently announced plans to establish new medical colleges in 58 districts, which will add 5,800 seats to the country's annual MBBS student intake.

Indonesia[edit]
In Indonesia, graduating students are awarded the academic degree of Sarjana Kedokteran / Bachelor of Medicine (written as suffix "S.Ked") after completing their pre-clinical studies. At this point, the graduate is not yet a practising doctor, but may choose to work directly as a medical scientist or other non-clinician professions (usually health-related). However, most graduates will pursue the conventional path, which is to enroll in the clinical clerkship program (Program Pendidikan Profesi Dokter) for another 1.5 to 2 years. During this program, students are required to rotate through different medical/surgical specialties in a teaching hospital, actively involved in diagnoses and treatment of patients under direct supervision of residents and consultants/attending physicians. After completing clinical clerkship, students take national medical licensing examination (Ujian Kompetensi Mahasiswa Program Profesi Dokter/UKMPPD) and will be awarded with the title Dokter (written as prefix "dr.") as first professional title if they pass the examination.

Iraq[edit]
All medical schools in Iraq award MB ChB. With the exception of University of Kurdistan-Hewlêr, which awards the "MBBS" degree.

Ireland[edit]
The medical schools in both the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland – Queen's University Belfast, the University of Dublin (Trinity College), some constituent institutions of the National University of Ireland (University College Dublin, University College Cork and NUI Galway), and the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland— award the degrees of MB BCh BAO. The letters BAO stand for Baccalaureus in Arte Obstetricia (Bachelor of Obstetrics), a degree unique to Ireland which the Irish universities added in the 19th century as the legislation at the time insisted on a final examination in obstetrics. This third degree is an anachronism which is not registerable with the Irish Medical Council nor the British General Medical Council (GMC). The only exception is the newly established University of Limerick graduate entry school of medicine which awards BM BS for Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery.
At the University of Dublin the preclinical course leads to an additional Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree (upgradable after three or four years to Master of Arts); as originally after this most students used to go elsewhere to complete clinical training.
LRCPI LRCSI, or simply LRCP&SI, denotes a holder of the historical non-university qualifying licentiates awarded jointly by the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland and the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland to students of the RCSI's medical school under the Irish Conjoint Scheme. Unlike the corresponding licentiates awarded by the Royal Colleges in Scotland and England (which were external qualifications), these qualifications are still registerable with the Irish Medical Council, but not with the British GMC. Students at RCSI still receive these licences but now also receive the degrees MB BCh BAO, due to RCSI's status as a recognised college of the National University of Ireland. The RCSI students received a Licence in Midwifery (LM) from each college, in the same way that the Irish universities granted BAO degrees, so their qualifications were sometimes expressed as L & LM, RCPI, L & LM, RCSI or more misleadingly as LLM, LRCPI LRCSI, or simply LRCP&SI.
LAH formerly denoted a licentiate of the Apothecaries' Hall of Ireland, and is no longer awarded.

Jordan[edit]
The Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery (MBBS) degree is awarded in Jordan by:

Jordan University of Science and Technology
University of Jordan
Mutah University
Hashemite University
Yarmouk University
Al Balqa Applied University
Kenya[edit]
The national universities with medical faculties in Kenya, namely Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology, University of Nairobi, Moi University, Kenyatta University, Egerton University, Maseno University and Kenya Methodist University award MB ChB.
Mount Kenya University and Egerton University also award the four-year BSc. Clinical Medicine degree in addition to the six-year MBChB.

Libya[edit]
There are three major public medical universities in Libya, University of Tripoli (Tripoli), University of Benghazi (formerly Garyounis) (Benghazi), and University of Alzaweyah. The schools award the MBBCh.
The Libyan International Medical University is an accredited private medical university that awards an MBChB to its graduates.

Malaysia[edit]
The MBBS is awarded by five public and 17 private universities:

Public[edit]
Universiti Malaya (UM) – October 1949
International Islamic University Malaysia (UIAM/IIUM) – May 1995
Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM) – June 2003
Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia (USIM) – July 2005
Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin (UniSZA) – July 2009
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM)
Private[edit]
Quest International University Perak
Widad University College - previously known as University College Shahputra
International Medical University (IMU) – February 1999
RCSI & UCD Malaysia Campus – 2001
Asian Institute of Medicine, Science & Technology University – May 2001
Monash University Malaysia Campus – February 2007
Universiti Kuala Lumpur (UniKL-RCMP) – July 2008
Melaka Manipal Medical College (MMMC)
Cyberjaya University College of Medical Sciences (CUCMS)
Management & Science University – International Medical School (MSU-IMS)
MAHSA University College
Taylor's University College
Newcastle University Medicine Malaysia
Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman (UTAR)
Masterskill University College of Health Sciences (MUCH)
SEGI University College
Insaniah University College
UCSI University
Mexico[edit]
In Mexico, the National Autonomous University of Mexico,[11] the Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education, the National Polytechnic Institute,[12] the Metropolitan Autonomous University,[13] among others, grant the title of "Médico cirujano" (Physician-surgeon) after five or six years of post-high school education, plus one year of internship and one year of social service depending on each institution.

Myanmar[edit]
All five medical schools (UM1, UM 2, DSMA, UMM, UMMG) in Myanmar award MB BS.

UMTG(2015)
Namibia[edit]
The University of Namibia UNAM School of Medicine, the only medical school in the country, awards the MBChB degree.

Netherlands, the[edit]
In the Netherlands, students follow a period of 6 academic years of which 2–4 years is internships. After 6 years, students obtain the titles MSc and Medical Doctor (MD).

Nigeria[edit]
The MBBS/MB ChB is awarded by many public and private universities in Nigeria, after a period of 6 academic years.

Public University[edit]
Obafemi Awolowo University (OAU) 1961.[14]
Bayero University Kano (BUK) 4 October 1975.[14]
University of Ibadan (UNIIBADAN) 1948.[14]
Ahmadu Bello University (ABU) Zaria 4 October 1962.[14]
Ambrose Ali University (AAU) Ekpoma 1981.[14]
University of Nigeria (NSUKKA) 7 October 1960.[14]
University of Lagos (UNILAG) 1962.[14]
University of Port Harcourt (UNIPORT) 1975.[14]
University of Calabar (UNICAL) 1975.[14]
University of Benin (UNIBEN) 1973.[14]
Abubakar Tafawa Balewa (ATBU) 1980.[14]
University of Maiduguri (UNIMAID) 1975.[14]
Usmanu Danfodiyo University (UDU) 1975.[14]
University of Ilorin (UNILORIN) 1975.[14]
Lagos state University (LASU) 1983

Rivers State University (RSU)
1972. [14]

Nepal[edit]
There are 18 medical schools in Nepal that award the MBBS degree. Nepal Medical Council (NMC) is the regulatory board that gives recognition to medical institutions for providing formal studies in medical science and training.

Kathmandu University (KU) and affiliated colleges[edit]
Kathmandu University, School of Medical Sciences (KUSMS), Dhulikhel, Kavre
Manipal College of Medical Sciences (MCOMS), Pokhara, Kaski
College of Medical Sciences (COMS), Bharatpur, Chitwan
Kathmandu Medical College (KMC), Sinamangal, Kathmandu
Nepal Medical College (NMC), Jorpati, Kathmandu
Nepalgunj Medical College (NGMC), Chisapani, Nepalgunj
Lumbini Medical College (LMC), Tansen, Palpa
Nobel Medical College, Biratnagar
Birat Medical college, Biratnagar
Devdaha Medical college, Rupendehi
Tribhuvan University (TU) and affiliated colleges[edit]
Tribhuvan University, Institute of Medicine (IOM), Maharajgunj, Kathmandu
Nepalese Army Institute of Health Sciences, College of Medicine, Kathmandu
Universal College of Medical Sciences (UCMS), Bhairawaha
National Medical College, Birgunj
Janaki Medical College, Janakpur
KIST Medical College, Imadol, Lalitpur
Chitwan Medical College (CMC), Bharatpur, Chitwan
Gandaki Medical College (GMCTHRC), Pokhara, Kaski
Medical schools not affiliated to universities or having their own board[edit]
B.P. Koirala Institute of Health Sciences (BPKIHS), Ghopa, Dharan
Patan Academy of Health Sciences (PAHS)-School of Medicine, Patan, Lalitpur
Karnali Institute of Health Science,Jumla
National Academy of Medical Sciences (NAMS), Kathmandu is an NMC-recognized medical college that has post-graduate residency (MD/MS) training programs but does not award MBBS degree.

New Zealand[edit]
The two New Zealand medical schools, Auckland and Otago, style their degrees as "MBChB" and "MB ChB" respectively.

Pakistan[edit]
Further information: List of medical schools in Pakistan
In Pakistan, a medical school is more often referred to as a medical college. The full-form of MBBS is Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery. It is a 5-year course that can be completed from a college recognized by the Pakistan Medical Commission, to receive a degree titled MBBS (Medical colleges in Pakistan). Medical colleges may also teach Post Graduate courses such as FCPS and diplomas. A medical college is affiliated with a university as a department which usually has a separate campus. Currently, there is a total of 114 medical colleges in Pakistan, 44 of which are public and 70 private. All but two colleges are listed in International Medical Education Directory.
All medical colleges and universities are regulated by the respective provincial department of health. They, however, have to be recognised after meeting criteria set by a central regulatory authority called Pakistan Medical Commission (PMC). Entrance into the medical colleges is based on merit under the guidelines of PMC. Both the academic performance at the HSSC (grades 11–12) and a centralized entrance test like NMDCAT, are taken into consideration for the eligibility to enter most of the medical colleges.
To get admission into any government medical college, the weightage is determined by the provincial or federal government. In order to get admission into any private medical college, the following weightage is used:[15]

50% to Marks of entrance test like National Medical and Dental College Admission Test (NMDCAT).
30% to Marks of Higher Secondary School Certificate (HSSC) Pre-Medical.
20% to Marks obtained in the Interview conducted by Private Colleges.
Saudi Arabia[edit]
Medical schools in Saudi Arabia award the MBBS.

Singapore[edit]
The Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine at the National University of Singapore and the Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine at Nanyang Technological University confer MB BS. The American Duke University has a medical programme based in Singapore (Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School), but it follows the North American model of styling its degree Doctor of Medicine (MD) at master's degree level.[16]

Somalia[edit]
Amoud University, Benadir University Salaam University and Hargeisa University award the MB ChB, East Africa University awards MMBS.[17]

South Africa[edit]
Main article: Medical education in South Africa
The University of Pretoria, University of Cape Town, University of the Free State, University of Stellenbosch, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Walter Sisulu University and MEDUNSA all award MBChB, whereas the University of the Witwatersrand styles its degree as MBBCh.

South Sudan[edit]
The University of Juba, University of Bahr El-Ghazal and Upper Nile University in South Sudan awards the MBBS degree after the successful completion of six academic years.

Sri Lanka[edit]
In 1942, the University of Ceylon was established through legislation and the MBBS degree was recognised for registration of doctors in place of the Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery (LMS).[18]

Sudan[edit]
All Sudanese medical schools award the MBBS.[citation needed]

Syria[edit]
The higher education in Syria provides training to a Diploma, Bachelor, Master, and Doctorate levels (see European Education, Audiovisual and Culture Executive Agency on Higher Education: Syria).[19]

Tunisia[edit]
Medical education in Tunisia is solely administered by the government Ministry of Higher Education and Ministry of Public Health. Students get permitted access to medical studies when succeeding their national baccalauréat exam and obtaining a competitive score that allows them admission to medical schools (usually in the 95% percentile). The training takes a minimum of nine years after the baccalauréat and concludes with a thesis. Upon successful presentation of their thesis, the medical student is awarded a Diploma of Doctorate in Medecine (Diplôme de Doctorat en Médecine). Further certification is based on their specialty.
Students spend their first, second year at their medical school where they learn physiology, semiology and the basics of medical examination. From their fourth year, they begin their rotations in teaching hospitals where they assist junior and senior physicians and learn their art. At the end of their fifth year, they undertake a competitive examination to match with their medical specialty and city of practice. Students are then full-time physicians practising under supervision and will be called "doctors" only when graduating at the end of their residency.

Ukraine[edit]
In Ukraine, the full-form of MBBS is Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery. It is generally a 5.8 year course including one year compulsory internship, that can be completed from a college accredited by the National Medical Commission. At present, Ukraine is ranked at the fourth position in Europe for having the largest number of post graduates in fields of medicine. Ukraine has a number of Top Government Medical Universities offering MBBS, MD and other degrees in medicine to the local students as well as international students. Some of the Top Ukraine Universities for nationals and international students are:

Bukovinian State Medical University
Kharkiv National Medical University
Kharkiv International Medical University
VN Karazin Kharkiv National University
Kyiv Medical University of UAFM
Vinnytsia National Medical University. N. I. Pirogov
Petro Mohyla Black Sea National University
Bogomolets National Medical University
Cherkasy National University
Danylo Halytsky Lviv National Medical University
Dnipropetrovsk State Medical Academy
Donetsk National Medical  University
International European University
Ivano-Frankivsk National Medical University
Odessa International Medical University
Poltava State Medical and Dental University
Uzhhorod National University, Faculty of Medicine
Taras Shevchenko National University
Ternopil National Medical University
Sumy State Medical University
The MBBS course starts with the basic pre and para-clinical subjects such as biochemistry, physiology, anatomy, microbiology, pathology, forensic medicine including toxicology and pharmacology. The students simultaneously obtain hands-on training in the wards and out-patient departments, where they interact with real patients for six years. The curriculum aims to inculcate standard protocols of history taking, examination, differential diagnosis and complete patient Management. The student is taught to determine what investigations will be useful for a patient and what are the best treatment options. The curriculum also contains a thorough practical knowledge and practice of performing standard clinical procedures. The course also contains a 12-month-long internship, in which an intern is rotated across various specialties. Besides standard clinical care, one also gets a thorough experience of ward management, staff management, and thorough counselling skills.
The degree awarded is "Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery". The minimum requirements for the MBBS course are 50% marks in physics, chemistry, biology and English in a student's secondary school examinations and student need to pass National Eligibility cum Entrance Test examination for the admission in Ukraine Universities.[20]

Uganda[edit]
The nine universities in Uganda that have medical schools that teach undergraduate courses, namely; Makerere University, Mbarara University, Gulu University, Kampala International University, Busitema University, Kabale University, Habib Medical School, St. Augustine International University, and Uganda Christian University all award the MBChB degree, after five years of study.

United Kingdom[edit]
England, Wales and Northern Ireland[edit]
While first degrees in medicine meet the expectations of the descriptor for higher education qualification at "level 7 (the UK master's degree)", these degrees usually retain, for historical reasons, "Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery" and are abbreviated to MBChB or MBBS.[21]
Varied abbreviations are used for these degrees in these areas:

MB ChB is used at the universities of Aston, Anglia Ruskin, Birmingham, Bristol, Buckingham, Lancaster, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Keele, Manchester, Sheffield, Sunderland (in partnership with Keele)[22] and Warwick.
MB BCh is used by the Welsh universities, Cardiff University and Swansea University.
MB, BCh, BAO is used at the Queen's University, Belfast.
MB BS is used at all medical schools currently or previously part of the University of London (aka The United Hospitals) (Imperial College School of Medicine, UCL Medical School, King's College London School of Medicine, Barts and The London School of Medicine and St George's, University of London), Norwich Medical School, Hull York Medical School, Newcastle University and University of Central Lancashire.
BM BCh is awarded by the University of Oxford.
BM BS is used at the University of Nottingham, University of Exeter, University of Plymouth, University of Southampton, Kent and Medway Medical School and Brighton and Sussex Medical School (formerly at Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry)
BM was previously awarded at the University of Southampton. However, beginning in 2013 students have been awarded BMBS. Although no degree in surgery was formally awarded by Southampton, this degree was equivalent to the MB ChB; students may go on to a career in surgery the same as any other graduates in medicine and surgery.
MB BChir is awarded by the University of Cambridge.
At the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, the preclinical course leads to an additional Bachelor of Arts (BA), degree (upgradable after three or four years to Master of Arts), after which most students used to go elsewhere (but usually to one of the London teaching hospitals) to complete clinical training. They could then take the degrees of their new university: They used to have the options of returning to their old university to take the clinical examinations or taking one of the old non-university qualifying examinations. Most students at Oxford and Cambridge now remain in place to take their clinical training.

Scotland[edit]
All medical schools in Scotland (Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow) award MB ChB.
The University of St Andrews School of Medicine awarded MB ChB until the early 1970s, but since the incorporation of its clinical medical school into the University of Dundee, St Andrews now only awards a pre-clinical BSc or BSc (Hons), and students go to a Partner Medical School (Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh, Glasgow, or Manchester), where they are awarded an MB ChB after a further three years' study.
Since 2018, a joint initiative coordinated by both the Universities of St Andrews and Dundee, the Scottish Graduate Entry Medicine (ScotGEM) programme, has based its first and second year students at St Andrews, and its third and fourth year students at Dundee. This is Scotland's first graduate entry medical degree programme. The intention is that the students of the inaugural cohort, due to graduate in July 2022, will be conferred a joint MB ChB by both universities - the first to graduate with this professional degree directly from St Andrews in over fifty years
The Scottish Triple Qualification of LRCPE, LRCSE, LRCPSG (earlier LRCPE, LRCSE, LRFPSG) is an old non-university qualifying examination in medicine and surgery awarded jointly by the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh and Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow, previously through a Conjoint Board and from 1994 through the United Examining Board. These qualifications are still registrable with the GMC,[citation needed] but permission to award them was withdrawn by the Privy Council of the UK in 1999.

Historical Primary Medical Qualifications[edit]
The Conjoint diplomas LRCP MRCS LMSSA were non-university qualifying examinations in medicine and surgery awarded jointly by the Royal College of Physicians of London, Royal College of Surgeons of England and Society of Apothecaries through the United Examining Board from 1994 until 1999, when the General Medical Council withdrew permission. Before 1994, the English Conjoint diploma of LRCP, MRCS was awarded for 110 years, and the LMSSA was a distinct and sometimes less-esteemed qualification. These diplomas slowly became less popular among British medical students, but as recently as 1938 only a half of them qualified with university degrees.[23] The diplomas came to be taken mostly by those who had already qualified in medicine overseas or who failed their medical school finals.

United States[edit]
International medical graduates with an MBBS from foreign countries are generally exempt from having to attend medical school in the United States, but must still undergo medical training and pass the USMLE.[24] The MBBS is not offered at medical schools in the United States as the majority of medical school programs are graduate entry and by tradition offer the MD degree as a primary medical qualification. There are several institutions that offer a combined BS,MD, notably Northeast Ohio Medical University, at an accelerated 6 year route following the completion of high school [25] which is similar to a traditional MBBS. Most MBBS physicians in United States use the designation of MD to avoid confusion for those unfamiliar with the British system; this is largely determined by individual hospital policy.

Vietnam[edit]
There are many medical schools in Vietnam, such as Hanoi Medical University, Vietnam University of Traditional Medicine, and Hue University of Medicine and Pharmacy. Most of them require six years to receive a Doctor of Medicine degree.

West Indies[edit]
All constituent countries of the University of the West Indies (UWI) confer MB BS, due to the historical affiliation of UWI to the University of London. The three physical campuses are Mona in Jamaica, Saint Augustine in Trinidad and Tobago, and Cave Hill in Barbados, with each campus having a Medical Faculty.
The University of Guyana (UG) also confers "MB BS" to their medical school graduates. There are other medical schools in the West Indies, but these follow the North-American system leading to MD.

Zambia[edit]
All schools in Zambia that award the MBChB degree:
Government sponsored medical schools:

University of Zambia (UNZA)
Copperbelt University (CBU)
Mulungushi University (MU)
Levy Mwanawasa Medical University (LMMU)
Private sponsored medical schools:

Cavendish University Zambia (CUZ)
Eden University
Lusaka Apex Medical University (LAMU)
University of Lusaka (UNILUS)
Texila American University (TAU)
Zimbabwe[edit]
The University of Zimbabwe College of Health Sciences awards the MBChB degree. While the National University of Science and Technology (NUST) awards the MBBS.

Liberia[edit]
The AM. Dogliotti College of Medicine (University of Libeira) awards the MD degree.

Classification[edit]
Medical degrees differ from other undergraduate degrees in that they are professional qualifications that lead holders to enter a particular career upon receipt. This is not the case with most other undergraduate degrees, so whilst the Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery are undergraduate or graduate degrees (depending on the institution), they are perhaps more accurately conceptualised as a so-called first professional degree. Other professions whose qualifications follow a similar pattern include:

Ayurveda
Homeopathy

Chiropractic
Dentistry
Education
Engineering
Environmental Health
Occupational Therapy
Optometry
Pharmacy
Physical Therapy
Law
Veterinary Medicine
Osteopathy
Physician Assistant
Nursing
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery are usually awarded as professional degrees, not as honours degrees, and as such the graduate is not classified as for honours degrees in other subjects. However, at many institutions (for example the University of Aberdeen, University of Birmingham, University of Sheffield, University of Liverpool, University of Leicester, Hull York Medical School, and University of Manchester in England, Queen's University Belfast in Northern Ireland, Cardiff University in Wales and the University of Dundee in Scotland), it is possible for the degrees to be awarded with Honours (i.e. MB ChB (Hons.)) or with Commendation, if the board of examiners recognises exceptional performance throughout the degree course. Very few of these are awarded.
More often, it is possible to study one subject for an extra year for an intercalated honours degree. This is usually a Bachelor of Science (BSc), Bachelor of Medical Science (BMedSci), Bachelor of Medical Biology (BMedBiol) or similar: at Oxford and Cambridge in England and Dublin in Ireland Bachelor of Arts degrees are awarded. At a few universities most medical students obtain an ordinary degree in science as well: when the University of Edinburgh had a six-year course, the third year was followed by the award of an ordinary BSc(MedSci). In Australia, The University of Melbourne in Australia offers an Arts Degree (BA) to a medical student on the completion of two extra years of undergraduate study, and Monash University offers a law degree (LLB); if the optional law degree is undertaken, on completion of their degree the student may choose to do a one-year internship at a hospital and become a doctor, or spend one year doing articles to practise thereafter as a lawyer. At the University of Nottingham and the University of Southampton, both in England, all medical students on the five-year course obtain a Bachelor of Medical Sciences (BMedSci) degree without an extra intercalated year. At the University of Cambridge, Imperial College London and University College London, certain medical students are able to extend their intercalated year to an extra three years, thus temporarily exiting the MBBS course to complete a PhD. Upon completion of the PhD, the student is required to sit the remaining 2 years of the medicine course to receive his/her MBBS degree. The University of the West Indies, Mona in Kingston, Jamaica automatically awards a Bachelor of Medical Sciences (BMedSci) degree to all students who have successfully completed three years of their MBBS programme.[26]

Progression[edit]
Medical school graduates are only entitled to use the courtesy title "Doctor" upon registration as a medical practitioner with the relevant regulatory body in their respective country. Medical graduates are eligible to sit postgraduate examinations, including examinations for membership and fellowship of professional institutions. Among the latter are the Membership of the Royal College of Surgeons, postgraduate master's degrees (such as a Master of Surgery or Master of Medicine), and a postgraduate doctorate in medicine (such as Doctor of Medicine or Doctor of Science, if earned in Ireland, the UK or Commonwealth nations, and board certification examinations).

See also[edit]
.mw-parser-output .portalbox{float:right;border:solid #aaa 1px;padding:0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tleft{margin:0.5em 1em 0.5em 0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tright{margin:0.5em 0 0.5em 1em}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul{display:table;box-sizing:border-box;padding:0.1em;max-width:175px;background:#f9f9f9;font-size:85%;line-height:110%;font-style:italic;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li{display:table-row}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:first-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em;vertical-align:middle;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:last-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em 0.2em 0.2em 0.3em;vertical-align:middle}

Medicine portal
Bachelor of Ayurveda, Medicine and Surgery
Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery
Bachelor's degree
Doctor of Medicine
Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine
Homologation
List of medical schools
Master of Medicine
Master of Surgery
Medical education
Medical school
References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/consumer-health/in-depth/medical-credentials/art-20454969

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}O'Connor, Bridget N. (October 2011). "Perspectives on professional doctorate education in the United States" (PDF). Work Based Learning e-Journal. Middlesex University. 2 (1). Retrieved 8 April 2015.

^ "ECFMC 2017 guide: Reference Guide for Medical Education Credentials". www.ecfmg.org. Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates. Retrieved 25 June 2017.

^ Bowden, K.M. (1965) Forensic Medicine, Jacaranda Press, p. 23.

^ "Study MBBS in China". www.cucas.cn.

^ "Doctor of Medicine (MD)". University of Melbourne. 15 January 2014. Retrieved 5 July 2014.

^ "Home | Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology". www.knust.edu.gh.

^ Accra College of Medicine,  www.acm.edu.gh

^ "MEDICAL AND DENTAL TRAINING INSTITUTIONS IN GHANA & PROGRAMMES". Medical & Dental Council. 11 August 2020. Retrieved 29 January 2021.

^ "NMC India".

^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 25 November 2016.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 13 November 2016. Retrieved 25 November 2016.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "UAM. Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana. Licenciaturas y carreras en orden alfabético". www.uam.mx.

^ Jump up to: a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o EDU. "Federal Universities". FEDERAL MINISTRY OF EDUCATION. Retrieved 19 July 2019.

^ http://www.pmdc.org.pk/Portals/0/admission%20housejob%20regulations.pdf

^ "Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School Singapore".

^ "Medical schools in Somalia". helpforafricanstudents.org. Archived from the original on 15 November 2016. Retrieved 14 November 2016.

^ "About us". Sri Lanka Medical Council. Retrieved 5 October 2016.

^ "Education, Audiovisual and Culture Executive Agency on Higher Education in Syria" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 December 2014. Retrieved 21 February 2015.

^ "Ukraine and Russia are leading study destinations to pursue MBBS abroad - Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 3 September 2021.

^ "Bristol University | Academic Registry (Education Support) | QAA Descriptor for a Higher Education Qualification at Level 7". Archived from the original on 20 June 2013.

^ "University of Sunderland | MB ChB Degree at University of Sunderland".

^ Walker, R Milnes (1965). Medical Education in Britain. London: Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust.

^ https://www.usmle-courses.eu/united-states-medical-licensure-requirements/

^ https://www.neomed.edu/medicine/admissions/paths/early-assurance/

^ "Regulations of the University of West Indies Regarding The MBBS dEGREE" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 July 2011.


External links[edit]
MBBS Admission eligibility in India
List of Chinese universities offering MBBS Course in the English language
MCI Recognized Medical Institutes outside India
Prerequisite course to study MBChB course in Zambia—The course covers the fundamental concepts of medical sciences
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vteLevels of academic degreeUndergraduateISCED level 5
Associate degree
Foundation degree
Higher National Diploma/​Diploma of Higher Education/​Certificate of Higher Education
ISCED level 6
Bachelor's degree
Honours degree
PostgraduateISCED level 7
Master's degree
Postgraduate diploma/​certificate
Diplom degree
Engineer's degree
ISCED level 8
Doctorate
Candidate of Sciences
OtherPostdoctoral
Higher doctorate
Doktor nauk
Habilitation
Docent
Tenure
Fellow
No dominant classification
Academic certificate
Laurea
Licentiate
Magister degree
Professional degree
Graduate diploma/​certificate
Higher diploma
Specialist degree/​diploma
Terminal degree
Unearned
Honorary degree
Ad eundem degree

vteMedicineSpecialtiesandsubspecialtiesSurgery
Cardiac surgery
Cardiothoracic surgery
Eye surgery
General surgery
Colorectal surgery
Digestive system surgery
Neurosurgery
Oral and maxillofacial surgery
Orthopedic surgery
Hand surgery
Otolaryngology
ENT
Pediatric surgery
Plastic surgery
Reproductive surgery
Surgical oncology
Transplant surgery
Trauma surgery
Urology
Andrology
Vascular surgery
Internal medicine
Allergy / Immunology
Angiology
Cardiology
Endocrinology
Gastroenterology
Hepatology
Geriatrics
Hematology
Hospital medicine
Infectious disease
Nephrology
Oncology
Pulmonology
Rheumatology
Obstetrics and gynaecology
Gynaecology
Gynecologic oncology
Maternal–fetal medicine
Obstetrics
Reproductive endocrinology and infertility
Urogynecology
Diagnostic
Radiology
Interventional radiology
Nuclear medicine
Pathology
Anatomical
Clinical pathology
Clinical chemistry
Cytopathology
Medical microbiology
Transfusion medicine
Other
Addiction medicine
Adolescent medicine
Anesthesiology
Dermatology
Disaster medicine
Diving medicine
Emergency medicine
Mass gathering medicine
Family medicine / General practice
Hospital medicine
Intensive care medicine
Medical genetics
Narcology
Neurology
Clinical neurophysiology
Occupational medicine
Ophthalmology
Oral medicine
Pain management
Palliative care
Pediatrics
Neonatology
Phlebology
Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R)
Preventive medicine
Prison healthcare
Psychiatry
Addiction psychiatry
Radiation oncology
Reproductive medicine
Sexual medicine
Venereology
Sleep medicine
Sports medicine
Transplantation medicine
Tropical medicine
Travel medicine
Medical education
Medical school
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery
Bachelor of Medical Sciences
Master of Medicine
Master of Surgery
Doctor of Medicine
Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine
MD–PhD
Medical Scientist Training Program
Related topics
Alternative medicine
Allied health
Dentistry
Podiatry
Pharmacy
Physiotherapy
Molecular oncology
Nanomedicine
Personalized medicine
Public health
Rural health
Therapy
Traditional medicine
Veterinary medicine
Physician
Chief physician
History of medicine

 Category
 Commons
 Wikiproject
 Portal
 Outline

vteMedical education in the United StatesStages
Pre-medical
Medical school
Clerkship
Sub-internship
Graduate medical education
Internship
Residency
Fellowship
Board certification
Licensure
Continuing medical education
Pathways
Medicine (MD)
Osteopathic Medicine (DO)
International medical graduate (MBBS)
Degrees
Doctor of Medicine
Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine
MD–PhD
Comparison
Exams
MCAT
USMLE
Step: 1
2CK
2CS
3
COMLEX
Level: 1
2CE
2PE
3
Regulatory bodies
American Medical Association
Association of American Medical Colleges
American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine
National Resident Matching Program
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education
Liaison Committee on Medical Education
Commission on Osteopathic College Accreditation
Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education
American Osteopathic Association
Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates
Lists
Medical schools
Specialty colleges
Reformers
Abraham Flexner
Flexner Report
William Osler
William Stewart Halsted
Andrew Taylor Still






