
Title:
First aid
Text:
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}This article is about first aid for humans. For pets, see Pet first aid. For other uses, see First aid (disambiguation).
Emergency first response medical treatment


  The universal first aid symbol
  A US Navy corpsman gives first aid to an injured Iraqi citizen.
.mw-parser-output .portalbox{float:right;border:solid #aaa 1px;padding:0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tleft{margin:0.5em 1em 0.5em 0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tright{margin:0.5em 0 0.5em 1em}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul{display:table;box-sizing:border-box;padding:0.1em;max-width:175px;background:#f9f9f9;font-size:85%;line-height:110%;font-style:italic;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li{display:table-row}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:first-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em;vertical-align:middle;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:last-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em 0.2em 0.2em 0.3em;vertical-align:middle}

Medical portal
First aid is the first and immediate assistance given to any person suffering from either a minor or serious  illness or injury,[1] with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from worsening, or to promote recovery. It includes initial intervention in a serious condition prior to professional medical help being available, such as performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) while waiting for an ambulance, as well as the complete treatment of minor conditions, such as applying a plaster to a cut. First aid is generally performed by someone with basic medical training. Mental health first aid is an extension of the concept of first aid to cover mental health,[2] while psychological first aid is used as early treatment of people who are at risk for developing PTSD.[3] Conflict First Aid, focused on preservation and recovery of an individual's social or relationship well-being, is being piloted in Canada.
There are many situations that may require first aid, and many countries have legislation, regulation, or guidance, which specifies a minimum level of first aid provision in certain circumstances. This can include specific training or equipment to be available in the workplace (such as an automated external defibrillator), the provision of specialist first aid cover at public gatherings, or mandatory first aid training within schools. First aid, however, does not necessarily require any particular equipment or prior knowledge, and can involve improvisation with materials available at the time, often by untrained people.[4]

Contents

1 Early history and warfare

1.1 Formalization of life saving treatments


2 Aims
3 Setting the priorities

3.1 ABCDE method[16]


4 Key skills

4.1 Preserving life


5 Training Principles

5.1 Types of first aid which require training


6 First aid services
7 Symbols
8 Physical conditions that often require first aid
9 First aid kits

9.1 Contents


10 References
11 External links



Early history and warfare[edit]
Skills of what is now known as first aid have been recorded throughout history, especially in relation to warfare, where the care of both traumatic and medical cases is required in particularly large numbers. The bandaging of battle wounds is shown on Classical Greek pottery from c. 500 BC, whilst the parable of the Good Samaritan includes references to binding or dressing wounds.[5]  There are numerous references to first aid performed within the Roman army, with a system of first aid supported by surgeons, field ambulances, and hospitals.[6]  Roman legions had the specific role of capsarii, who were responsible for first aid such as bandaging, and are the forerunners of the modern combat medic.[7]
Further examples occur through history, still mostly related to battle, with examples such as the Knights Hospitaller in the 11th century AD, providing care to pilgrims and knights in the Holy Land.[8]

Formalization of life saving treatments[edit]
During the late 18th century, drowning as a cause of death was a major concern amongst the population. In 1767, a society for the preservation of life from accidents in water was started in Amsterdam, and in 1773, physician William Hawes began publicizing the power of artificial respiration as means of resuscitation of those who appeared drowned.  This led to the formation, in 1774, of the Society for the Recovery of Persons Apparently Drowned, later the Royal Humane Society, who did much to promote resuscitation.[9][10]
Napoleon's surgeon, Baron Dominique-Jean Larrey, is credited with creating an ambulance corps (the ambulance volantes), which included medical assistants, tasked to administer first aid in battle.[11]
In 1859, Swiss businessman Jean-Henri Dunant witnessed the aftermath of the Battle of Solferino, and his work led to the formation of the Red Cross, with a key stated aim of "aid to sick and wounded soldiers in the field".[8]  The Red Cross and Red Crescent are still the largest provider of first aid worldwide.[12]

  Esmarch bandage showing soldiers how to perform first aid
In 1870, Prussian military surgeon Friedrich von Esmarch introduced formalized first aid to the military, and first coined the term "erste hilfe" (translating to 'first aid'), including training for soldiers in the Franco-Prussian War on care for wounded comrades using pre-learnt bandaging and splinting skills, and making use of the Esmarch bandage which he designed.[5]  The bandage was issued as standard to the Prussian combatants, and also included aide-memoire pictures showing common uses.
In 1872, the Order of Saint John of Jerusalem in England changed its focus from hospice care, and set out to start a system of practical medical help, starting with making a grant towards the establishment of the UK's first ambulance service.  This was followed by creating its own wheeled transport litter in 1875 (the St John Ambulance), and in 1877 established the St John Ambulance Association (the forerunner of modern-day St John Ambulance) "to train men and women for the benefit of the sick and wounded".[13]
Also in the UK, Surgeon-Major Peter Shepherd had seen the advantages of von Esmarch's new teaching of first aid, and introduced an equivalent programme for the British Army, and so being the first user of "first aid for the injured" in English, disseminating information through a series of lectures. Following this, in 1878, Shepherd and Colonel Francis Duncan took advantage of the newly charitable focus of St John,[5] and established the concept of teaching first aid skills to civilians.  The first classes were conducted in the hall of the Presbyterian school in Woolwich (near Woolwich barracks where Shepherd was based) using a comprehensive first aid curriculum.
First aid training began to spread through the British Empire through organisations such as St John, often starting, as in the UK, with high risk activities such as ports and railways.[14]

Aims[edit]
The primary goal of first aid is to prevent death or serious injury from worsening. The key aims of first aid can be summarized with the acronym of 'the three Ps':[15]

Preserve life:  The overriding aim of all medical care which includes first aid, is to save lives and minimize the threat of death.  First aid done correctly should help reduce the patient's level of pain and calm them down during the evaluation and treatment process.
Prevent further harm:  Prevention of further harm includes addressing both external factors, such as moving a patient away from any cause of harm, and applying first aid techniques to prevent worsening of the condition, such as applying pressure to stop a bleed becoming dangerous.
Promote recovery:  First aid also involves trying to start the recovery process from the illness or injury, and in some cases might involve completing a treatment, such as in the case of applying a plaster   to a small wound.
It is important to note that first aid is not medical treatment and cannot be compared with what a trained medical professional provides. First aid involves making common sense decisions in the best interest of an injured person.

Setting the priorities[edit]
Protocols such as ATLS, BATLS, SAFE-POINT are based on the principle of defining the priorities and the procedure where the correct execution of the individual steps achieves the required objective of saving human life. Basic points of these protocols include:

Catastrophic bleeding (massive external bleeding)
Airway (clearing airways)
Breathing (ensuring respiration)
Circulation (internal bleeding)
Disability (neurological condition)
Environment (overall examination, environment)
A major benefit of these protocols is that they require minimum resources, time and skills with a great degree of success in saving lives under conditions unfavourable for applying first aid.

ABCDE method[16][edit]
Airway (clearing airways):   If the patient responds in a normal voice, then the airway is patent. Airway obstruction can be partial or complete. Signs of a partially obstructed airway include a changed voice, noisy breathing (eg, stridor), and an increased breathing effort. With a completely obstructed airway, there is no respiration despite great effort (ie, paradox respiration, or “see-saw” sign). A reduced level of consciousness is a common cause of airway obstruction, partial or complete. A common sign of partial airway obstruction in the unconscious state is snoring.  Untreated airway obstruction can rapidly lead to cardiac arrest. All health care professionals, regardless of the setting, can assess the airway as described and use a head-tilt and chin-lift maneuver to open the airway. With the proper equipment, suction of the airways to remove obstructions, for example, blood or vomit, is recommended. If possible, foreign bodies causing airway obstruction should be removed. In the event of a complete airway obstruction, treatment should be given according to current guidelines.9 In brief, to conscious patients give five back blows alternating with five abdominal thrusts until the obstruction is relieved. If the victim becomes unconscious, call for help and start cardiopulmonary resuscitation according to guidelines.
Importantly, high-flow oxygen should be provided to all critically ill persons as soon as possible.

Breathing (ensuring respiration):   In all settings, it is possible to determine the respiratory rate, inspect movements of the thoracic wall for symmetry and use of auxiliary respiratory muscles, and percuss the chest for unilateral dullness or resonance. Cyanosis, distended neck veins, and lateralization of the trachea can be identified. If a stethoscope is available, lung auscultation should be performed and, if possible, a pulse oximeter should be applied. Tension pneumothorax must be relieved immediately by inserting a cannula where the second intercostal space crosses the midclavicular line (needle thoracocentesis). Bronchospasm should be treated with inhalations.  If breathing is insufficient, assisted ventilation must be performed by giving rescue breaths with or without a barrier device. Trained personnel should use a bag mask if available
Circulation (internal bleeding):   The capillary refill time and pulse rate can be assessed in any setting. Inspection of the skin gives clues to circulatory problems. Color changes, sweating, and a decreased level of consciousness are signs of decreased perfusion. If a stethoscope is available, heart auscultation should be performed. Electrocardiography monitoring and blood pressure measurements should also be performed as soon as possible. Hypotension is an important adverse clinical sign. The effects of hypovolemia can be alleviated by placing the patient in the supine position and elevating the patient’s legs. An intravenous access should be obtained as soon as possible and saline should be infused.
Disability (neurological condition):   The level of consciousness can be rapidly assessed using the AVPU method, where the patient is graded as alert (A), voice responsive (V), pain responsive (P), or unresponsive (U). Alternatively, the Glasgow Coma Score can be used.16 Limb movements should be inspected to evaluate potential signs of lateralization. The best immediate treatment for patients with a primary cerebral condition is stabilization of the airway, breathing, and circulation. In particular, when the patient is only pain responsive or unresponsive, airway patency must be ensured, by placing the patient in the recovery position, and summoning personnel qualified to secure the airway. Ultimately, intubation may be required. Pupillary light reflexes should be evaluated and blood glucose measured. A decreased level of consciousness due to low blood glucose can be corrected quickly with oral or infused glucose.
Environment (overall examination, environment):  Signs of trauma, bleeding, skin reactions (rashes), needle marks, etc, must be observed. Bearing the dignity of the patient in mind, clothing should be removed to allow a thorough physical examination to be performed. Body temperature can be estimated by feeling the skin or using a thermometer when available.
Key skills[edit]
  In case of tongue fallen backwards, blocking the airway, it is necessary to hyperextend the head and pull up the chin, so that the tongue lifts and clears the airway.
Certain skills are considered essential to the provision of first aid and are taught ubiquitously. Particularly the "ABC"s of first aid, which focus on critical life-saving intervention, must be rendered before treatment of less serious injuries. ABC stands for Airway, Breathing, and Circulation.[17] The same mnemonic is used by emergency health professionals. Attention must first be brought to the airway to ensure it is clear. Obstruction (choking) is a life-threatening emergency. Following evaluation of the airway, a first aid attendant would determine adequacy of breathing and provide rescue breathing if necessary.
Assessment of circulation is now not usually carried out for patients who are not breathing, with first aiders now trained to go straight to chest compressions (and thus providing artificial circulation) but pulse checks may be done on less serious patients.
Some organizations add a fourth step of "D" for Deadly bleeding or Defibrillation, while others consider this as part of the Circulation step simply referred as Disability. Variations on techniques to evaluate and maintain the ABCs depend on the skill level of the first aider.  Once the ABCs are secured, first aiders can begin additional treatments or examination, as required if they possess the proper training (such as measuring pupil dilation).[18] Some organizations teach the same order of priority using the "3Bs": Breathing, Bleeding, and Bones (or "4Bs": Breathing, Bleeding, Burns, and Bones). While the ABCs and 3Bs are taught to be performed sequentially, certain conditions may require the consideration of two steps simultaneously. This includes the provision of both artificial respiration and chest compressions to someone who is not breathing and has no pulse, and the consideration of cervical spine injuries when ensuring an open airway.
Skills applicable to the wider context are reflected in the mnemonic AMEGA, which refers to the tasks of "assess", "make safe", "emergency aid", "get help" and "aftermath". The aftermath tasks include recording and reporting, continued care of patients and the welfare of responders and the replacement of used first aid kit elements.[19]

Preserving life[edit]
The patient must have an open airway—that is, an unobstructed passage that allows air to travel from the open mouth or uncongested nose, down through the pharynx and into the lungs. Conscious people maintain their own airway automatically, but those who are unconscious (with a GCS of less than 8) may be unable to do so, as the part of the brain that manages spontaneous breathing may not be functioning.
Whether conscious or not, the patient may be placed in the recovery position, laying on their side. In addition to relaxing the patient, this can have the effect of clearing the tongue from the pharynx. It also avoids a common cause of death in unconscious patients, which is choking on regurgitated stomach contents.
The airway can also become blocked by a foreign object. To dislodge the object and prevent choking, the first aider may use techniques such as ‘back slaps’ and ‘abdominal thrusts’.
Once the airway has been opened, the first aider would reassess the patient's breathing. If there is no breathing, or the patient is not breathing normally (e.g. agonal breathing), the first aider would initiate CPR, which attempts to restart the patient's breathing by forcing air into the lungs. They may also manually massage the heart to promote blood flow around the body.
If the choking person is an infant, the procedure is to deliver five strong blows on the infant's upper back after placing the infant's face in the aider's forearm. If the infant is able to cough or cry, no breathing assistance should be given. Coughing and crying indicate the airway is open and the foreign object will likely to come out from the force the coughing or crying produces.[20]
A first responder should know how to use an Automatic External Defibrillator (AED) in the case of a person having a sudden cardiac arrest. The survival rate of those who suffer a cardiac arrest outside of the hospital is low. Permanent brain damage sets in after 5 minutes of no oxygen delivery, so rapid action on the part of the rescuer is necessary. An AED is a device that can examine a heartbeat and produce electric shocks to restart the heart.[21]
A first aider should be prepared to quickly deal with less severe problems such as cuts, grazes or bone fracture. They may be able to completely resolve a situation if they have the proper training and equipment. For situations that are more severe, complex or dangerous, a first aider might need to do the best they can with the equipment they have, and wait for an ambulance to arrive at the scene.

Training Principles[edit]
  First aid scenario training in progress
Basic principles, such as knowing the use of adhesive bandage or applying direct pressure on a bleed, are often acquired passively through life experiences. However, to provide effective, life-saving first aid interventions requires instruction and practical training. This is especially true where it relates to potentially fatal illnesses and injuries, such as those that require CPR; these procedures may be invasive, and carry a risk of further injury to the patient and the provider. As with any training, it is more useful if it occurs before an actual emergency, and in many countries, emergency ambulance dispatchers may give basic first aid instructions over the phone while the ambulance is on the way.
Training is generally provided by attending a course, typically leading to certification. Due to regular changes in procedures and protocols, based on updated clinical knowledge, and to maintain skill, attendance at regular refresher courses or re-certification is often necessary. First aid training is often available through community organizations such as the Red Cross and St. John Ambulance, or through commercial providers, who will train people for a fee. This commercial training is most common for training of employees to perform first aid in their workplace. Many community organizations also provide a commercial service, which complements their community programmes.
1.Junior level certificate Basic Life Support
2.Senior level certificate
3.Special certificate

Types of first aid which require training[edit]
  A first aid box
There are several types of first aid (and first aider) that require specific additional training. These are usually undertaken to fulfill the demands of the work or activity undertaken.

Aquatic/Marine first aid is usually practiced by professionals such as lifeguards, professional mariners or in diver rescue, and covers the specific problems which may be faced after water-based rescue or delayed MedEvac.
Battlefield first aid takes into account the specific needs of treating wounded combatants and non-combatants during armed conflict.
Conflict First Aid focuses on support for stability and recovery of personal, social, group or system well-being and to address circumstantial safety needs.
  Shown here is an example of a way for people to practice CPR in a safe and reliable manner.
Hyperbaric first aid may be practiced by underwater diving professionals, who need to treat conditions such as decompression sickness.
Oxygen first aid is the providing of oxygen to casualties who suffer from conditions resulting in hypoxia. It is also a standard first aid procedure for underwater diving incidents where gas bubble formation in the tissues is possible.
Wilderness first aid is the provision of first aid under conditions where the arrival of emergency responders or the evacuation of an injured person may be delayed due to constraints of terrain, weather, and available persons or equipment. It may be necessary to care for an injured person for several hours or days.
Mental health first aid is taught independently of physical first aid. How to support someone experiencing a mental health problem or in a crisis situation. Also how to identify the first signs of someone developing mental ill health and guide people towards appropriate help.
First aid services[edit]
  First aider of the British Red Cross accompanies parade of morris dancers at the Knutsford Royal May Day, Knutsford, Cheshire, England, 2012
Some people undertake specific training in order to provide first aid at public or private events, during filming, or other places where people gather.  They may be designated as a first aider, or use some other title.  This role may be undertaken on a voluntary basis, with organisations such as the Red Cross society and St John Ambulance,[22] or as paid employment with a medical contractor.
People performing a first aid role, whether in a professional or voluntary capacity, are often expected to have a high level of first aid training and are often uniformed.

Symbols[edit]
Further information: Emblems of the Red Cross § Use of the emblems
Although commonly associated with first aid, the symbol of a red cross is an official protective symbol of the Red Cross. According to the Geneva Conventions and other international laws, the use of this and similar symbols is reserved for official agencies of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent, and as a protective emblem for medical personnel and facilities in combat situations. Use by any other person or organization is illegal, and may lead to prosecution.
The internationally accepted symbol for first aid is the white cross on a green background shown below.
Some organizations may make use of the Star of Life, although this is usually reserved for use by ambulance services, or may use symbols such as the Maltese Cross, like the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps and St John Ambulance. Other symbols may also be used.


		
			
			
ISO First Aid Symbol

			
		
		
			
			
St. Andrew's First Aid Badge

			
		
		
			
			
Emblem of the Red Cross

			
		
		
			
			
Emblem of the Red Crescent

			
		
		
			
			
Maltese or Amalfi Cross

			
		
		
			
			
Star of Life

			
		
		
			
			
Civil defense

			
		

Physical conditions that often require first aid[edit]
See also: Medical emergency
Altitude sickness, which can begin in susceptible people at altitudes as low as 5,000 feet, can cause potentially fatal swelling of the brain or lungs.[23]
Anaphylaxis, a life-threatening condition in which the airway can become constricted and the patient may go into shock. The reaction can be caused by a systemic allergic reaction to allergens such as insect bites or peanuts. Anaphylaxis is initially treated with injection of epinephrine.
Battlefield first aid—This protocol refers to treating shrapnel, gunshot wounds, burns and bone fractures as seen either in the traditional battlefield setting or in an area subject to damage by large-scale weaponry, such as a bomb blast.
Bone fracture, a break in a bone initially treated by stabilizing the fracture with a splint.
Burns, which can result in damage to tissues and loss of body fluids through the burn site.
Cardiac Arrest, which will lead to death unless CPR preferably combined with an AED is started within minutes. There is often no time to wait for the emergency services to arrive as 92 percent of people suffering a sudden cardiac arrest die before reaching hospital according to the American Heart Association.
Choking, blockage of the airway which can quickly result in death due to lack of oxygen if the patient's trachea is not cleared, for example by the Heimlich Maneuver.
Childbirth.
Cramps in muscles due to lactic acid build up caused either by inadequate oxygenation of muscle or lack of water or salt.
Diving disorders, drowning or asphyxiation.[24]
Gender-specific conditions, such as dysmenorrhea and testicular torsion.
Heart attack, or inadequate blood flow to the blood vessels supplying the heart muscle.
Heat stroke, also known as sunstroke or hyperthermia, which tends to occur during heavy exercise in high humidity, or with inadequate water, though it may occur spontaneously in some chronically ill persons. Sunstroke, especially when the victim has been unconscious, often causes major damage to body systems such as brain, kidney, liver, gastric tract. Unconsciousness for more than two hours usually leads to permanent disability. Emergency treatment involves rapid cooling of the patient.
Hair tourniquet a condition where a hair or other thread becomes tied around a toe or finger tightly enough to cut off blood flow.
Heat syncope, another stage in the same process as heat stroke, occurs under similar conditions as heat stroke and is not distinguished from the latter by some authorities.
Heavy bleeding, treated by applying pressure (manually and later with a pressure bandage) to the wound site and elevating the limb if possible.
Hyperglycemia (diabetic coma) and Hypoglycemia (insulin shock).
Hypothermia, or Exposure, occurs when a person's core body temperature falls below 33.7 °C (92.6 °F). First aid for a mildly hypothermic patient includes rewarming, which can be achieved by wrapping the affected person in a blanket, and providing warm drinks, such as soup, and high energy food, such as chocolate.[25] However, rewarming a severely hypothermic person could result in a fatal arrhythmia, an irregular heart rhythm.[26]
Insect and animal bites and stings.
Joint dislocation.
Poisoning, which can occur by injection, inhalation, absorption, or ingestion.
Seizures, or a malfunction in the electrical activity in the brain. Three types of seizures include a grand mal (which usually features convulsions as well as temporary respiratory abnormalities, change in skin complexion, etc.) and petit mal (which usually features twitching, rapid blinking, or fidgeting as well as altered consciousness and temporary respiratory abnormalities).
Muscle strains and Sprains, a temporary dislocation of a joint that immediately reduces automatically but may result in ligament damage.
Stroke, a temporary loss of blood supply to the brain.
Shock and electric shock - electrical injury
Toothache, which can result in severe pain and loss of the tooth but is rarely life-threatening, unless over time the infection spreads into the bone of the jaw and starts osteomyelitis.
Wounds and bleeding, including lacerations, incisions and abrasions,
Gastrointestinal bleeding, avulsions and Sucking chest wounds, treated with an occlusive dressing to let air out but not in.
Many accidents can happen in homes, offices, schools and laboratories which require immediate attention before the patient is attended by the doctor.

First aid kits[edit]
A first aid kit consists of a strong, durable bag or transparent plastic box. They are commonly identified with a white cross on a green background. A first aid kit does not have to be bought ready-made. The advantage of ready-made first aid kits are that they have well organized compartments and familiar layouts.

Contents[edit]
There is no universal agreement upon the list for the contents of a first aid kit. The UK Health and Safety Executive stress that the contents of workplace first aid kits will vary according to the nature of the work activities.[27] As an example of possible contents of a kit, British Standard "BS 8599 First Aid Kits for the Workplace" [28] lists the following items:

.mw-parser-output .div-col{margin-top:0.3em;column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .div-col-small{font-size:90%}.mw-parser-output .div-col-rules{column-rule:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .div-col dl,.mw-parser-output .div-col ol,.mw-parser-output .div-col ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .div-col li,.mw-parser-output .div-col dd{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
Information leaflet
Medium sterile dressings
Large sterile dressings
Bandages
Triangular dressings
Safety pins
Adhesive dressings
Sterile wet wipes
Microporous tape
Nitrile gloves
Face shield
Foil blanket
Burn dressings
Clothing shears
Conforming bandages
Finger dressing
Antiseptic cream
Scissors
Tweezers
Cotton

References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}First aid manual: 9th edition. Dorling Kindersley. 2009. ISBN 978-1-4053-3537-9.

^ "Mental Health First Aid USA". Mental Health First Aid. October 10, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2019.

^ Peterson, Sarah (January 30, 2018). "About PFA". The National Child Traumatic Stress Network. Retrieved November 20, 2019.

^ "Duct tape for the win! Using household items for first aid needs". CPR Seattle. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014.

^ Jump up to: a b c Pearn, John (1994). "The earliest days of first aid". The British Medical Journal. 309 (6970): 1718–1720. doi:10.1136/bmj.309.6970.1718. PMC 2542683. PMID 7820000.

^ Eastman, A Brent (1992). "Blood in Our Streets: The Status and Evolution of Trauma Care Systems". JAMA Surgery. 127 (6): 677–681. doi:10.1001/archsurg.1992.01420060043008. PMID 1596168.

^ Efstathis, Vlas (November 1999). "A history of first aid and its role in armed forces" (PDF). ADF Health. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 30, 2014.

^ Jump up to: a b "First Aid: From Witchdoctors & Religious Knights to Modern Doctors". Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved March 23, 2011.

^ New Scientist, Vol. 193 No. 2586 (13–19 Jan 2007), p. 50

^ Price, John (2014). Everyday Heroism: Victorian Constructions of the Heroic Civilian. Bloomsbury: London. p. 203. ISBN 978-1-4411066-5-0.

^ Baker, David; Cazalaà, Jean-Bernard; Carli, Pierre (September 2005). "Resuscitation great. Larrey and Percy--a tale of two barons". Resuscitation. 66 (3): 259–262. doi:10.1016/j.resuscitation.2005.03.009. ISSN 0300-9572. PMID 15990216.

^ "Event first aid and ambulance support". British Red Cross. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014.

^ Fletcher NC. The St John Ambulance Association: its history and its past in the ambulance movement. London: St John Ambulance Association, 1929:12–3.

^ Industrial Revolution: St. John Ambulance Archived 2007-02-20 at the Wayback Machine, retrieved December 10, 2006.

^ "Accidents and first aid". Archived from the original on May 3, 2008. Retrieved October 4, 2008.

^ Thim, Troels; Krarup, Niels Henrik Vinther; Grove, Erik Lerkevang; Rohde, Claus Valter; Løfgren, Bo (January 31, 2012). "Initial assessment and treatment with the Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability, Exposure (ABCDE) approach". International Journal of General Medicine. 5: 117–121. doi:10.2147/IJGM.S28478. ISSN 1178-7074. PMC 3273374. PMID 22319249.

^ Eisenburger, Philip; Safar, Peter (1999). "Life supporting first aid training of the public—review and recommendations". Resuscitation. 41 (1): 3–18. doi:10.1016/S0300-9572(99)00034-9. PMID 10459587.

^ "Guidelines and Guidance: The ABCDE approach". Resuscitation Council (UK). Archived from the original on August 12, 2005. Retrieved May 2, 2019.

^ Furst, J., What does AMEGA stand for in first aid?, updated 12 July 2019, accessed 24 January 2022

^ "Choking- infant under 1 year".

^ Nessel, Edward H. (2012). "Treating Sudden Cardiac Arrest and the Use of Automated External Defibrillators in the Community Setting". AAMA Journal. 25: 9.

^ "Role of a First Aider - First Aid - St John Ambulance". www.sja.org.uk. Retrieved November 20, 2019.

^ Cymerman, A; Rock, PB. "Medical Problems in High Mountain Environments. A Handbook for Medical Officers". USARIEM-TN94-2. US Army Research Inst. of Environmental Medicine Thermal and Mountain Medicine Division Technical Report. Archived from the original on April 23, 2009. Retrieved March 5, 2009. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Longphre, John M.; Petar J. DeNoble; Richard E. Moon; Richard D. Vann; John J. Freiberger (2007). "First aid normobaric oxygen for the treatment of recreational diving injuries". Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine. 34 (1): 43–49. ISSN 1066-2936. OCLC 26915585. PMID 17393938. Archived from the original on June 13, 2008. Retrieved March 5, 2009.

^ "Everyday First Aid – Hypothermia". British Red Cross. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014.

^ Sterba, JA (1990). "Field Management of Accidental Hypothermia during Diving". US Navy Experimental Diving Unit Technical Report. NEDU-1-90. Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved March 15, 2013.

^ First aid at work: The Health and Safety (First-Aid) Regulations 1981. Guidance on Regulations L74

^ BS 8599-1:2011 BSI 2011


External links[edit]



Look up first aid in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: First Aid




Wikivoyage has a travel guide for First aid kit for travellers.

First Aid Guide at the Mayo Clinic
First aid from the British Red Cross – including first aid tips and first aid training information
First aid from St John Ambulance – first aid information and advice
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}show.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vteFirst aidTechniques
Abdominal thrusts
Airway management
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Emergency bleeding control
Equipment
Automated external defibrillator
Bag valve mask
Bandage
Dressing
First aid kit
Nasopharyngeal airway
Oropharyngeal airway
Mnemonics
ABC
DCAP-BTLS
OPQRST
RICE
SAMPLE
SOAP
Certifications
Certified first responder
Emergency medical technician
Wilderness Emergency Medical Technician
Topics
Bleeding
Golden hour
Good Samaritan law
Wilderness medicine

showvteEmergency medicineEmergency medicine
Emergency department
Emergency medical services
Emergency nursing
Emergency psychiatry
Golden hour
Medical emergency
International emergency medicine
Pediatric emergency medicine
Pre-hospital emergency medicine
Major trauma
Trauma center
Triage
Equipment
Bag valve mask (BVM)
Chest tube
Defibrillation (AED
ICD)
Electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG)
Intraosseous infusion (IO)
Intravenous therapy (IV)
Tracheal intubation
Laryngeal tube
Combitube
Nasopharyngeal airway (NPA)
Oropharyngeal airway (OPA)
Pocket mask
Drugs
Adenosine
Amiodarone
Atropine
Dopamine
Epinephrine / Adrenaline
Naloxone
Magnesium sulfate
Sodium bicarbonate
Organisations
International Federation for Emergency Medicine (International Conference on Emergency Medicine)
American College of Emergency Physicians
Australasian College for Emergency Medicine
Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians
Royal College of Emergency Medicine
European Society for Emergency Medicine
Asian Society for Emergency Medicine
American Academy of Emergency Medicine
Courses / Life support
First aid
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation
Basic life support (BLS)
Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS)
Advanced trauma life support (ATLS)
Neonatal Resuscitation Program (NRP)
Acute Care of at-Risk Newborns (ACoRN)
Pediatric basic life support (PBLS)
Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS)
Advanced Life Support in Obstetrics (ALSO)
Care of the Critically Ill Surgical Patient (CCrISP)
Scoring systems
NACA score
Injury Severity Score

 Category
 Outline

showvteLifesaving and lifeguardingInternational standards bodies
International Lifesaving Federation
International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation
National societies
DLRG
Lifesaving South Africa
Royal Life Saving Society Australia
Royal Life Saving Society Canada
Royal Life Saving Society UK
Royal Life Saving Society Commonwealth
Surf Life Saving Australia
Surf Life Saving New Zealand
United States Lifesaving Association
RFESS - Royal Spanish Lifesaving Association
Wasserwacht
Sub-national societies
The Hong Kong Life Saving Society
Topics
Lifesaving
Lifesaving (sport)
Lifeguard
Surf lifesaving
First aid
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Drowning chain
Rip current
Awards
Lifesaving Medal
Albert Medal for lifesaving
Bronze Medallion
Bronze Cross
National Lifeguard
Life-saving appliances
Lifebuoy
Rescue buoy
Throw bag
Life saving reel
IRB
Surf ski
Paddle board

showvteUnderwater diving
Diving modes
Atmospheric pressure diving
Freediving
Saturation diving
Scuba diving
Snorkeling
Surface oriented diving
Surface-supplied diving
Unmanned diving
showDiving equipment
Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment
Human factors in diving equipment design
Basic equipment
Diving mask
Snorkel
Swimfin
Breathing gas
Bailout gas
Bottom gas
Breathing air
Decompression gas
Emergency gas supply
Heliox
Nitrox
Oxygen
Travel gas
Trimix
Buoyancy andtrim equipment
Buoyancy compensator
Power inflator
Dump valve
Variable buoyancy pressure vessel
Diving weighting system
Ankle weights
Integrated weights
Trim weights
Weight belt
Decompressionequipment
Decompression buoy
Decompression chamber
Decompression cylinder
Decompression trapeze
Dive computer
Diving bell
Diving shot
Diving stage
Jersey upline
Jonline
Diving suit
Atmospheric diving suit
JIM suit
Newtsuit
Dry suit
Sladen suit
Standard diving suit
Rash vest
Wetsuit
Dive skins
Hot-water suit
Helmetsand masks
Anti-fog
Diving helmet
Free-flow helmet
Lightweight demand helmet
Orinasal mask
Reclaim helmet
Shallow water helmet
Standard diving helmet
Diving mask
Band mask
Full-face mask
Half mask
Instrumentation
Bottom timer
Depth gauge
Dive computer
Dive timer
Diving watch
Helium release valve
Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor
Pneumofathometer
Submersible pressure gauge
Mobilityequipment
Diver propulsion vehicle
Diving bell
Closed bell
Wet bell
Diving stage
Swimfin
Monofin
PowerSwim
Towboard
Wet sub
Safetyequipment
Alternative air source
Octopus regulator
Pony bottle
Bolt snap
Buddy line
Dive light
Diver's cutting tool
Diver's knife
Diver's telephone
Through-water communications
Diving bell
Diving safety harness
Emergency gas supply
Bailout block
Bailout bottle
Lifeline
Screw gate carabiner
Emergency locator beacon
Rescue tether
Safety helmet
Shark-proof cage
Snoopy loop
Navigation equipment
Distance line
Diving compass
Dive reel
Line marker
Surface marker buoy
Silt screw
Underwaterbreathingapparatus
Atmospheric diving suit
Diving cylinder
Burst disc
Scuba cylinder valve
Diving helmet
Reclaim helmet
Diving regulator
Mechanism of diving regulators
Regulator malfunction
Regulator freeze
Single-hose regulator
Twin-hose regulator
Full face diving mask
Open-circuitscuba
Scuba set
Bailout bottle
Decompression cylinder
Independent doubles
Manifolded twin set
Scuba manifold
Pony bottle
Scuba configuration
Sidemount
Sling cylinder
Diving rebreathers
Carbon dioxide scrubber
Carleton CDBA
CDLSE
Cryogenic rebreather
CUMA
DSEA
Dolphin
Halcyon PVR-BASC
Halcyon RB80
IDA71
Interspiro DCSC
LAR-5
LAR-6
LAR-V
LARU
Mark IV Amphibian
Porpoise
Ray
Siebe Gorman CDBA
Salvus
Siva
Surface-supplieddiving equipment
Air line
Diver's umbilical
Diving air compressor
Gas panel
Hookah
Scuba replacement
Sea Trek
Snuba
Standard diving dress

Divingequipmentmanufacturers
AP Diving
Apeks
Aqua Lung America
Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique
Beuchat
René Cavalero
Cis-Lunar
Cressi-Sub
Dacor
DESCO
Dive Xtras
Divex
Diving Unlimited International
Drägerwerk
Fenzy
Maurice Fernez
Technisub
Oscar Gugen
Heinke
HeinrichsWeikamp
Johnson Outdoors
Mares
Morse Diving
Nemrod
Oceanic Worldwide
Porpoise
Sub Sea Systems
Shearwater Research
Siebe Gorman
Submarine Products
Suunto

showDiving support equipmentAccess equipment
Boarding stirrup
Diver lift
Diving bell
Diving ladder
Diving platform (scuba)
Diving stage
Downline
Jackstay
Launch and recovery system
Messenger line
Moon pool
Breathing gashandling
Air filtration
Activated carbon
Hopcalite
Molecular sieve
Silica gel
Booster pump
Carbon dioxide scrubber
Cascade filling system
Diver's pump
Diving air compressor
Diving air filter
Water separator
High pressure breathing air compressor
Low pressure breathing air compressor
Gas blending
Gas blending for scuba diving
Gas panel
Gas reclaim system
Gas storage bank
Gas storage quad
Gas storage tube
Helium analyzer
Nitrox production
Membrane gas separation
Pressure swing adsorption
Oxygen analyser
Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor
Oxygen compatibility
Decompressionequipment
Air-lock
Built-in breathing system
Decompression tables
Diving bell
Bell cursor
Closed bell
Clump weight
Launch and recovery system
Wet bell
Diving chamber
Diving stage
Recreational Dive Planner
Saturation system
Platforms
Dive boat
Canoe and kayak diving
Combat Rubber Raiding Craft
Liveaboard
Subskimmer
Diving support vessel
HMS Challenger (K07)
Underwaterhabitat
Aquarius Reef Base
Continental Shelf Station Two
Helgoland Habitat
Jules' Undersea Lodge
Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station
SEALAB
Tektite habitat

Remotely operatedunderwater vehicles
8A4-class ROUV
ABISMO
Atlantis ROV Team
CURV
Deep Drone
Épaulard
Global Explorer ROV
Goldfish-class ROUV
Kaikō ROV
Kaşif ROUV
Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System
Mini Rover ROV
OpenROV
ROV KIEL 6000
ROV PHOCA
Scorpio ROV
Sea Dragon-class ROV
Seabed tractor
Seafox drone
Seahorse ROUV
SeaPerch
SJT-class ROUV
T1200 Trenching Unit
VideoRay UROVs
Safety equipment
Diver down flag
Diving shot
ENOS Rescue-System
Hyperbaric lifeboat
Hyperbaric stretcher
Jackstay
Jonline
Reserve gas supply
General
Diving spread
Air spread
Saturation spread
Hot water system
Sonar
Underwater acoustic positioning system
Underwater acoustic communication
showFreedivingActivities
Aquathlon
Apnoea finswimming
Freediving
Haenyeo
Pearl hunting
Ama
Snorkeling
Spearfishing
Underwater football
Underwater hockey
Underwater ice hockey
Underwater rugby
Underwater target shooting
Competitions
Nordic Deep
Vertical Blue
Disciplines
Constant weight (CWT)
Constant Weight Bi-fins (CWTB)
Constant weight without fins (CNF)
Dynamic apnea (DYN)
Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF)
Free immersion (FIM)
No-limits apnea (NLT)
Static apnea (STA)
Skandalopetra diving
Variable weight apnea (VWT)
Variable weight apnea without fins
Equipment
Diving mask
Diving suit
Hawaiian sling
Polespear
Snorkel (swimming)
Speargun
Swimfins
Monofin
Water polo cap
Freedivers
Deborah Andollo
Peppo Biscarini
Sara Campbell
Derya Can Göçen
Goran Čolak
Carlos Coste
Robert Croft
Mandy-Rae Cruickshank
Yasemin Dalkılıç
Leonardo D'Imporzano
Flavia Eberhard
Şahika Ercümen
Emma Farrell
Francisco Ferreras
Pierre Frolla
Flavia Eberhard
Mehgan Heaney-Grier
Elisabeth Kristoffersen
Loïc Leferme
Enzo Maiorca
Jacques Mayol
Audrey Mestre
Karol Meyer
Stéphane Mifsud
Alexey Molchanov
Natalia Molchanova
Dave Mullins
Patrick Musimu
Guillaume Néry
Herbert Nitsch
Umberto Pelizzari
Annelie Pompe
Michal Risian
Stig Severinsen
Tom Sietas
Aharon Solomons
Martin Štěpánek
Walter Steyn
Tanya Streeter
William Trubridge
Devrim Cenk Ulusoy
Fatma Uruk
Danai Varveri
Alessia Zecchini
Nataliia Zharkova
Hazards
Barotrauma
Drowning
Freediving blackout
Deep-water blackout
Shallow-water blackout
Hypercapnia
Hypothermia
Historical
Ama
Octopus wrestling
Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming
Organisations
AIDA International
Scuba Schools International
Australian Underwater Federation
British Freediving Association
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques
Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins
Performance Freediving International
showProfessional divingOccupations
Ama
Commercial diver
Commercial offshore diver
Hazmat diver
Divemaster
Diving instructor
Diving safety officer
Diving superintendent
Diving supervisor
Haenyeo
Media diver
Police diver
Public safety diver
Scientific diver
Underwater archaeologist
Militarydiving
Army engineer diver
Canadian Armed Forces Divers
Clearance diver
Frogman
Minentaucher
Royal Navy ships diver
United States military divers
U.S. Navy diver
U.S.Navy master diver
Militarydivingunits
Clearance Diving Branch (RAN)
Commando Hubert
Combat Divers Service (Lithuania)
Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei
Decima Flottiglia MAS
Frogman Corps (Denmark)
Fuerzas Especiales
GRUMEC
Grup Gerak Khas
Jagdkommando
JW Formoza
JW GROM
JW Komandosów
Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine
KOPASKA
MARCOS
Marine Commandos
Marinejegerkommandoen
Marine Raider Regiment
Minedykkerkommandoen
Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit
Naval Diving Unit (Singapore)
Naval Service Diving Section
Naval Special Operations Command
Operational Diving Division (SA Navy)
Royal Engineers
Russian commando frogmen
Sappers Divers Group
Shayetet 13
Special Air Service
Special Air Service Regiment
Special Actions Detachment
Special Boat Service
Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka)
Special Forces Command (Turkey)
Special Forces Group (Belgium)
Special Operations Battalion (Croatia)
Special Service Group (Navy)
Special Warfare Diving and Salvage
Tactical Divers Group
US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance
US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions
US Navy SEALs
Underwater Construction Teams
Underwater Demolition Command
Underwater Demolition Team
Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces)
UNGERIN


Underwaterwork
Commercial offshore diving
Dive leader
Diver training
Recreational diver training
Hazmat diving
Hyperbaric welding
Media diving
Nondestructive testing
Pearl hunting
Police diving
Potable water diving
Public safety diving
Scientific diving
Ships husbandry
Sponge diving
Submarine pipeline
Underwater archaeology
Archaeology of shipwrecks
Underwater construction
Offshore construction
Underwater demolition
Underwater logging
Underwater photography
Underwater search and recovery
Underwater searches
Underwater videography
Salvage diving
SS Egypt
Kronan
La Belle
SS Laurentic
RMS Lusitania
Mars
Mary Rose
USS Monitor
HMS Royal George
Vasa

Divingcontractors
COMEX
Helix Energy Solutions Group
International Marine Contractors Association
Tools andequipment
Abrasive waterjet
Airlift
Baited remote underwater video
In-water surface cleaning
Brush cart
Cavitation cleaning
Pressure washing
Pigging
Lifting bag
Remotely operated underwater vehicle
Thermal lance
Tremie
Water jetting
Underwaterweapons
Limpet mine
Speargun
Hawaiian sling
Polespear
Underwaterfirearm
Gyrojet
Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun
Powerhead
Underwater pistols
Heckler & Koch P11
SPP-1 underwater pistol
Underwater revolvers
AAI underwater revolver
Underwater rifles
ADS amphibious rifle
APS underwater rifle
ASM-DT amphibious rifle

showRecreational diving
Recreational dive sites
Index of recreational dive sites
List of wreck diving sites
Outline of recreational dive sites
Specialties
Altitude diving
Cave diving
Deep diving
Ice diving
Muck diving
Open-water diving
Rebreather diving
Sidemount diving
Solo diving
Technical diving
Underwater photography
Wreck diving
Diverorganisations
British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)
Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA)
Cave Diving Group (CDG)
Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT)
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS)
Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM)
International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD)
National Association for Cave Diving (NACD)
Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS)
Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP)
Diving tourismindustry
Dive center
Diving in East Timor
Diving in the Maldives
Environmental impact of recreational diving
Scuba diving tourism
Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands
Shark tourism
Sinking ships for wreck diving sites
Underwater diving on Guam
Diving eventsand festivals
Diversnight
Underwater Bike Race

hideDiving safety
Human factors in diving equipment design
Human factors in diving safety
Life-support system
Safety-critical system
Scuba diving fatalities
Divinghazards
List of diving hazards and precautions
Environmental
Current
Delta-P
Entanglement hazard
Overhead
Silt out
Wave action
Equipment
Freeflow
Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment
Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus
Single point of failure
Physiological
Cold shock response
Decompression
Nitrogen narcosis
Oxygen toxicity
Seasickness
Uncontrolled decompression
Diver behaviour and competence
Lack of competence
Overconfidence effect
Panic
Task loading
Trait anxiety
Willful violation
Consequences
Barotrauma
Decompression sickness
Drowning
Hypothermia
Hypoxia
Hypercapnia
Hyperthermia
Non-freezing cold injury

Divingprocedures
Ascending and descending
Emergency ascent
Boat diving
Canoe and kayak diving
Buddy diving
buddy check
Decompression
Decompression practice
Pyle stop
Ratio decompression
Dive briefing
Dive log
Dive planning
Rule of thirds
Scuba gas planning
Diver communications
Diving hand signals
Diving line signals
Diver voice communications
Diver rescue
Diver training
Doing It Right
Drift diving
Gas blending for scuba diving
Night diving
Rebreather diving
Solo diving
Water safety
Riskmanagement
Checklist
Hazard identification and risk assessment
Hazard analysis
Job safety analysis
Risk assessment
Risk control
Hierarchy of hazard controls
Incident pit
Lockout–tagout
Permit To Work
Redundancy
Safety data sheet
Situation awareness
Diving team
Bellman
Chamber operator
Diver medical technician
Diver's attendant
Diving supervisor
Diving systems technician
Gas man
Life support technician
Stand-by diver
Equipmentsafety
Breathing gas quality
Testing and inspection of diving cylinders
Hydrostatic test
Sustained load cracking
Diving regulator
Breathing performance of regulators
Occupationalsafety andhealth
Approaches to safety
Job safety analysis
Risk assessment
Toolbox talk
Housekeeping
Association of Diving Contractors International
Code of practice
Contingency plan
Diving regulations
Emergency procedure
Emergency response plan
Evacuation plan
Hazardous Materials Identification System
Hierarchy of hazard controls
Administrative controls
Engineering controls
Hazard elimination
Hazard substitution
Personal protective equipment
International Marine Contractors Association
Occupational hazard
Biological hazard
Chemical hazard
Physical hazard
Psychosocial hazard
Occupational hygiene
Exposure assessment
Occupational exposure limit
Workplace health surveillance
Safety culture
Code of practice
Diving safety officer
Diving superintendent
Health and safety representative
Operations manual
Safety meeting
Standard operating procedure


showDiving medicineDivingdisorders
List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders
Cramp
Motion sickness
Surfer's ear
Pressurerelated
Alternobaric vertigo
Barostriction
Barotrauma
Air embolism
Aerosinusitis
Barodontalgia
Dental barotrauma
Pulmonary barotrauma
Compression arthralgia
Decompression illness
Dysbarism
Oxygen
Freediving blackout
Hyperoxia
Hypoxia
Oxygen toxicity
Inert gases
Avascular necrosis
Decompression sickness
Isobaric counterdiffusion
Taravana
Dysbaric osteonecrosis
High-pressure nervous syndrome
Hydrogen narcosis
Nitrogen narcosis
Carbon dioxide
Hypercapnia
Hypocapnia
Breathing gascontaminants
Carbon monoxide poisoning

Immersionrelated
Asphyxia
Drowning
Hypothermia
Immersion diuresis
Instinctive drowning response
Laryngospasm
Salt water aspiration syndrome
Swimming-induced pulmonary edema

Treatment
Demand valve oxygen therapy
First aid
Hyperbaric medicine
Hyperbaric treatment schedules
In-water recompression
Oxygen therapy
Therapeutic recompression
Personnel
Diving Medical Examiner
Diving Medical Practitioner
Diving Medical Technician
Hyperbaric nursing
Screening
Atrial septal defect
Effects of drugs on fitness to dive
Fitness to dive
Psychological fitness to dive
ResearchResearchers indiving physiologyand medicine
Arthur J. Bachrach
Albert R. Behnke
Paul Bert
George F. Bond
Robert Boyle
Albert A. Bühlmann
John R. Clarke
Guybon Chesney Castell Damant
Kenneth William Donald
William Paul Fife
John Scott Haldane
Robert William Hamilton Jr.
Leonard Erskine Hill
Brian Andrew Hills
Felix Hoppe-Seyler
Christian J. Lambertsen
Simon Mitchell
Charles Momsen
Neal W. Pollock
John Rawlins R.N.
Charles Wesley Shilling
Edward D. Thalmann
Jacques Triger
Diving medicalresearchorganisations
Aerospace Medical Association
Divers Alert Network (DAN)
Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC)
Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC)
European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC)
European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS)
National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology
Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory
Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine
Rubicon Foundation
South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS)
Southern African Underwater and Hyperbaric Medical Association (SAUHMA)
Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS)
United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU)
showLaw
Civil liability in recreational diving
Diving regulations
Duty of care
List of legislation regulating underwater diving
Investigation of diving accidents
UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage
showHistory of underwater diving
History of decompression research and development
History of scuba diving
List of researchers in underwater diving
Lyons Maritime Museum
Timeline of diving technology
Archeologicalsites
SS Commodore
USS Monitor
Queen Anne's Revenge
Whydah Gally
Underwater artand artists
The Diver
Jason deCaires Taylor
Engineersand inventors
William Beebe
Georges Beuchat
John R. Clarke
Jacques Cousteau
Charles Anthony Deane
John Deane
Ted Eldred
Henry Fleuss
Émile Gagnan
Joseph-Martin Cabirol
Christian J. Lambertsen
Yves Le Prieur
John Lethbridge
Ernest William Moir
Joseph Salim Peress
Auguste Piccard
Joe Savoie
Willard Franklyn Searle
Gordon Smith
Augustus Siebe
Jacques Triger
Equipment
Aqua-Lung
RV Calypso
SP-350 Denise
Nikonos
Porpoise regulator
Standard diving dress
Vintage scuba
Diverpropulsionvehicles
Advanced SEAL Delivery System
Cosmos CE2F series
Dry Combat Submersible
Human torpedo
Motorised Submersible Canoe
Necker Nymph
R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle
SEAL Delivery Vehicle
Shallow Water Combat Submersible
Siluro San Bartolomeo
Welfreighter
Wet Nellie

Military andcovert operations
Raid on Alexandria (1941)
Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior
Scientific projects
1992 cageless shark-diving expedition
Mission 31
IncidentsDive boat incidents
Sinking of MV Conception
Fire on MV Red Sea Aggressor
Diver rescues
Alpazat cave rescue
Tham Luang cave rescue
Early diving
John Day (carpenter)
Charles Spalding
Ebenezer Watson
Freediving fatalities
Loïc Leferme
Audrey Mestre
Nicholas Mevoli
Natalia Molchanova
Offshorediving incidents
Byford Dolphin diving bell accident
Drill Master diving accident
Star Canopus diving accident
Stena Seaspread diving accident
Venture One diving accident
Waage Drill II diving accident
Wildrake diving accident
Professionaldiving fatalities
Roger Baldwin
John Bennett
Victor F. Guiel Jr.
Francis P. Hammerberg
Craig M. Hoffman
Peter Henry Michael Holmes
Johnson Sea Link accident
Edwin Clayton Link
Gerard Anthony Prangley
Pier Skipness
Robert John Smyth
Albert D. Stover
Richard A. Walker
Lothar Michael Ward
Joachim Wendler
Bradley Westell
Arne Zetterström
Scuba divingfatalities
1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident
Ricardo Armbruster
Allan Bridge
David Bright
Berry L. Cannon
Cotton Coulson
Cláudio Coutinho
E. Yale Dawson
Deon Dreyer
Milan Dufek
Sheck Exley
Maurice Fargues
Fernando Garfella Palmer
Guy Garman
Steve Irwin
Jim Jones
Henry Way Kendall
Artur Kozłowski
Yuri Lipski
Kirsty MacColl
Agnes Milowka
François de Roubaix
Chris and Chrissy Rouse
Dave Shaw
Wesley C. Skiles
Dewey Smith
Rob Stewart
Esbjörn Svensson
Josef Velek

showPublicationsManuals
NOAA Diving Manual
U.S. Navy Diving Manual
Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival
Underwater Handbook
Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving
Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving
The new science of skin and scuba diving
Professional Diver's Handbook
Basic Scuba
Standards andCodes of Practice
Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO)
DIN 7876
IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving
ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers
General non-fiction
The Darkness Beckons
Goldfinder
The Last Dive
Shadow Divers
The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure
Research
List of Divers Alert Network publications
Dive guides

showTraining and registrationDivertraining
Competence and assessment
Competency-based learning
Refresher training
Skill assessment
Diver training standard
Diving instructor
Diving school
Occupational diver training
Commercial diver training
Military diver training
Public safety diver training
Scientific diver training
Recreational diver training
Introductory diving
Teaching method
Muscle memory
Overlearning
Stress exposure training
Skills
Combat sidestroke
Diver navigation
Diver trim
Ear clearing
Frenzel maneuver
Valsalva maneuver
Finning techniques
Scuba skills
Buddy breathing
Low impact diving
Diamond Reef System
Surface-supplied diving skills
Underwater searches

RecreationalscubacertificationlevelsCore diving skills
Advanced Open Water Diver
Autonomous diver
CMAS* scuba diver
CMAS** scuba diver
Introductory diving
Low Impact Diver
Master Scuba Diver
Open Water Diver
Supervised diver
Leadership skills
Dive leader
Divemaster
Diving instructor
Master Instructor
Specialist skills
Rescue Diver
Solo diver
Diver trainingcertificationand registrationorganisations
European Underwater Federation (EUF)
International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF)
International Diving Schools Association (IDSA)
International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA)
List of diver certification organizations
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Nautical Archaeology Society
Universal Referral Program
World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC)
Commercial divercertificationauthorities
Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS)
Commercial diver registration in South Africa
Divers Institute of Technology
Health and Safety Executive (HSE)
Department of Employment and Labour
Commercial divingschools
Divers Academy International
Norwegian diver school
Free-divingcertificationagencies
AIDA International (AIDA)
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Performance Freediving International (PI)
Scuba Schools International (SSI)
Recreationalscubacertificationagencies
American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC)
American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI)
Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP)
British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)
Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT)
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS)
Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM)
Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS)
Global Underwater Explorers (GUE)
International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD)
International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD)
International Diving Educators Association (IDEA)
International Life Saving Federation (ILS)
Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF)
National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE)
National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI)
Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB)
Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI)
Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC)
Sub-Aqua Association (SAA)
Scuba Diving International (SDI)
Scuba Educators International (SEI)
Scottish Sub Aqua Club (ScotSAC)
Scuba Schools International (SSI)
Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF)
United Diving Instructors (UDI)
YMCA SCUBA Program
Scientific divercertificationauthorities
American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS)
CMAS Scientific Committee
Technical divercertificationagencies
American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI)
British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Diving Science and Technology (DSAT)
Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS)
International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD)
Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI)
Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC)
Trimix Scuba Association (TSA)
Technical Extended Range (TXR)
Cavediving
Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA)
Cave Diving Group (CDG)
Global Underwater Explorers (GUE)
National Association for Cave Diving (NACD)
National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG)
National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI)
Technical Diving International (TDI)


Military divertraining centres
Defence Diving School
Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center
Underwater Escape Training Unit
Military divertraining courses
United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course
showUnderwater sportsSurface snorkeling
Finswimming
Snorkeling/breath-hold
Spearfishing
Underwater football
Underwater hockey
Australia
Turkey
Underwater rugby
Colombia
United States
Underwater target shooting
Breath-hold
Aquathlon
Apnoea finswimming
Freediving
Underwater ice hockey
Open Circuit Scuba
Immersion finswimming
Sport diving
Underwater cycling
Underwater orienteering
Underwater photography
Rebreather
Underwater photography
Sports governingorganisations and federations
International
AIDA International
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques)
National
AIDA Hellas
Australian Underwater Federation
British Freediving Association
British Octopush Association
British Underwater Sports Association
Comhairle Fo-Thuinn
Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas
Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins
South African Underwater Sports Federation
Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu
Underwater Society of America)
Competitions
14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship
showUnderwater diversPioneersof diving
Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro
Aquanaut
James F. Cahill
Jacques Cousteau
Billy Deans
Dottie Frazier
Trevor Hampton
Hans Hass
Dick Rutkowski
Teseo Tesei
Arne Zetterström
Underwaterscientistsarchaeologists andenvironmentalists
Michael Arbuthnot
Robert Ballard
George Bass
Mensun Bound
Louis Boutan
Hugh Bradner
Cathy Church
Eugenie Clark
James P. Delgado
Sylvia Earle
John Christopher Fine
George R. Fischer
Anders Franzén
Honor Frost
Fernando Garfella Palmer
David Gibbins
Graham Jessop
Swietenia Puspa Lestari
Pilar Luna
Robert F. Marx
Anna Marguerite McCann
Innes McCartney
Charles T. Meide
David Moore
Mark M. Newell
Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova
John Peter Oleson
Mendel L. Peterson
Richard Pyle
William R. Royal
Margaret Rule
Gunter Schöbel
Stephanie Schwabe
Myriam Seco
E. Lee Spence
Robert Sténuit
Peter Throckmorton
Cristina Zenato
Scuba recordholders
Pascal Bernabé
Jim Bowden
Mark Ellyatt
Sheck Exley
Nuno Gomes
Claudia Serpieri
Krzysztof Starnawski
Underwaterfilmmakersand presenters
Samir Alhafith
David Attenborough
Ramón Bravo
Jean-Michel Cousteau
Richie Kohler
Paul Rose
Andy Torbet
Ivan Tors
Andrew Wight
Underwaterphotographers
Doug Allan
Tamara Benitez
Georges Beuchat
Adrian Biddle
Jonathan Bird
Eric Cheng
Neville Coleman
Jacques Cousteau
John D. Craig
Ben Cropp
Bernard Delemotte
David Doubilet
Candice Farmer
John Christopher Fine
Dermot FitzGerald
Rodney Fox
Ric Frazier
Stephen Frink
Peter Gimbel
Monty Halls
Hans Hass
Henry Way Kendall
Rudie Kuiter
Joseph B. MacInnis
Luis Marden
Agnes Milowka
Noel Monkman
Pete Oxford
Steve Parish
Zale Parry
Pierre Petit
Leni Riefenstahl
Peter Scoones
Brian Skerry
Wesley C. Skiles
E. Lee Spence
Philippe Tailliez
Ron Taylor
Valerie Taylor
Albert Tillman
John Veltri
Stan Waterman
Michele Westmorland
John Ernest Williamson
J. Lamar Worzel
Underwaterexplorers
Caves
Graham Balcombe
Sheck Exley
Martyn Farr
Jochen Hasenmayer
Jill Heinerth
Jarrod Jablonski
William Hogarth Main
Tom Mount
Jack Sheppard
Bill Stone
Reefs
Arthur C. Clarke
Wrecks
Leigh Bishop
John Chatterton
Clive Cussler
Bill Nagle
Valerie van Heest
Aristotelis Zervoudis
Aquanauts
Andrew Abercromby
Joseph M. Acaba
Clayton Anderson
Richard R. Arnold
Serena Auñón-Chancellor
Michael Barratt (astronaut)
Robert A. Barth
Robert L. Behnken
Randolph Bresnik
Timothy J. Broderick
Justin Brown
Berry L. Cannon
Scott Carpenter
Gregory Chamitoff
Steve Chappell
Catherine Coleman
Robin Cook
Craig B. Cooper
Fabien Cousteau
Philippe Cousteau
Timothy Creamer
Jonathan Dory
Pedro Duque
Sylvia Earle
Jeanette Epps
Sheck Exley
Albert Falco
Andrew J. Feustel
Michael Fincke
Satoshi Furukawa
Ronald J. Garan Jr.
Michael L. Gernhardt
Christopher E. Gerty
David Gruber
Chris Hadfield
Jeremy Hansen
José M. Hernández
John Herrington
Paul Hill
Akihiko Hoshide
Mark Hulsbeck
Emma Hwang
Norishige Kanai
Les Kaufman
Scott Kelly
Karen Kohanowich
Timothy Kopra
Dominic Landucci
Jon Lindbergh
Kjell N. Lindgren
Michael López-Alegría
Joseph B. MacInnis
Sandra Magnus
Thomas Marshburn
Matthias Maurer
K. Megan McArthur
Craig McKinley
Jessica Meir
Simone Melchior
Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger
Andreas Mogensen
Karen Nyberg
John D. Olivas
Takuya Onishi
Luca Parmitano
Nicholas Patrick
Tim Peake
Thomas Pesquet
Marc Reagan
Garrett Reisman
Kathleen Rubins
Dick Rutkowski
Tara Ruttley
David Saint-Jacques
Josef Schmid
Robert Sheats
Dewey Smith
Steve Squyres
Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper
Robert Sténuit
Hervé Stevenin
Nicole Stott
James Talacek
Daniel M. Tani
Robert Thirsk
Bill Todd
Mark T. Vande Hei
Koichi Wakata
Rex J. Walheim
Shannon Walker
John Morgan Wells
Joachim Wendler
Douglas H. Wheelock
Peggy Whitson
Dafydd Williams
Jeffrey Williams
Sunita Williams
Gregory R. Wiseman
Kimiya Yui
Writers and journalists
Michael C. Barnette
Victor Berge
Philippe Diolé
Gary Gentile
Bret Gilliam
Bob Halstead
Trevor Jackson
Steve Lewis
John Mattera
Rescuers
Craig Challen
Richard Harris
Rick Stanton
John Volanthen
Frogmen
Lionel Crabb
Ian Edward Fraser
Sydney Knowles
James Joseph Magennis
Commercial salvors
Keith Jessop
showScience of underwater divingDivingphysics
Breathing performance of regulators
Buoyancy
Archimedes' principle
Neutral buoyancy
Concentration
Diffusion
Molecular diffusion
Force
Oxygen fraction
Permeation
Psychrometric constant
Solubility
Henry's law
Saturation
Solution
Supersaturation
Surface tension
Hydrophobe
Surfactant
Temperature
Torricellian chamber
Underwater acoustics
Modulated ultrasound
Underwater vision
Snell's law
Underwater computer vision
Weight
Apparent weight
Gas laws
Amontons's law
Boyle's law
Charles's law
Combined gas law
Dalton's law
Gay-Lussac's law
Ideal gas law
Pressure
Absolute pressure
Ambient pressure
Atmospheric pressure
Gauge pressure
Hydrostatic pressure
Metre sea water
Partial pressure

Divingphysiology
Artificial gills
Cold shock response
Diving reflex
Equivalent narcotic depth
Lipid
Maximum operating depth
Metabolism
Physiological response to water immersion
Tissue
Underwater vision
Circulatorysystem
Blood shift
Patent foramen ovale
Perfusion
Pulmonary circulation
Systemic circulation
Decompressiontheory
Decompression models:
Bühlmann decompression algorithm
Haldane's decompression model
Reduced gradient bubble model
Thalmann algorithm
Thermodynamic model of decompression
Varying Permeability Model
Equivalent air depth
Equivalent narcotic depth
Oxygen window
Physiology of decompression
Respiration
Blood–air barrier
Breathing
CO₂ retention
Dead space
Gas exchange
Hypocapnia
Respiratory exchange ratio
Respiratory quotient
Respiratory system
Work of breathing

DivingenvironmentClassification
List of diving environments by type
Altitude diving
Benign water diving
Confined water diving
Deep diving
Inland diving
Inshore diving
Muck diving
Night diving
Open-water diving
Black-water diving
Blue-water diving
Penetration diving
Cave diving
Ice diving
Wreck diving
Recreational dive sites
Underwater environment
Impact
Environmental impact of recreational diving
Low impact diving
Environmentalfactors
Algal bloom
Currents:
Current
Longshore drift
Ocean current
Rip current
Tidal race
Undertow
Upwelling
Ekman transport
Halocline
Reef
Coral reef
Stratification
Thermocline
Tides
Turbidity
Wind wave
Breaking wave
Surf
Surge
Swell
Wave shoaling
showOther
Bathysphere
Defense against swimmer incursions
Diver detection sonar
Offshore survey
Rugged compact camera
Underwater domain awareness
Awards and events
Hans Hass Award
International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame
London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures
NOGI Awards
Deep-submergencevehicle
Aluminaut
DSV Alvin
American submarine NR-1
Bathyscaphe
Archimède
FNRS-2
FNRS-3
Harmony class bathyscaphe
Sea Pole-class bathyscaphe
Trieste II
Deepsea Challenger
Ictineu 3
JAGO
Jiaolong
Konsul-class submersible
Russian submarine Losharik
Mir
Nautile
Pisces-class deep submergence vehicle
DSV Sea Cliff
DSV Shinkai
DSV Shinkai 2000
DSV Shinkai 6500
DSV Turtle
DSV-5 Nemo
Deep-submergencerescue vehicle
LR5
LR7
MSM-1
Mystic-class deep-submergence rescue vehicle
DSRV-1 Mystic
DSRV-2 Avalon
NATO Submarine Rescue System
Priz-class deep-submergence rescue vehicle
Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28
Russian submarine AS-34
ASRV Remora
SRV-300
Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System
Type 7103 DSRV
URF (Swedish Navy)

Specialinterestgroups
Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia
CMAS Europe
Coral Reef Alliance
Diving Equipment and Marketing Association
Divers Alert Network
Green Fins
Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association
Historical Diving Society
Karst Underwater Research
Nautical Archaeology Program
Nautical Archaeology Society
Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club
Project AWARE
Reef Check
Reef Life Survey
Rubicon Foundation
Save Ontario Shipwrecks
SeaKeys
Sea Research Society
Society for Underwater Historical Research
Society for Underwater Technology
Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command
Submarine escapeand rescue
Escape trunk
International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office
McCann Rescue Chamber
Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy)
Submarine escape training facility
Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia)
Submarine rescue ship
Escape set
Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus
Momsen lung
Steinke hood
Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment

Neutral buoyancyfacilities forAstronaut training
Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory
Neutral buoyancy pool
Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid
Neutral Buoyancy Simulator
Space Systems Laboratory
Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center
Other
Nautilus Productions
Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device


 Category
 Commons
 Glossary
Indexes: Dive sites
Divers
Diving
 Outline
 Portal

showAuthority control General
Integrated Authority File (Germany)
National libraries
United States
Japan
Other
National Archives (US)






