
Title:
Physical therapy
Text:
Profession that helps a disabled person to function in everyday life
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}For the journal, see Physical Therapy (journal).



.mw-parser-output .infobox-subbox{padding:0;border:none;margin:-3px;width:auto;min-width:100%;font-size:100%;clear:none;float:none;background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .infobox-3cols-child{margin:auto}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-header,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-subheader,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-above,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-title,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-image,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-full-data,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-below{text-align:center}Physical therapy / physiotherapyMilitary physical therapists working with patients on balance problems, orthopedic, amputee, Examining patient's strength, flexibility, joint range of motion balance and gait.ICD-9-CM93.0-93.3MeSHD026761[edit on Wikidata]
.mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:22em;float:right;clear:right;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em;background:#f8f9fa;border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.2em;text-align:center;line-height:1.4em;font-size:88%;border-collapse:collapse;display:table}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .sidebar{display:table!important;float:right!important;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em!important}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-subgroup{width:100%;margin:0;border-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-left{float:left;clear:left;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-none{float:none;clear:both;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-outer-title{padding:0 0.4em 0.2em;font-size:125%;line-height:1.2em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-image{padding:0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-caption,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle-with-top-image,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-caption{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle{padding:0.4em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.2em 0.8em;font-size:145%;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-image{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-heading{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content{padding:0 0.5em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content-with-subgroup{padding:0.1em 0.4em 0.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-below{padding:0.3em 0.8em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-below{border-top:1px solid #aaa;border-bottom:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-navbar{text-align:right;font-size:115%;padding:0 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:left;font-weight:bold;line-height:1.6em;font-size:105%}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title-c{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:center;margin:0 3.3em}@media(max-width:720px){body.mediawiki .mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:100%!important;clear:both;float:none!important;margin-left:0!important;margin-right:0!important}}Disability
Theory and models
Disability theory
Ableism / Disablism
Medical model
Social model


Education
Mainstreaming
Individualized Education Program (IEP)

Special needs
Special school
Special education
Learning disability


Therapy
Physical
Occupational
Speech


Societal implications
Disability rights movement
Inclusion
Normalization
People-first language
Pejorative terms


Personal assistance
Unlicensed assistive personnel (ADLs)

Orthotics and braces
Prosthetics
Assistive technology
Assisted living
Mobility aid
Physical accessibility
Universal design
Web accessibility


Socioeconomic assistance
Social Security Disability Insurance
Supplemental Security Income
Ticket to Work
Disability Living Allowance
Disabled students allowance
Disabled Persons Railcard
Freedom Pass
Assured Income forthe Severely Handicapped

GroupsOrganizations
National Telecommuting Institute
Society for Disability Studies
Disabled Peoples' International (DPI)
Visitability
WeThe15

Parasports
Special Olympics
Paralympic Games
Deaflympics
Invictus Games


Culture
Disability in the arts
Disability art
Disability in the media

 DisabilityLists.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vte
Physical therapy (PT), also known as physiotherapy, is one of the allied health professions.[1][2][3][4] It is provided by physical therapists who promote, maintain, or restore health through physical examination, diagnosis, prognosis, patient education, physical intervention, rehabilitation, disease prevention, and health promotion. Physical therapists are known as physiotherapists in many countries.
In addition to clinical practice, other aspects of physical therapist practice include research, education, consultation, and health administration. Physical therapy is provided as a primary care treatment or alongside, or in conjunction with, other medical services. In some jurisdictions, such as the United Kingdom, physical therapists have the authority to prescribe medication.[5]

.mw-parser-output .toclimit-2 .toclevel-1 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-3 .toclevel-2 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-4 .toclevel-3 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-5 .toclevel-4 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-6 .toclevel-5 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-7 .toclevel-6 ul{display:none}Contents

1 Overview
2 History
3 Education

3.1 Canada
3.2 Scotland
3.3 United States


4 Employment

4.1 United States
4.2 United Kingdom


5 Specialty areas

5.1 Cardiovascular and pulmonary
5.2 Clinical electrophysiology
5.3 Geriatric
5.4 Wound management
5.5 Neurology
5.6 Orthopaedics
5.7 Pediatrics
5.8 Sports
5.9 Women's health
5.10 Oncology
5.11 Intensive care unit


6 Physical therapist–patient collaborative relationship
7 Effectiveness
8 Telehealth
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Overview
Physical therapy addresses the illnesses or injuries that limit a person's abilities to move and perform functional activities in their daily lives.[6] PTs use an individual's history and physical examination to arrive at a diagnosis and establish a management plan and, when necessary, incorporate the results of laboratory and imaging studies like X-rays, CT-scan, or MRI findings. Electrodiagnostic testing (e.g., electromyograms and nerve conduction velocity testing) may also be used.[7] PT management commonly includes prescription of or assistance with specific exercises, manual therapy, and manipulation, mechanical devices such as traction, education, electrophysical modalities which include heat, cold, electricity, sound waves, radiation, assistive devices, prostheses, orthoses, and other interventions. In addition, PTs work with individuals to prevent the loss of mobility before it occurs by developing fitness and wellness-oriented programs for healthier and more active lifestyles, providing services to individuals and populations to develop, maintain and restore maximum movement and functional ability throughout the lifespan. This includes providing treatment in circumstances where movement and function are threatened by aging, injury, disease, or environmental factors. Functional movement is central to what it means to be healthy. Physical therapy is a professional career which has many specialties including musculoskeletal, orthopedics, cardiopulmonary, neurology, endocrinology, sports medicine, geriatrics, pediatrics, women's health, wound care and electromyography. Neurological rehabilitation is, in particular, a rapidly emerging field. PTs practice in many settings, such as private-owned physical therapy clinics, outpatient clinics or offices, health and wellness clinics, rehabilitation hospitals facilities, skilled nursing facilities, extended care facilities, private homes, education, and research centers, schools, hospices, industrial and these workplaces or other occupational environments, fitness centers and sports training facilities.[8]
Physical therapists also practice in the non-patient care roles such as health policy,[9][10] health insurance, health care administration and as health care executives. Physical therapists are involved in the medical-legal field serving as experts, performing peer review and independent medical examinations.
Education varies greatly by country. The span of education ranges from some countries having little formal education to others having doctoral degrees and post-doctoral residencies and fellowships.

History
The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate.  (May 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
  Exercise to shoulder and elbow to increase motion following fracture and dislocation of humerus is being given by an Army therapist to a soldier patient.
Physicians like Hippocrates and later Galen are believed to have been the first practitioners of physical therapy, advocating massage, manual therapy techniques and hydrotherapy to treat people in 460 BC.[11] After the development of orthopedics in the eighteenth century, machines like the Gymnasticon were developed to treat gout and similar diseases by systematic exercise of the joints, similar to later developments in physical therapy.[12]
The earliest documented origins of actual physical therapy as a professional group date back to Per Henrik Ling, "Father of Swedish Gymnastics," who founded the Royal Central Institute of Gymnastics (RCIG) in 1813 for manipulation, and exercise. Up until 2014, the Swedish word for a physical therapist was suk gymnast = someone involved in gymnastics for those who are ill, but the title was then changed to fysioterapeut (physiotherapist), the word used in the other Scandinavian countries.[13] In 1887, PTs were given official registration by Sweden's National Board of Health and Welfare. Other countries soon followed. In 1894, four nurses in Great Britain formed the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy.[14] The School of Physiotherapy at the University of Otago in New Zealand in 1913,[15] and the United States 1914 Reed College in Portland, Oregon, which graduated "reconstruction aides."[16] Since the profession's inception, spinal manipulative therapy has been a component of the physical therapist practice.[17]
Modern physical therapy was established towards the end of the 19th century due to events that affected on a global scale, which called for rapid advances in physical therapy. Soon following American orthopedic surgeons began treating children with disabilities and began employing women trained in physical education, and remedial exercise. These treatments were applied and promoted further during the Polio outbreak of 1916. During the First World War, women were recruited to work with and restore physical function to injured soldiers, and the field of physical therapy was institutionalized. In 1918 the term "Reconstruction Aide" was used to refer to individuals practicing physical therapy. The first school of physical therapy was established at Walter Reed Army Hospital in Washington, D.C., following the outbreak of World War I.[18] Research catalyzed the physical therapy movement. The first physical therapy research was published in the United States in March 1921 in "The PT Review." In the same year, Mary McMillan organized the American Women's Physical Therapeutic Association (now called the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA). In 1924, the Georgia Warm Springs Foundation promoted the field by touting physical therapy as a treatment for polio.[19]
Treatment through the 1940s primarily consisted of exercise, massage, and traction. Manipulative procedures to the spine and extremity joints began to be practiced, especially in the British Commonwealth countries, in the early 1950s.[20][21] Around the time that polio vaccines were developed, physical therapists became a normal occurrence in hospitals throughout North America and Europe.[22] In the late 1950s, physical therapists started to move beyond hospital-based practice to outpatient orthopedic clinics, public schools, colleges/universities health-centres, geriatric settings (skilled nursing facilities), rehabilitation centers and medical centers. Specialization in physical therapy in the U.S. occurred in 1974, with the Orthopaedic Section of the APTA being formed for those physical therapists specializing in orthopedics. In the same year, the International Federation of Orthopaedic Manipulative Physical Therapists was formed,[23] which has ever since played an important role in advancing manual therapy worldwide.

Education
Main article: Physical therapy education
Educational criteria for physical therapy providers vary from state to state and from country to country, and among various levels of professional responsibility. Most U.S. states have physical therapy practice acts that recognize both physical therapists (PT) and physical therapist assistants (PTA) and some jurisdictions also recognize physical therapy technicians (PT Techs) or aides. Most countries have licensing bodies that require physical therapists to be a member of before they can start practicing as independent professionals.

Canada
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Physical therapy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR  (July 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Canadian physiotherapy programs are offered at 15 universities, often through the university's respective college of medicine. Each of Canada's physical therapy schools has transitioned from 3-year Bachelor of Science in Physical Therapy (BScPT) programs that required 2 years of prerequisite university courses (5-year bachelor's degree) to 2-year Master's of Physical Therapy (MPT) programs that require prerequisite bachelor's degrees. The last Canadian university to follow suit was the University of Manitoba which transitioned to the MPT program in 2012, making the MPT credential the new entry to practice standard across Canada. Existing practitioners with BScPT credentials are not required to upgrade their qualifications.
In the province of Quebec, prospective physiotherapists are required to have completed a college diploma in either health sciences, which lasts on average two years, or physical rehabilitation technology, which lasts at least three years, to apply to a physiotherapy program or program in university. Following admission, physical therapy students work on a bachelor of science with a major in physical therapy and rehabilitation. The B.Sc. usually requires three years to complete. Students must then enter graduate school to complete a master's degree in physical therapy, which normally requires one and a half to two years of study. Graduates who obtain their M.Sc. must successfully pass the membership examination to become members of the Ordre Professionnel de la physiothérapie du Québec (PPQ). Physiotherapists can pursue their education in such fields as rehabilitation sciences, sports medicine, kinesiology, and physiology.
In the province of Quebec, physical rehabilitation therapists are health care professionals who are required to complete a three-year college diploma program in physical rehabilitation therapy and be members of the Ordre Professionnel de la physiothérapie du Québec (OPPQ) to practice legally in the country according to specialist De Van Gerard.
Most physical rehabilitation therapists complete their college diploma at Collège Montmorency, Dawson College, or Cégep Marie-Victorin, all situated in and around the Montreal area.
After completing their technical college diploma, graduates have the opportunity to pursue their studies at the university level to perhaps obtain a bachelor's degree in physiotherapy, kinesiology, exercise science, or occupational therapy. The Université de Montréal, the Université Laval and the Université de Sherbrooke are among the Québécois universities that admit physical rehabilitation therapists in their programs of study related to health sciences and rehabilitation to credit courses that were completed in college.
To date, there are no bridging programs available to facilitate upgrading from the BScPT to the MPT credential. However, research Master's of Science (MSc) and Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) programs are available at every university. Aside from academic research, practitioners can upgrade their skills and qualifications through continuing education courses and curriculums. Continuing education is a requirement of the provincial regulatory bodies.
The Canadian Alliance of Physiotherapy Regulators (CAPR) offers eligible program graduates to apply for the national Physiotherapy Competency Examination (PCE). Passing the PCE is one of the requirements in most provinces and territories to work as a licensed physiotherapist in Canada.[24] CAPR has members which are physiotherapy regulatory organizations recognized in their respective provinces and territories:

Government of Yukon, Consumer Services
College of Physical Therapists of British Columbia
Physiotherapy Alberta College + Association
Saskatchewan College of Physical Therapists
College of Physiotherapists of Manitoba
College of Physiotherapists of Ontario
Ordre professionnel de la physiothérapie du Québec
College of Physiotherapists of New Brunswick/Collège des physiothérapeutes du Nouveau-Brunswick
Nova Scotia College of Physiotherapists
Prince Edward Island College of Physiotherapists
Newfoundland & Labrador College of Physiotherapists[25]
The Canadian Physiotherapy Association offers a curriculum of continuing education courses in orthopedics and manual therapy. The program consists of 5 levels (7 courses) of training with ongoing mentorship and evaluation at each level. The orthopedic curriculum and examinations take a minimum of 4 years to complete. However, upon completion of level 2, physiotherapists can apply to a unique 1-year course-based Master's program in advanced orthopedics and manipulation at the University of Western Ontario to complete their training. This program accepts only 16 physiotherapists annually since 2007. Successful completion of either of these education streams and their respective examinations allows physiotherapists the opportunity to apply to the Canadian Academy of Manipulative Physiotherapy (CAMPT) for fellowship. Fellows of the Canadian Academy of manipulative Physiotherapists (FCAMPT) are considered leaders in the field, having extensive post-graduate education in orthopedics and manual therapy. FCAMPT is an internationally recognized credential, as CAMPT is a member of the International Federation of Manipulative Physiotherapists (IFOMPT), a branch of the World Confederation of Physical Therapy (WCPT) and the World Health Organization (WHO).

Scotland
Physiotherapy degrees are offered at three universities: Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen, Glasgow Caledonian University in Glasgow, and Queen Margaret University in Edinburgh. Students can qualify as physiotherapists by completing a four-year Bachelor of Science degree or a two-year master's degree (if they already have an undergraduate degree in a related field).
To use the title 'Physiotherapist', a student must register with the Health and Care Professions Council, a UK-wide regulatory body, on qualifying. Many physiotherapists are also members of the Chartered Society of Physiotherapists (CSP), which provides insurance and professional support.

United States
The primary physical therapy practitioner is the Physical Therapist (PT) who is trained and licensed to examine, evaluate, diagnose and treat impairment, functional limitations, and disabilities in patients or clients. Physical therapist education curricula in the United States culminate in a Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT) degree,[26] with some practicing PTs holding a Master of Physical Therapy degree, and some with a Bachelor's degree. The Master of Physical Therapy and Master of Science in Physical Therapy degrees are no longer offered, and the entry-level degree is the Doctor of Physical Therapy degree, which typically takes 3 years after completing a bachelor's degree.[27] PTs who hold a Masters or bachelors in PT are encouraged to get their DPT because APTA's goal is for all PT's to be on a doctoral level.[28] WCPT recommends physical therapist entry-level educational programs be based on university or university-level studies, of a minimum of four years, independently validated and accredited.[29] Curricula in the United States are accredited by the Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education (CAPTE). According to CAPTE, as of 2017 there are 31,380 students currently enrolled in 227 accredited PT programs in the United States while 12,945 PTA students are currently enrolled in 331 PTA programs in the United States.[30] (Updated CAPTE statistics list that for 2015–2016, there were 30,419 students enrolled in 233 accredited PT programs in the United States.)[31]
The physical therapist professional curriculum includes content in the clinical sciences (e.g., content about the cardiovascular, pulmonary, endocrine, metabolic, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, integumentary, musculoskeletal, and neuromuscular systems and the medical and surgical conditions frequently seen by physical therapists). Current training is specifically aimed to enable physical therapists to appropriately recognize and refer non-musculoskeletal diagnoses that may present similarly to those caused by systems not appropriate for physical therapy intervention, which has resulted in direct access to physical therapists in many states.[32]
Post-doctoral residency and fellowship education prevalence is increasing steadily with 219 residency, and 42 fellowship programs accredited in 2016. Residencies are aimed to train physical therapists in a specialty such as acute care, cardiovascular & pulmonary, clinical electrophysiology, faculty, geriatrics, neurology, orthopaedics, pediatrics, sports, women's health, and wound care, whereas fellowships train specialists in a subspecialty (e.g. critical care, hand therapy, and division 1 sports), similar to the medical model. Residency programs offer eligibility to sit for the specialist certification in their respective area of practice. For example, completion of an orthopedic physical therapy residency, allows its graduates to apply and sit for the clinical specialist examination in orthopedics, achieving the OCS designation upon passing the examination.[33] Board certification of physical therapy specialists is aimed to recognize individuals with advanced clinical knowledge and skill training in their respective area of practice, and exemplifies the trend toward greater education to optimally treat individuals with movement dysfunction.[34]
Physical therapist assistants may deliver treatment and physical interventions for patients and clients under a care plan established by and under the supervision of a physical therapist. Physical therapist assistants in the United States are currently trained under associate of applied sciences curricula specific to the profession, as outlined and accredited by CAPTE. As of August 2011, there were 276 accredited two-year (Associate degree) programs for physical therapist assistants In the United States of America.[35] According to CAPTE, as of 2012 there are 10,598 students currently enrolled in 280 accredited PTA programs in the United States.[30] Updated CAPTE statistics list that for 2015–2016, there are 12,726 students enrolled in 340 accredited PTA programs in the United States.[31]
Curricula for the physical therapist assistant associate degree include:[36]

Anatomy & physiology
Exercise physiology
Human biology
Physics
Biomechanics
Kinesiology
Neuroscience
Clinical pathology
Behavioral sciences
Communication
Ethics
Research
Other coursework as required by individual programs.
Job duties and education requirements for Physical Therapy Technicians or Aides may vary depending on the employer, but education requirements range from a high school diploma or equivalent to completion of a 2-year degree program.[37] O-Net reports that 64% of PT Aides/Techs have a high school diploma or equivalent, 21% have completed some college but do not hold a degree, and 10% hold an associate degree.[38]
Some jurisdictions allow physical therapists to employ technicians or aides or therapy assistants to perform designated routine tasks related to physical therapy under the direct supervision of a physical therapist. Some jurisdictions require physical therapy technicians or aides to be certified, and education and certification requirements vary among jurisdictions.

Employment
Physical therapy-related jobs in North America have shown rapid growth in recent years, but employment rates and average wages may vary significantly between different countries, states, provinces, or regions. A study from 2013 states that 56.4% of physical therapists were globally satisfied with their jobs.[39] Salary, interest in work, and fulfillment in a job are important predictors of job satisfaction.[39] In a Polish study, job burnout among the physical therapists was manifested by increased emotional exhaustion and decreased sense of personal achievement.[40] Emotional exhaustion is significantly higher among physical therapists working with adults and employed in hospitals. Other factors that increased burnout include working in a hospital setting and having seniority from 15 to 19 years.[40]

United States
According to the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics, there were approximately 210,900 physical therapists employed in the United States in 2014, earning an average of $84,020 annually in 2015, or $40.40 per hour, with 34% growth in employment projected by the year 2024.[41] The Bureau of Labor Statistics also reports that there were approximately 128,700 Physical Therapist Assistants and Aides employed in the United States in 2014, earning an average $42,980 annually, or $20.66 per hour, with 40% growth in employment projected by the year 2024. To meet their needs, many healthcare and physical therapy facilities hire "travel physical therapists", who work temporary assignments between 8 and 26 weeks for much higher wages; about $113,500 a year.[42] Bureau of Labor Statistics data on PTAs and Techs can be difficult to decipher, due to their tendency to report data on these job fields collectively rather than separately. O-Net reports that in 2015, PTAs in the United States earned a median wage of $55,170 annually or $26.52 hourly and that Aides/Techs earned a median wage of $25,120 annually or $12.08 hourly in 2015.[38][43] The American Physical Therapy Association reports vacancy rates for physical therapists as 11.2% in outpatient private practice, 10% in acute care settings, and 12.1% in skilled nursing facilities. The APTA also reports turnover rates for physical therapists as 10.7% in outpatient private practice, 11.9% in acute care settings, 27.6% in skilled nursing facilities.[44][45][46]
Definitions and licensing requirements in the United States vary among jurisdictions, as each state has enacted its own physical therapy practice act defining the profession within its jurisdiction, but the Federation of State Boards of Physical Therapy [47] has also drafted a model definition to limit this variation. The Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education [48] (CAPTE) is responsible for accrediting physical therapy education curricula throughout the United States of America.

United Kingdom
The title of Physiotherapist is a protected professional title in the United Kingdom. Anyone using this title must be registered with the Health & Care Professions Council[49] (HCPC). Physiotherapists must complete the necessary qualifications, usually an undergraduate physiotherapy degree (at university or as an intern), a master rehabilitation degree, or a doctoral degree in physiotherapy.[50]  This is typically followed by supervised professional experience lasting two to three years. All professionals on the HCPC register must comply with continuing professional development (CPD) and can be audited for this evidence at intervals.[51]

Specialty areas
The body of knowledge of physical therapy is large, and therefore physical therapists may specialize in a specific clinical area. While there are many different types of physical therapy, the American Board of Physical Therapy Specialties lists ten current specialist certifications. Most Physical Therapists practicing in a specialty will have undergone further training, such as an accredited residency program, although individuals are currently able to sit for their specialist examination after 2,000 hours of focused practice in their respective specialty population, in addition to requirements set by each respective specialty board.

Cardiovascular and pulmonary
Cardiovascular and pulmonary rehabilitation respiratory practitioners and physical therapists offer therapy for a wide variety of cardiopulmonary disorders or pre and post cardiac or pulmonary surgery. An example of cardiac surgery is coronary bypass surgery. The primary goals of this specialty include increasing endurance and functional independence. Manual therapy is used in this field to assist in clearing lung secretions experienced with cystic fibrosis. Pulmonary disorders, heart attacks, post coronary bypass surgery, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and pulmonary fibrosis, treatments can benefit[citation needed] from cardiovascular and pulmonary specialized physical therapists.[52][verification needed]

Clinical electrophysiology
This specialty area includes electrotherapy/physical agents, electrophysiological evaluation (EMG/NCV), physical agents, and wound management.

Geriatric
Geriatric physical therapy covers a wide area of issues concerning people as they go through normal adult aging but is usually focused on the older adult. There are many conditions that affect many people as they grow older and include but are not limited to the following: arthritis, osteoporosis, cancer, Alzheimer's disease, hip and joint replacement, balance disorders, incontinence, etc. Geriatric physical therapists specialize in providing therapy for such conditions in older adults.
Physical rehabilitation can prevent deterioration in health and activities of daily living among care home residents. The current evidence suggests benefits to physical health from participating in different types of physical rehabilitation to improve daily living, strength, flexibility, balance, mood, memory, exercise tolerance, fear of falling, injuries, and death.[53] It may be both safe and effective in improving physical and possibly mental state, while reducing disability with few adverse events.[53]
The current body of evidence suggests that physical rehabilitation may be effective for long-term care residents in reducing disability with few adverse events.[53] However, there is insufficient to conclude whether the beneficial effects are sustainable and cost-effective.[53] The findings are based on moderate quality evidence.

Wound management
Wound management physical therapy includes the treatment of conditions involving the skin and all its related organs. Common conditions managed include wounds and burns. Physical therapists may utilize surgical instruments, wound irrigations, dressings, and topical agents to remove the damaged or contaminated tissue and promote tissue healing.[54] Other commonly used interventions include exercise, edema control, splinting, and compression garments. The work done by physical therapists in the integumentary specialty does work similar to what would be done by medical doctors or nurses in the emergency room or triage.

Neurology
Neurological physical therapy is a field focused on working with individuals who have a neurological disorder or disease. These can include stroke, chronic back pain, Alzheimer's disease, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), ALS, brain injury, cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, facial palsy and spinal cord injury. Common impairments associated with neurologic conditions include impairments of vision, balance, ambulation, activities of daily living, movement, muscle strength and loss of functional independence.[52] The techniques involve in neurological physical therapy are wide-ranging and often require specialized training.
Neurological physiotherapy is also called neurophysiotherapy or neurological rehabilitation. It is recommended for neurophysiotherapists to collaborate with psychologists when providing physical treatment of movement disorders.[55] This is especially important because combining physical therapy and psychotherapy can improve neurological status of the patients.

Orthopaedics
  Treatment by orthopedic physical therapists
Orthopedic physical therapists diagnose, manage, and treat disorders and injuries of the musculoskeletal system including rehabilitation after orthopedic surgery. acute trauma such as sprains, strains, injuries of insidious onset such as tendinopathy, bursitis, and deformities like scoliosis. This specialty of physical therapy is most often found in the outpatient clinical setting. Orthopedic therapists are trained in the treatment of post-operative orthopedic procedures, fractures, acute sports injuries, arthritis, sprains, strains, back and neck pain, spinal conditions, and amputations.
Joint and spine mobilization/manipulation, dry needling (similar to acupuncture), therapeutic exercise, neuromuscular techniques, muscle reeducation, hot/cold packs, and electrical muscle stimulation (e.g., cryotherapy, iontophoresis, electrotherapy) are modalities employed to expedite recovery in the orthopedic setting.[56][verification needed] Additionally, an emerging adjunct to diagnosis and treatment is the use of sonography for diagnosis and to guide treatments such as muscle retraining.[57][58][59] Those who have suffered injury or disease affecting the muscles, bones, ligaments, or tendons will benefit from assessment by a physical therapist specialized in orthopedics.

Pediatrics
Pediatric physical therapy assists in the early detection of health problems and uses a variety of modalities to provide physical therapy for disorders in the pediatric population. These therapists are specialized in the diagnosis, treatment, and management of infants, children, and adolescents with a variety of congenital, developmental, neuromuscular, skeletal, or acquired disorders/diseases. Treatments focus mainly on improving gross and fine motor skills, balance and coordination, strength and endurance as well as cognitive and sensory processing/integration.

Sports
Physical therapists are closely involved in the care and wellbeing of athletes including recreational, semi-professional (paid), and professional (full-time employment) participants. This area of practice encompasses athletic injury management under 5 main categories: 

acute care – assessment and diagnosis of an initial injury;
treatment – application of specialist advice and techniques to encourage healing;
rehabilitation – progressive management for full return to sport;
prevention – identification and address of deficiencies known to directly result in, or act as precursors to injury, such as movement assessment
education – sharing of specialist knowledge to individual athletes, teams, or clubs to assist in prevention or management of injury
Physical therapists who work for professional sports teams often have a specialized sports certification issued through their national registering organization. Most Physical therapists who practice in a sporting environment are also active in collaborative sports medicine programs too (See also: athletic trainers).

Women's health
Women's health or pelvic floor physical therapy mostly addresses women's issues related to the female reproductive system, child birth, and post-partum. These conditions include lymphedema, osteoporosis, pelvic pain, prenatal and post-partum periods, and urinary incontinence. It also addresses incontinence, pelvic pain, and other disorders associated with pelvic floor dysfunction.[60] Manual physical therapy has been demonstrated in multiple studies to increase rates of conception in women with infertility.[61][62][63][64]

Oncology
Physical therapy in the field of oncology and palliative care is a continuously evolving and developing specialty, both in malignant and non-malignant diseases. Physical therapy for both groups of patients is now recognized as an essential part of the clinical pathway, as early diagnoses and new treatments are enabling patients to live longer. it is generally accepted that patients should have access to an appropriate level of rehabilitation, so that they can function at a minimum level of dependency and optimize their quality of life, regardless of their life expectancy.

Intensive care unit
Exercise rehabilitation following intensive care unit discharge for recovery from critical illness
Following intensive care unit discharge for recovery from critical illness, the overall effect of exercise rehabilitation is currently uncertain.[65] Further research in this area is needed as current body of evidence is very low quality.  

Physical therapist–patient collaborative relationship
A systematic review that included patients with brain injury, musculoskeletal conditions, cardiac conditions, or multiple pathologies found that the alliance between patient and therapist positively correlates with treatment outcome. Outcomes include the ability to perform activities of daily living, manage pain, complete specific physical function tasks, depression, global assessment of physical health, treatment adherence, and treatment satisfaction.[66]
Studies have explored four themes that may influence patient-therapist interactions: interpersonal and communication skills, practical skills, individualized patient-centered care, and organizational and environmental factors.[67] Physical therapists need to be able to effectively communicate with their patients on a variety of levels. Patients have varying levels of health literacy so physical therapists need to take that into account when discussing the patient's ailments as well as planned treatment. Research has shown that using communication tools tailored to the patient's health literacy leads to improved engagement with their practitioner and their clinical care. In addition, patients reported that shared decision-making will yield a positive relationship.[68] Practical skills such as the ability to educate patients about their conditions, and professional expertise are perceived as valuable factors inpatient care. Patients value the ability of a clinician to provide clear and simple explanations about their problems. Furthermore, patients value when physical therapists possess excellent technical skills that improve the patient effectively.[67]
Environmental factors such as the location, equipment used, and parking are less important to the patient than the physical therapy clinical encounter itself.[69]
Based on the current understanding, the most important factors that contribute to the patient-therapist interactions include that the physical therapist: spends an adequate amount of time with the patient, possesses strong listening and communication skills, treats the patient with respect, provides clear explanations of the treatment, and allows the patient to be involved in the treatment decisions.[69]

Effectiveness
Physical therapy has been found to be effective for improving outcomes, both in terms of pain and function, in multiple musculoskeletal conditions. A 2012 systematic review found evidence to support the use of spinal manipulation by physical therapists as a safe option to improve outcomes for lower back pain.[70] According to randomized control trials, a combination of manual therapy and supervised exercise therapy by physiotherapists give functional benefits for patients with osteoarthritis of the knee, and may delay or even prevent the need for surgery.[71] Another randomized controlled study has shown that surgical decompression treatment and physiotherapy are on par for lumbar spinal stenosis in improving symptoms and function.[72] Several studies have suggested that physical therapy, particularly manual therapy techniques focused on the neck and the median nerve, combined with stretching exercises, may be equivalent or even preferable to surgery for Carpal Tunnel Syndrome.[73][74] A 2015 systematic review suggested that while spine manipulation and therapeutic massage are effective interventions for neck pain, electroacupuncture, strain-counterstrain, relaxation massage, heat therapy, and ultrasound therapy are not as effective, and thus not recommended.[75]
Studies also show physical therapy is effective for patients with other conditions. A 2012 systematic review about the effectiveness of physiotherapy treatment in asthma patients concluded that physiotherapy treatment may improve quality of life, promote cardiopulmonary fitness and inspiratory pressure, as well as reduce symptoms and medication use.[76] Physical therapy is sometimes provided to patients in the ICU, as early mobilization can help reduce ICU and hospital length of stay and improve long-term functional ability.[77] A 2013 systematic review showed that early progressive mobilization for adult, intubated ICU patients on mechanical ventilation is safe and effective.[78]
Results from a 2019 systematic review suggest that psychologically informed physical therapy (PIPT), where a physical therapist treats patients while other members of a multidisciplinary care team help in preoperative planning for patient management of pain and quality of life, helps improve patient outcomes. This is especially present when utilized before and after spine, hip, or knee surgery.[79]

Telehealth
Telehealth (or telerehabilitation) is a developing form of physical therapy in response to the increasing demand for physical therapy treatment.[80] Telehealth is online communication between the clinician and patient, either live or in pre-recorded sessions with mixed reviews when compared to usual, in-person care.[81] The benefits of telehealth include improved accessibility in remote areas, cost efficiency, and improved convenience for the bedridden and home-restricted, physically disabled.[81] Some considerations for telehealth include: limited evidence to prove effectiveness and compliance more than in-person therapy, licensing and payment policy issues, and compromised privacy.[82] Studies are controversial as to the effectiveness of telehealth in patients with more serious conditions, such as stroke, multiple sclerosis, and lower back pain.[83]
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the need for telehealth came to the fore as patients were less able to safely attend in-person, particularly if the were elderly or had chronic diseases. Telehealth was considered to be a proactive step to prevent decline in individuals that could not attend classes. Physical decline in at risk groups is difficult to address or undo later. The platform licensing or development are found to be the most substantial cost in telehealth. Telehealth does not remove the need for the physical therapist as they still need to oversee the program.[84][85][86]

See also
.mw-parser-output .div-col{margin-top:0.3em;column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .div-col-small{font-size:90%}.mw-parser-output .div-col-rules{column-rule:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .div-col dl,.mw-parser-output .div-col ol,.mw-parser-output .div-col ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .div-col li,.mw-parser-output .div-col dd{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
American Board of Physical Therapy Specialties
American Physical Therapy Association
Basic body-awareness methodology
Chiropractic
Doctor (title)
Doctor of Physical Therapy
Exercise physiology
Exercise prescription
Frenkel exercises
Joint manipulation
List of exercise prescription software
Neurophysiotherapy
Occupational therapy
Physical medicine and rehabilitation
Postural Restoration
Procovery
Sports medicine
Therapy
World Confederation for Physical Therapy

.mw-parser-output .portal-bar{font-size:88%;font-weight:bold;display:flex;justify-content:center;align-items:baseline}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-bordered{padding:0 2em;background-color:#fdfdfd;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;clear:both;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-unbordered{padding:0 1.7em;margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-header{margin:0 1em 0 0.5em;padding:0.2em 0;flex:0 0 auto;min-height:24px;line-height:22px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;align-items:baseline;flex:0 1 auto;padding:0.15em 0;column-gap:1em}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-item{display:flex;align-items:baseline;margin:0.15em 0;min-height:24px;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-logo{width:22px;line-height:22px;margin:0 0.2em;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-link{margin:0 0.2em;text-align:left}@media screen and (max-width:768px){.mw-parser-output .portal-bar{font-size:88%;font-weight:bold;display:flex;flex-flow:column wrap}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-header{text-align:center;flex:0;padding-left:0.5em;margin:0 auto}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;align-items:baseline;flex:0;margin:0 auto;column-gap:1em;border-top:1px solid #a2a9b1}}.mw-parser-output .navbox+link+.portal-bar-bordered{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox+style+.portal-bar-bordered{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}Portals:MedicineEducation
References
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}"What is Allied Health?". Association of Schools of Allied Health Professionals. Retrieved 10 March 2020.

^ "Allied Health (Paramedical) Services and Education" (PDF).

^ "Allied Health Professionals".

^ "What Does "Allied Health" Mean?".

^ "Physiotherapists given prescribing powers". BBC. 20 August 2013.

^ "Occupational Outlook Handbook - Physical Therapists". bls.gov. Retrieved 30 August 2021.

^ American Physical Therapy Association Section on Clinical Electrophysiology and Wound Management. "Curriculum Content Guidelines for Electrophysiologic Evaluation" (PDF). Educational Guidelines. American Physical Therapy Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2011. Retrieved 29 May 2008.

^ American Physical Therapy Association (17 January 2008). "APTA Background Sheet 2008". American Physical Therapy Association. Archived from the original on 29 May 2008. Retrieved 29 May 2008.

^ "Health policy implications for patient education in physical therapy". Archived from the original on 24 March 2011.

^ Initiatives in Rehabilitation Research, "Physical Therapy | Oxford Academic". Archived from the original on 23 February 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2010.

^ Wharton M. A. Health Care Systems I, Slippery Rock University. 1991.[page needed]

^ Bakewell S (October 1997). "Medical gymnastics and the Cyriax collection". Medical History. 41 (4): 487–95. doi:10.1017/s0025727300063067. PMC 1043941. PMID 9536620.

^ "Fysioterapeut – nytt name på yet suk gymnast sedan 2014".

^ Chartered Society of Physiotherapy. "History of the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy". Chartered Society of Physiotherapy. Retrieved 29 May 2008.

^ Knox B (29 January 2007). "History of the School of Physiotherapy". School of Physiotherapy Centre for Physiotherapy Research. University of Otago. Archived from the original on 24 December 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2008.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ Reed College. "Mission and History". About Reed. Reed College. Retrieved 29 May 2008.

^ Bialosky JE, Simon CB, Bishop MD, George SZ (October 2012). "Basis for spinal manipulative therapy: a physical therapist perspective". Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology. 22 (5): 643–7. doi:10.1016/j.jelekin.2011.11.014. PMC 3461123. PMID 22197083.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ "Missouri Women in the Health Sciences – Health Professions – Development of the Field of Physical Therapy".

^ "History". About Us. Roosevelt Warm Springs Institute. Retrieved 29 May 2008.

^ McKenzie RA (1998). The Cervical and Thoracic Spine: Mechanical Diagnosis and Therapy. New Zealand: Spinal Publications Ltd. pp. 16–20. ISBN 978-0-9597746-7-2.

^ McKenzie R (2002). "Patient Heal Thyself". Worldwide Spine & Rehabilitation. 2 (1): 16–20.

^ af Klinteberg M (1992). "The history and present scope of physical therapy". International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care. 8 (1): 4–9. doi:10.1017/s0266462300007856. PMID 1601592.

^ Basson A (2010). "History: Abridged version of IFOMPT History". International Federation of Orthopaedic Manipulative Physical Therapists (IFOMPT). Archived from the original on 13 July 2011. Retrieved 9 January 2011.

^ "Career Centre – Canadian Physiotherapy Association".

^ "about_us.php". Archived from the original on 21 September 2017.

^ "2010–2011 Fact Sheet: Physical Therapist Education Programs" (PDF). American Physical Therapy Association. 16 August 2011. Retrieved 28 February 2012.

^ Clark M. "Physical Therapist (PT) Education Overview". www.apta.org. Retrieved 15 February 2016.

^ Collor C (12 July 2012). "Master's of Physical Therapy (MPT) vs. Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT) Degree". Exercise Science Guide. Retrieved 15 February 2016.

^ "Discovering Physical Therapy". American Physical Therapy Association. Archived from the original on 31 October 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2008.

^ Jump up to: a b "Quick Facts". Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education. 2012. Retrieved 23 May 2012.

^ Jump up to: a b "Quick Facts". Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education. 2016. Retrieved 13 November 2016.

^ "Federation of State Boards of Physical Therapy Jurisdiction Licensure Reference Guide Topic: Direct Access Language" (PDF). Retrieved 7 August 2016.

^ "Benefits of Attending a Physical Therapy Residency Programs". American Board of Physical Therapy Residency and Fellowship Education. Retrieved 7 August 2016.

^ "ABPTS homepage". American Board of Physical Therapy Specialties. Archived from the original on 23 April 2011. Retrieved 7 August 2016.

^ "2010–2011 Fact Sheet: Physical Therapist Assistant Education Programs" (PDF). American Physical Therapy Association. 25 August 2011. Retrieved 28 February 2012.

^ "Physical Therapist Assistant (PTA) Education Overview". American Physical Therapy Association. 3 March 2011. Retrieved 28 February 2012.

^ "Physical Therapy Tech Career Info and Education Requirements". Education-Portal.com. 2012. Retrieved 23 May 2012.

^ Jump up to: a b "Summary Report for 31-2022.00 – Physical Therapist Aides". O-Net Online. 2016–2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017.

^ Jump up to: a b Gupta N (2013). "Predictors of job satisfaction among physiotherapy professionals". Indian Journal of Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy. 7 (3): 146–151. doi:10.5958/j.0973-5674.7.3.082. ProQuest 1464664057.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ Jump up to: a b Pustułka-Piwnik U, Ryn ZJ, Krzywoszański Ł, Stożek J (17 November 2014). "Burnout syndrome in physical therapists - demographic and organizational factors". Medycyna Pracy. 65 (4): 453–62. doi:10.13075/mp.5893.00038. PMID 25643484.

^ "Physical Therapists". Occupational Outlook Handbook. U.S. Dept. of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics. 17 December 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2017.

^ "Physical Therapist Assistants and Aides". Occupational Outlook Handbook. U.S. Dept. of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics. 17 December 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2017.

^ "Summary Report for 31-2021.00 – Physical Therapist Assistants". O-Net Online. 2016–17. Retrieved 4 April 2017.

^ "Physical Therapy Vacancy and Turnover Rates in Outpatient Private Practice". www.apta.org. 25 October 2010. Retrieved 4 April 2017.

^ "Physical Therapy Vacancy and Turnover Rates in Acute Care Hospitals". www.apta.org. 16 December 2010. Retrieved 4 April 2017.

^ "Physical Therapy Vacancy and Turnover Rates in Skilled Nursing Facilities". www.apta.org. 29 June 2011. Retrieved 4 April 2017.

^ "Model Practice Act | FSBPT".

^ "Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education".

^ "Getting on the Register |". www.hcpc-uk.org. Retrieved 11 April 2021.

^ "Routes into physiotherapy". The Chartered Society of Physiotherapy. Retrieved 11 April 2021.

^ "Continuing professional development (CPD) |". www.hcpc-uk.org. Retrieved 11 April 2021.

^ Jump up to: a b Inverarity L, Grossman K (28 November 2007). "Types of Physical Therapy". About.com. The New York Times Company. Retrieved 29 May 2008.

^ Jump up to: a b c d Crocker T, Forster A, Young J, Brown L, Ozer S, Smith J,  et al. (Cochrane Stroke Group) (February 2013). "Physical rehabilitation for older people in long-term care". The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (2): CD004294. doi:10.1002/14651858.cd004294.pub3. PMID 23450551.

^ Enoch S, Harding K (2003). "Wound Bed Preparation: The Science Behind the Removal of Barriers to Healing". Wounds. 15 (7).{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ Zečević I (July 2020). "Clinical practice guidelines based on evidence for cognitive-behavioural therapy in Parkinson's disease comorbidities: A literature review". Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy (Review). 27 (4): 504–514. doi:10.1002/cpp.2448. PMID 32196842. S2CID 214601157.

^ Cameron MH (2003). Physical agents in rehabilitation: from research to practice. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders. ISBN 978-0-7216-9378-1.

^ Bunce SM, Moore AP, Hough AD (May 2002). "M-mode ultrasound: a reliable measure of transversus abdominis thickness?". Clinical Biomechanics. 17 (4): 315–7. doi:10.1016/S0268-0033(02)00011-6. PMID 12034127.

^ Wallwork TL, Hides JA, Stanton WR (October 2007). "Intrarater and interrater reliability of assessment of lumbar multifidus muscle thickness using rehabilitative ultrasound imaging". The Journal of Orthopaedic and Sports Physical Therapy. 37 (10): 608–12. doi:10.2519/jospt.2007.2418. PMID 17970407.

^ Henry SM, Westervelt KC (June 2005). "The use of real-time ultrasound feedback in teaching abdominal hollowing exercises to healthy subjects". The Journal of Orthopaedic and Sports Physical Therapy. 35 (6): 338–45. doi:10.2519/jospt.2005.35.6.338. PMID 16001905.

^ "Bethel Pharmacy – Tulsa's Hormone, Weight Loss, & Health Experts".

^ Rice AD, Patterson K, Wakefield LB, Reed ED, Breder KP, Wurn BF,  et al. (February 2015). "Ten-year Retrospective Study on the Efficacy of a Manual Physical Therapy to Treat Female Infertility" (PDF). Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine. 21 (3): 32–40. PMID 25691329.

^ Kramp ME (October 2012). "Combined manual therapy techniques for the treatment of women with infertility: a case series". The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association. 112 (10): 680–4. PMID 23055467.

^ Wurn BF, Wurn LJ, King CR, Heuer MA, Roscow AS, Hornberger K, Scharf ES (February 2008). "Treating fallopian tube occlusion with a manual pelvic physical therapy". Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine. 14 (1): 18–23. PMID 18251317.

^ Wurn BF, Wurn LJ, King CR, Heuer MA, Roscow AS, Scharf ES, Shuster JJ (June 2004). "Treating female infertility and improving IVF pregnancy rates with a manual physical therapy technique". MedGenMed. 6 (2): 51. PMC 1395760. PMID 15266276.

^ Connolly B, Salisbury L, O'Neill B, Geneen L, Douiri A, Grocott MP,  et al. (June 2015). "Exercise rehabilitation following intensive care unit discharge for recovery from critical illness". The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (6): CD008632. doi:10.1002/14651858.cd008632.pub2. PMC 6517154. PMID 26098746.

^ Hall AM, Ferreira PH, Maher CG, Latimer J, Ferreira ML (August 2010). "The influence of the therapist-patient relationship on treatment outcome in physical rehabilitation: a systematic review". Physical Therapy. 90 (8): 1099–110. doi:10.2522/ptj.20090245. PMID 20576715.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ Jump up to: a b O'Keeffe M, Cullinane P, Hurley J, Leahy I, Bunzli S, O'Sullivan PB, O'Sullivan K (May 2016). "What Influences Patient-Therapist Interactions in Musculoskeletal Physical Therapy? Qualitative Systematic Review and Meta-Synthesis". Physical Therapy. 96 (5): 609–22. doi:10.2522/ptj.20150240. PMID 26427530.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ Jakimowicz S, Stirling C, Duddle M (January 2015). "An investigation of factors that impact patients' subjective experience of nurse-led clinics: a qualitative systematic review". Journal of Clinical Nursing. 24 (1–2): 19–33. doi:10.1111/jocn.12676. PMID 25236376.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ Jump up to: a b Beattie PF, Pinto MB, Nelson MK, Nelson R (June 2002). "Patient satisfaction with outpatient physical therapy: instrument validation". Physical Therapy. 82 (6): 557–65. doi:10.1093/ptj/82.6.557. PMID 12036397.

^ Kuczynski JJ, Schwieterman B, Columber K, Knupp D, Shaub L, Cook CE (December 2012). "Effectiveness of physical therapist administered spinal manipulation for the treatment of low back pain: a systematic review of the literature". International Journal of Sports Physical Therapy. 7 (6): 647–62. PMC 3537457. PMID 23316428.

^ Deyle GD, Henderson NE, Matekel RL, Ryder MG, Garber MB, Allison SC (February 2000). "Effectiveness of manual physical therapy and exercise in osteoarthritis of the knee. A randomized, controlled trial". Annals of Internal Medicine. 132 (3): 173–81. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-132-3-200002010-00002. PMID 10651597.

^ Wise J (April 2015). "Physical therapy is as effective as surgery for lumbar spinal stenosis, study finds". BMJ. 350: h1827. doi:10.1136/bmj.h1827. PMID 25852064. S2CID 206904981.

^ "Carpal Tunnel Syndrome: Physical Therapy or Surgery?". The Journal of Orthopaedic and Sports Physical Therapy. 47 (3): 162. March 2017. doi:10.2519/jospt.2017.0503. PMID 28245744.

^ Fernández-de-Las Peñas C, Ortega-Santiago R, de la Llave-Rincón AI, Martínez-Perez A, Fahandezh-Saddi Díaz H, Martínez-Martín J,  et al. (November 2015). "Manual Physical Therapy Versus Surgery for Carpal Tunnel Syndrome: A Randomized Parallel-Group Trial". The Journal of Pain. 16 (11): 1087–94. doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2015.07.012. PMID 26281946.

^ Wong JJ, Shearer HM, Mior S, Jacobs C, Côté P, Randhawa K,  et al. (December 2016). "Are manual therapies, passive physical modalities, or acupuncture effective for the management of patients with whiplash-associated disorders or neck pain and associated disorders? An update of the Bone and Joint Decade Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated Disorders by the OPTIMa collaboration". The Spine Journal. 16 (12): 1598–1630. doi:10.1016/j.spinee.2015.08.024. PMID 26707074.

^ Bruurs ML, van der Giessen LJ, Moed H (April 2013). "The effectiveness of physiotherapy in patients with asthma: a systematic review of the literature". Respiratory Medicine. 107 (4): 483–94. doi:10.1016/j.rmed.2012.12.017. PMID 23333065.

^ Paton M, Lane R, Hodgson CL (October 2018). "Early Mobilization in the Intensive Care Unit to Improve Long-Term Recovery". Critical Care Clinics. 34 (4): 557–571. doi:10.1016/j.ccc.2018.06.005. PMID 30223994. S2CID 52283563.

^ Stiller K (September 2013). "Physiotherapy in intensive care: an updated systematic review". Chest. 144 (3): 825–847. doi:10.1378/chest.12-2930. PMID 23722822.

^ Coronado RA, Patel AM, McKernan LC, Wegener ST, Archer KR (2019). "Preoperative and postoperative psychologically informed physical therapy: A systematic review of randomized trials among patients with degenerative spine, hip, and knee conditions". Journal of Applied Biobehavioral Research. 24 (1): e12159. doi:10.1111/jabr.12159. ISSN 1751-9861. S2CID 149936302.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ Gardner K. "Telehealth". www.apta.org. Retrieved 4 April 2017.

^ Jump up to: a b Laver KE, Adey-Wakeling Z, Crotty M, Lannin NA, George S, Sherrington C (January 2020). "Telerehabilitation services for stroke". The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 1: CD010255. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD010255.pub3. PMC 6992923. PMID 32002991.

^ Lee AC, Harada N (March 2012). "Telehealth as a means of health care delivery for physical therapist practice". Physical Therapy. 92 (3): 463–8. doi:10.2522/ptj.20110100. PMID 22135703.

^ Khan F, Amatya B, Kesselring J, Galea M (April 2015). "Telerehabilitation for persons with multiple sclerosis". The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (4): CD010508. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD010508.pub2. PMC 7211044. PMID 25854331.

^ Middleton A, Simpson KN, Bettger JP, Bowden MG (August 2020). "COVID-19 Pandemic and Beyond: Considerations and Costs of Telehealth Exercise Programs for Older Adults With Functional Impairments Living at Home-Lessons Learned From a Pilot Case Study". Physical Therapy. 100 (8): 1278–1288. doi:10.1093/ptj/pzaa089. PMC 7239185. PMID 32372072.

^ Quinn L, Macpherson C, Long K, Shah H (September 2020). "Promoting Physical Activity via Telehealth in People With Parkinson Disease: The Path Forward After the COVID-19 Pandemic?". Physical Therapy. 100 (10): 1730–1736. doi:10.1093/ptj/pzaa128. PMC 7454884. PMID 32734298.

^ Lai FH, Yan EW, Yu KK, Tsui WS, Chan DT, Yee BK (November 2020). "The Protective Impact of Telemedicine on Persons With Dementia and Their Caregivers During the COVID-19 Pandemic". The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 28 (11): 1175–1184. doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2020.07.019. PMC 7413846. PMID 32873496.


External links
.mw-parser-output .sister-box{border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0;background:#f9f9f9}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>div{padding:0.75em 0;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>div>b{display:block}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>ul{border-top:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.75em 0;width:217px;margin:0 auto}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>ul>li{min-height:31px}.mw-parser-output .sister-logo{display:inline-block;width:31px;line-height:31px;vertical-align:middle;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .sister-link{display:inline-block;margin-left:4px;width:182px;vertical-align:middle}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar{display:flex;justify-content:center;align-items:baseline;font-size:88%;background-color:#fdfdfd;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;clear:both;margin:1em 0 0;padding:0 2em}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-header{margin:0 1em 0 0.5em;padding:0.2em 0;flex:0 0 auto;min-height:24px;line-height:22px}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;flex:0 1 auto;align-items:baseline;padding:0.2em 0;column-gap:1em}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-item{display:flex;align-items:baseline;margin:0.15em 0;min-height:24px;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-logo{width:22px;line-height:22px;margin:0 0.2em;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-link{margin:0 0.2em;text-align:left}@media screen and (max-width:960px){.mw-parser-output .sister-bar{display:flex;flex-flow:column wrap;font-size:88%;background-color:#fdfdfd;clear:both;margin:1em auto 0;padding:0 2em}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-header{padding:0.2em 0;flex:0 1}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;flex:1;align-items:baseline;padding:0.2em 0;border-top:1px solid #a2a9b1}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-item{display:flex;align-items:baseline;flex:0 0 20em;min-width:20em;margin:0.15em 0;min-height:24px}}.mw-parser-output .navbox+link+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox+style+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+link+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+style+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+.navbox-styles+.portal-bar{margin-top:-1px}Physical therapyat Wikipedia's sister projectsDefinitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
Europe: Regulated professions database – Physiotherapist, European Commission
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vteExerciseTypesAerobic exercise
Aerobics
Cycling
Distance running
Endurance training
Hiking
Jogging
Swimming
Walking
Anaerobic exercise
High-intensity interval training
Sprinting
Strength training
Bodybuilding
Bodyweight exercise
Suspension training
Weight training
Other
Calisthenics
Circuit training
Cross-training
Interval training
Muscle hypertrophy
Outdoor fitness
Physical therapy
Stretching
Yoga
Related
History
Exercise equipment
Exercise physiology
Neurobiological effects
Exercise trends
Fitness culture
Outline of exercise
Physical culture
Physical fitness
 Category
vtePhysical therapy and rehabilitationPhysical rehabilitation disciplines
Physical therapy
Occupational therapy
Speech and language pathology
Education
Doctor of Physical Therapy
Master of Physical Therapy
Physical therapy education
Intervention techniques
Aquatic therapy
Cryotherapy
Debridement
Diathermy
Eccentric training
Electrotherapy
Fluidotherapy
Gait training
Heat therapy (Thermotherapy)
Hydrotherapy
Iontophoresis
Joint manipulation
Joint mobilization
Soft tissue therapy
Splint 
Strength training
Traction 
Therapeutic ultrasound
Professional associationsand regulatory agencies
American Board of Physical Therapy Specialties
American Occupational Therapy Association
American Physical Therapy Association
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education
Federation of State Boards of Physical Therapy
World Confederation of Physical Therapy
World Federation of Occupational Therapists
Other related articles
Allied health professions
Assistive technology
Disability
Evidence-based practice
Pain management
Physical therapy practice act

vteDisabilityMain topics
Disability
Disability studies
Medical model
Social model
Society for Disability Studies
Approaches
Freak show
IEP
Inclusion
Learning disability
Mainstreaming
Physical therapy
driver rehabilitation
Special needs
school
education
Rights, law, supportRights
Ableism/disablism
Disability rights
Pejorative terms
Law
AODA
ADA
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Declaration on the Rights of Disabled Persons
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
Services
Services for mental disorders
Services for disabled people
Support
DLA
ODSP
Rail
SSDI
SSI
Students
CNIB
Activist groups
CCD
DPI
MINDS
Reach Canada
Structural and assistive
Activities of daily living
Assistive technology
Independent living
Mobility aid
Orthotics and braces
Personal Care Assistant
Physical accessibility
Prosthetics
Universal design
Web accessibility
Social issues
Augmentative and alternative communication
Emotional or behavioral disability
Invisible disability
Disability and religion
Disability and poverty
Disability and sexuality
Arts, media, culture, sport
Disability culture
Disability art
Disability in the arts
Disability in the media
Disabled sports
Deaflympics
Paralympics
Special Olympics

 Category
 Lists

Authority control General
Integrated Authority File (Germany)
National libraries
France (data)
United States
Japan






