
Title:
Maimonides
Text:
12th-century Sephardic Jewish rabbi
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}For other uses, see Maimonides (disambiguation).
For the Haifa hospital, see Rambam Health Care Campus.
.mw-parser-output .infobox-subbox{padding:0;border:none;margin:-3px;width:auto;min-width:100%;font-size:100%;clear:none;float:none;background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .infobox-3cols-child{margin:auto}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-header,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-subheader,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-above,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-title,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-image,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-full-data,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-below{text-align:center}Maimonides Moses ben MaimonSpeculative 18th-century depiction of MaimonidesBorn30 March[1] or 6 April[2] 1135
Possibly born 28 March or 4 April[3] 1138Córdoba, Almoravid Empire (present-day Spain)Died12 December 1204Fostat, Ayyubid Sultanate (present-day Egypt)[4]Notable workMishneh TorahThe Guide for the PerplexedSpouse(s)(1) daughter of Nathaniel Baruch (2) daughter of Mishael HaleviEraMedieval philosophyRegionMiddle Eastern philosophySchoolAristotelianismMain interestsReligious law, HalakhaNotable ideasOath of Maimonides, Maimonides' rule, Golden mean, 13 principles of faithshow
Influences
Talmud, Plato, Aristotle, al-Farabi, Avicenna, Avempace, Averroes, Al-Ghazali[5][6]
show
Influenced
Virtually all subsequent Jewish philosophy, as well as a significant amount of Catholic theology, and especially Spinoza, Albertus Magnus, Aquinas, Joyce, Bodin, Leibniz, Newton,[7] Strauss, Buber, Rosenzweig, Friedländer, Fackenheim, Levinas

Signature
.mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:22em;float:right;clear:right;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em;background:#f8f9fa;border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.2em;text-align:center;line-height:1.4em;font-size:88%;border-collapse:collapse;display:table}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .sidebar{display:table!important;float:right!important;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em!important}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-subgroup{width:100%;margin:0;border-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-left{float:left;clear:left;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-none{float:none;clear:both;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-outer-title{padding:0 0.4em 0.2em;font-size:125%;line-height:1.2em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-image{padding:0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-caption,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle-with-top-image,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-caption{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle{padding:0.4em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.2em 0.8em;font-size:145%;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-image{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-heading{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content{padding:0 0.5em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content-with-subgroup{padding:0.1em 0.4em 0.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-below{padding:0.3em 0.8em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-below{border-top:1px solid #aaa;border-bottom:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-navbar{text-align:right;font-size:115%;padding:0 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:left;font-weight:bold;line-height:1.6em;font-size:105%}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title-c{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:center;margin:0 3.3em}@media(max-width:720px){body.mediawiki .mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:100%!important;clear:both;float:none!important;margin-left:0!important;margin-right:0!important}}Part of a series on thePhilosophy of religion
showReligious concepts
Afterlife
Apophatism
Cataphatism
Eschatology
Enlightenment
Intelligent design
Miracle
Mysticism
Religious belief
Reincarnation
Religious faith
Scripture (religious text)
Soul
Spirit
Theological veto

showChallenges
Ethical egoism
Euthyphro dilemma
Logical positivism
Religious language
Verificationism
eschatological

Problem of evil
Theodicy
Augustinian
Irenaean
Best of all possible worlds
Inconsistent triad
Natural evil


showGod
Conceptions
Aristotelian
Brahman
Demiurge
Divinely simple
Form of the Good
Holy Spirit
Maltheist
Pandeist
Personal
Process-theological
Summum bonum
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover

Existence

Arguments for
Beauty
Christological
Trilemma
Resurrection
Consciousness
Cosmological
kalām
contingency
metaphysical
Degree
Desire
Experience
Existential choice
Fine-tuned universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Mystical idealism
Natural law
Necessary existent
Seddiqin
Nyayakusumanjali
Ontological
Gödel
Modal
Anselm
Mulla Sadra
Spinoza
Pascal's wager
Reason
Reformed
Teleological
Intelligent design
Natural law
Watchmaker
Junkyard
Trademark
Transcendental

Arguments against
747 gambit
Wager
Creator of God
Evil God
Free will
Hell
Inconsistency
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Omnipotence paradox
Poor design
Russell's teapot


By religion
Abrahamic
Bahá'í
Christianity
Islam
Judaism
Mormonism
Mandaeism
Buddhism
Hinduism
Jainism
Sikhism
Wicca


showTheories of religion
Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism
agnostic
atheist
Christian
Feminist
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism
Christian
religious
secular
Inclusivism
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism
humanistic
metaphysical
religious
New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Process
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism

showPhilosophers of religion
Irreligious
de Beauvoir
Camus
Critchley
Dawkins
Dennett
Drange
Draper
Epicurus
Foucault
Goldstein
Heraclitus
Harris
Hecht
Hitchens
Hume
Kenny
Lucretius
Łyszczyński
Martin
Marx
Mill
Nietzsche
Quine
Rand
Russell
Sartre
Schopenhauer
Searle
Singer
Spinoza
Voltaire

Buddhist
Nagarjuna
Vasubandhu
Buddhaghosa
Dignāga
Dharmakirti
Jayatilleke
Premasiri
Ñāṇavīra
Nakamura
Nishitani
Nishida
Keown
Loy
Thompson
Smith
Westerhoff
Garfield

Christian
Adams
Alston
Aquinas
Augustine
Bell
Brümmer
Burns
Caird
Craig
Dalferth
Eliade
Evans
Gamwell
Heidegger
Hick
Kierkegaard
Kretzmann
Leftow
McCabe
McIntyre
Merricks
Miceli
Moser
Newman
Otto
Paley
Schaeffer
de Silva
Smith
Stewart
Swinburne
Taliaferro
Tamer
Thiselton
Ward
White
Wiebe
Wollaston
Yandell

Islamic
al-Amiri
al-Attas
Averroes
Avicenna
Badawi
Brethren of Purity
Damad
al-Farabi
al-Ghazali
Ibn Arabi
Ibn Bajjah
Ibn Masarra
Ibn Miskawayh
M. Iqbal
al-Kindi
Nasr
Ramadan
al-Razi
Sadra
al-Shahrastani
Shariati
Suhrawardi
Shaykh Tusi
Waliullah

Jewish
Buber
Heschel
Maimonides
Mendelssohn
Schwarzschild
Soloveitchik

Hindu
Adi Shankara
Ramanuja
Madhvacharya
Udayana
Kumārila Bhaṭṭa
Vācaspati Miśra
Jayanta Bhatta
Abhinavagupta
Raghunatha Siromani
Sri Aurobindo
Ramana Maharshi
J. Krishnamurti
Radhakrishnan
BK Matilal
KC Bhattacharya

Others
Almaas
Anderson
Emmet
Esaulov
Ferré
Forman
Glogau
Hartshorne
Hatano
Hatcher
Klostermaier
Kvanvig
Martinich
Meltzer
Runzo
Smart
Vallicella
Zank
Zimmerman


showRelated topics
Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
Faith and rationality
History of religions
Religion and science
Religious philosophy
Theology

Philosophy of religion article index.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vte
Moses ben Maimon[note 1] (1138–1204), commonly known as Maimonides (/maɪˈmɒnɪdiːz/)[note 2] and also referred to by the acronym Rambam (Hebrew: רמב״ם),[note 3] was a medieval Sephardic Jewish philosopher who became one of the most prolific and influential Torah scholars of the Middle Ages. In his time, he was also a preeminent astronomer and physician, serving as the personal physician of Saladin.[8][9][10][11][12] Born in Córdoba, Almoravid Empire (present-day Spain) on Passover eve, 1138 (or 1135),[13][14][15][16][17] he worked as a rabbi, physician and philosopher in Morocco and Egypt. He died in Egypt on 12 December 1204, whence his body was taken to the lower Galilee and buried in Tiberias.[18][19]
During his lifetime, most Jews greeted Maimonides' writings on Jewish law and ethics with acclaim and gratitude, even as far away as Iraq and Yemen. Yet, while Maimonides rose to become the revered head of the Jewish community in Egypt, his writings also had vociferous critics, particularly in Spain. Nonetheless, he was posthumously acknowledged as one of the foremost rabbinic decisors and philosophers in Jewish history, and his copious work comprises a cornerstone of Jewish scholarship. His fourteen-volume Mishneh Torah still carries significant canonical authority as a codification of Halacha. He is sometimes known as "ha'Nesher ha'Gadol" (The Great Eagle)[20] in recognition of his outstanding status as a bona fide exponent of the Oral Torah.
Aside from being revered by Jewish historians, Maimonides also figures very prominently in the history of Islamic and Arab sciences and he is mentioned extensively in studies. Influenced by Al-Farabi, Ibn Sina, and his contemporary Ibn Rushd, he became a prominent philosopher and polymath in both the Jewish and Islamic worlds. On his tomb is inscribed "From Moses to Moses there was none like Moses".[21]

Contents

1 Name
2 Biography

2.1 Early years
2.2 Exile
2.3 Death of his brother
2.4 Nagid
2.5 Death


3 Thirteen principles of faith
4 Legal works

4.1 Tzedakah (charity)


5 Philosophy

5.1 Theology
5.2 Character development
5.3 Prophecy
5.4 The problem of evil
5.5 On poisons and death
5.6 Skepticism of astrology
5.7 True beliefs versus necessary beliefs
5.8 Eschatology

5.8.1 The Messianic era
5.8.2 Resurrection
5.8.3 The World to Come


5.9 Maimonides and Kabbalah
5.10 The Oath of Maimonides
5.11 Views on circumcision


6 Influence

6.1 Maimonides and the Modernists


7 Tributes and memorials
8 Works and bibliography

8.1 Judaic and philosophical works
8.2 Medical works
8.3 Treatise on logic


9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 See also
13 Bibliography
14 External links



Name[edit]
His full Hebrew name is Rabbi Moshe ben Maimon (.mw-parser-output .script-hebrew,.mw-parser-output .script-Hebr{font-family:"SBL Hebrew","SBL BibLit","Taamey Ashkenaz","Taamey Frank CLM","Frank Ruehl CLM","Ezra SIL","Ezra SIL SR","Keter Aram Tsova","Taamey David CLM","Keter YG","Shofar","David CLM","Hadasim CLM","Simple CLM","Nachlieli",Cardo,Alef,"Noto Serif Hebrew","Noto Sans Hebrew","David Libre",David,"Times New Roman",Gisha,Arial,FreeSerif,FreeSans}רבי משה בן מימון‎), whose acronym forms "Rambam" (רמב״ם‎). His full Arabic name is Abū ʿImrān Mūsā bin Maimūn bin ʿUbaidallāh al-Qurtabī (ابو عمران موسى بن ميمون بن عبيد الله القرطبي), or Mūsā bin Maymūn (موسى بن ميمون) for short. The portion bin ʿUbaidallāh should not imply that Maimon's father was named Obadiah, instead bin ʿUbaidallāh is treated as Maimonides' surname, as Obadiah was the name of his earliest direct ancestor. In Latin, the Hebrew ben (son of) becomes the Greek-style patronymic suffix -ides, forming "Moses Maimonides".

Biography[edit]
  The dominion of the Almohad Caliphate at its greatest extent, c. 1200
Further information: History of the Jews in Egypt § Arab rule (641 to 1250)
Early years[edit]
Maimonides was born 1138 in Córdoba, Andalusia in the Muslim-ruled Almoravid Empire during what some scholars consider to be the end of the golden age of Jewish culture in the Iberian Peninsula, after the first centuries of the Moorish rule. His father Maimon ben Joseph, was a Spanish dayyan (Jewish judge), whose family claimed direct paternal descent from Simeon ben Judah ha-Nasi, and thus from the Davidic line. Maimonides later stated that there are 38 generations between him and Judah ha-Nasi.[22][23] His ancestry, going back four generations, is given in his Iggeret Teiman (Epistle to Yemen), as Moses son of Maimon the Judge (hadayan), son of Joseph the Wise (הֶחָכָם, he-chakham), son of Isaac the Rabbi (הָרָב, harav), son of Obadiah the Judge.[24] At an early age, Maimonides developed an interest in sciences and philosophy. He read those Greek philosophers accessible in Arabic translations, and was deeply immersed in the sciences and learning of Islamic culture.[25]
Maimonides was not known as a supporter of Kabbalah, although a strong intellectual type of mysticism has been discerned in his philosophy.[26] He expressed disapproval of poetry, the best of which he declared to be false, since it was founded on pure invention. This sage, who was revered for his personality as well as for his writings, led a busy life, and wrote many of his works while travelling or in temporary accommodation.[27] Maimonides studied Torah under his father, who had in turn studied under Rabbi Joseph ibn Migash, a student of Isaac Alfasi.

  Maimonides' house in Fez, Morocco
Exile[edit]
Another Berber dynasty, the Almohads, conquered Córdoba in 1148 and abolished dhimmi status (i.e., state protection of non-Muslims ensured through payment of a tax, the jizya) in some[which?] of their territories. The loss of this status left the Jewish and Christian communities with conversion to Islam, death, or exile.[27] Many Jews were forced to convert, but due to suspicion by the authorities of fake conversions, the new converts had to wear identifying clothing that set them apart and made them subject to public scrutiny.[28][29]
Maimonides's family, along with most other Jews,[dubious  – discuss] chose exile. The question whether Maimonides himself was among those who had to convert to Islam in order to save his life prior to fleeing the area, has been the subject of scholarly debate.[30] This forced conversion was ruled legally invalid under Islamic law when brought up by a rival in Egypt.[31] For the next ten years, Maimonides moved about in southern Spain, eventually settling in Fez in Morocco. During this time, he composed his acclaimed commentary on the Mishnah, during the years 1166–1168.[32] Some say that his teacher in Fez was Rabbi Yehuda Ha-Cohen Ibn Susan, until he was killed in 1165.[33]
Following this sojourn in Morocco, together with two sons,[34] he sojourned in the Land of Israel before settling in Fustat in Fatimid Caliphate-controlled Egypt around 1168. While in Cairo, he studied in a yeshiva attached to a small synagogue, which now bears his name.[35] In the Land of Israel, he prayed at the Temple Mount. He wrote that this day of visiting the Temple Mount was a day of holiness for him and his descendants.[36]
Maimonides shortly thereafter was instrumental in helping rescue Jews taken captive during the Christian Amalric of Jerusalem's siege of the southeastern Nile Delta town of Bilbeis. He sent five letters to the Jewish communities of Lower Egypt asking them to pool money together to pay the ransom. The money was collected and then given to two judges sent to Palestine to negotiate with the Crusaders. The captives were eventually released.[37]

Death of his brother[edit]
  Monument in Córdoba
Following this triumph, the Maimonides family, hoping to increase their wealth, gave their savings to his brother, the youngest son David ben Maimon, a merchant. Maimonides directed his brother to procure goods only at the Sudanese port of ʽAydhab. After a long arduous trip through the desert, however, David was unimpressed by the goods on offer there. Against his brother's wishes, David boarded a ship for India, since great wealth was to be found in the East.[38] Before he could reach his destination, David drowned at sea sometime between 1169 and 1177. The death of his brother caused Maimonides to become sick with grief.
In a letter discovered in the Cairo Geniza, he wrote:

.mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}The greatest misfortune that has befallen me during my entire life—worse than anything else—was the demise of the saint, may his memory be blessed, who drowned in the Indian sea, carrying much money belonging to me, to him, and to others, and left with me a little daughter and a widow. On the day I received that terrible news I fell ill and remained in bed for about a year, suffering from a sore boil, fever, and depression, and was almost given up. About eight years have passed, but I am still mourning and unable to accept consolation. And how should I console myself? He grew up on my knees, he was my brother, [and] he was my student.[39]
Nagid[edit]
  Bas relief of Maimonides in the United States House of Representatives.
Around 1171, Maimonides was appointed the Nagid of the Egyptian Jewish community.[35] Arabist Shelomo Dov Goitein believes the leadership he displayed during the ransoming of the Crusader captives led to this appointment.[40] However he was replaced by Sar Shalom ben Moses in 1173. Over the controversial course of Sar Shalom's appointment, during which Sar Shalom was accused of tax farming, Maimonides excommunicated and fought with him for several years until Maimonides was appointed Nagid in 1195. A work known as "Megillat Zutta" was written by Abraham ben Hillel, who writes a scathing description of Sar Shalom while praising Maimonides as "the light of east and west and unique master and marvel of the generation."[41][42][43] With the loss of the family funds tied up in David's business venture, Maimonides assumed the vocation of physician, for which he was to become famous. He had trained in medicine in both Córdoba and in Fez. Gaining widespread recognition, he was appointed court physician to al-Qadi al-Fadil, the chief secretary to Sultan Saladin, then to Saladin himself; after whose death he remained a physician to the Ayyubid dynasty.[8]
In his medical writings, Maimonides described many conditions, including asthma, diabetes, hepatitis, and pneumonia, and he emphasized moderation and a healthy lifestyle.[44] His treatises became influential for generations of physicians. He was knowledgeable about Greek and Arabic medicine, and followed the principles of humorism in the tradition of Galen. He did not blindly accept authority but used his own observation and experience.[44] Julia Bess Frank indicates that Maimonides in his medical writings sought to interpret works of authorities so that they could become acceptable.[8] Maimonides displayed in his interactions with patients attributes that today would be called intercultural awareness and respect for the patient's Autonomy.[45] Although he frequently wrote of his longing for solitude in order to come closer to God and to extend his reflections – elements considered essential in his philosophy to the prophetic experience -he gave over most of his time to caring for others.[46] In a famous letter, Maimonides describes his daily routine. After visiting the Sultan's palace, he would arrive home exhausted and hungry, where "I would find the antechambers filled with gentiles and Jews … I would go to heal them, and write prescriptions for their illnesses … until the evening … and I would be extremely weak."[47]
As he goes on to say in this letter, even on Shabbat he would receive members of the community. It is remarkable that he managed to write extended treatises, including not only medical and other scientific studies but some of the most systematically thought-through and influential treatises on halakha (rabbinic law) and Jewish philosophy of the Middle Ages.[48]
Joseph Karo later praised Maimonides, writing of him, "Maimonides is the greatest of the decisors [of Jewish law], and all communities of the Land of Israel and of Arabia and of the Maghreb base their practices after him, and have taken him upon themselves as their rabbi."[49]
In 1173/4, Maimonides wrote his famous Epistle to Yemen.[50] It has been suggested that his "incessant travail" undermined his own health and brought about his death at 69 (although this is a normal lifespan).[51]

Death[edit]
  The Tomb of Maimonides in Tiberias
Maimonides died on 12 December 1204 (20th of Tevet 4965) in Fustat. It is widely believed that he was briefly buried in the beth midrash of the synagogue courtyard, and soon afterward, in accordance with his wishes, his remains were exhumed and taken to Tiberias, where they were re-interred.[52] The Tomb of Maimonides on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee in Israel marks his grave. This location for his final resting-place has been debated, for in the Jewish Cairene community, a tradition holds that he remained buried in Egypt.[53]
Maimonides and his wife, the daughter of Mishael ben Yeshayahu Halevi, had one child who survived into adulthood,[54] Abraham Maimonides, who became recognized as a great scholar. He succeeded Maimonides as Nagid and as court physician at the age of eighteen. Throughout his career, he defended his father's writings against all critics. The office of Nagid was held by the Maimonides family for four successive generations until the end of the 14th century.
Maimonides is widely respected in Spain, and a statue of him was erected near the Córdoba Synagogue.
Maimonides is sometimes said to be a descendant of King David, although he never made such a claim.[55][56]

Thirteen principles of faith[edit]
Main article: Jewish principles of faith
Part of a series onJews and Judaism
Etymology
Who is a Jew?
showReligion
God in Judaism (names)
Principles of faith
Mitzvot (613)
Halakha
Shabbat
Holidays
Prayer
Tzedakah
Land of Israel
Brit
Bar and Bat Mitzvah
Marriage
Bereavement
Philosophy
Ethics
Kabbalah
Customs
Synagogue
Rabbi

showTexts
Tanakh
Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim

Talmud
Mishnah
Gemara

Rabbinic
Midrash
Tosefta

Targum
Beit Yosef
Mishneh Torah
Tur
Shulchan Aruch
Zohar


showCommunities
Ashkenazim
Mizrahim
Sephardim
Teimanim
Beta Israel
Gruzinim
Juhurim
Bukharim
Italkim
Romanyotim
Cochinim
Bene Israel
Berber

Related groups
Bnei Anusim
Lemba
Crimean Karaites
Krymchaks
Kaifeng Jews
Igbo Jews
Samaritans
Crypto-Jews
Mosaic Arabs
Subbotniks
Noahides


showPopulation
@media all and (max-width:720px){body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .mw-graph{min-width:100%!important;max-width:100%;overflow-x:auto;overflow-y:visible}}.mw-parser-output .mw-graph-img{width:inherit;height:inherit}
Judaism by country
Lists of Jews
Diaspora
Historical population comparisons
Genetic studies

Land of Israel
Old Yishuv
New Yishuv
Israeli Jews

Europe
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Bulgaria
Cyprus
Czech lands
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Moldova
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Spain
Sweden
Ukraine
United Kingdom

Asia
Afghanistan
China
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Japan
Lebanon
Malaysia
Philippines
Syria
Turkey
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen

Africa
Algeria
Egypt
Ethiopia
Libya
Morocco
South Africa
Tunisia
Zimbabwe

North America
Canada
United States

Latin America and Caribbean
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guyana
Haiti
Jamaica
Mexico
Paraguay
Peru
Puerto Rico
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela

Oceania
Australia
Fiji
Guam
New Zealand
Palau


showDenominations
Orthodox
Modern
Haredi
Hasidic
Reform
Conservative
Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Haymanot
Humanistic

showCulture
Yiddish theatre
Dance
Humour
Minyan
Wedding
Clothing
Niddah
Pidyon haben
Kashrut
Shidduch
Zeved habat
Conversion to Judaism
Hiloni

Music
Religious
Secular

Cuisine
American
Ashkenazi
Bukharan
Ethiopian
Israeli
Israelite
Mizrahi
Sephardic
Yemenite

Literature
Israeli
Yiddish
American


showLanguages
Hebrew
Biblical
Yiddish
Yeshivish
Jewish Koine Greek
Yevanic
Juhuri
Shassi
Judaeo-Iranian
Ladino
Ghardaïa Sign
Bukharian
Knaanic
Zarphatic
Italkian
Gruzinic
Judeo-Aramaic
Judeo-Arabic
Judeo-Berber
Judeo-Malayalam

showHistory
Timeline
Name "Judea"

Leaders
Twelve Tribes of Israel
Ancient history
Kingdom of Judah
Temple in Jerusalem
Babylonian captivity
Assyrian captivity
Yehud Medinata
Second Temple
Jerusalem (in Judaism
timeline)
Hasmonean dynasty
Sanhedrin
Schisms
Pharisees
Hellenistic Judaism
Jewish–Roman wars
History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire
Christianity and Judaism (Jews and Christmas)
Hinduism and Judaism
Islamic–Jewish relations
Middle Ages
Golden Age
Sabbateans
Hasidism
Haskalah
Emancipation
Antisemitism
Anti-Judaism
Persecution
The Holocaust
Israel
Land of Israel
Aliyah
Jewish atheism
Baal teshuva
Arab–Israeli conflict


showPolitics
Jewish political movements
Anarchism
Autonomism
Bundism
Feminism
Leftism
Secularism
Territorialism
World Agudath Israel

Politics of Israel
Anarchism
Liberalism
Secularism

Zionism
General
Green
Labor
Kahanism
Maximalism
Neo-Zionism
Religious
Revisionist
Post-Zionism


Category
Portalvte
In his commentary on the Mishnah (tractate Sanhedrin, chapter 10), Maimonides formulates his "13 principles of faith"; and that these principles summarized what he viewed as the required beliefs of Judaism:

The existence of God.
God's unity and indivisibility into elements.
God's spirituality and incorporeality.
God's eternity.
God alone should be the object of worship.
Revelation through God's prophets.
The preeminence of Moses among the prophets.
That the entire Torah (both the Written and Oral law) are of Divine origin and were dictated to Moses by God on Mt. Sinai.
The Torah given by Moses is permanent and will not be replaced or changed.
God's awareness of all human actions and thoughts.
Reward of righteousness and punishment of evil.
The coming of the Jewish Messiah.
The resurrection of the dead.
Maimonides is said to have compiled the principles from various Talmudic sources. These principles were controversial when first proposed, evoking criticism by Rabbis Hasdai Crescas and Joseph Albo, and were effectively ignored by much of the Jewish community for the next few centuries.[57] However, these principles have become widely held and are considered to be the cardinal principles of faith for Orthodox Jews.[58][59] Two poetic restatements of these principles (Ani Ma'amin and Yigdal) eventually became canonized in many editions of the "Siddur" (Jewish prayer book).
The principles can be seen listed in the Siddur Edot HaMizrach, Additions for Shacharit[60] The omission of a list of these principles as such within his later works, the Mishneh Torah and The Guide for the Perplexed, has lead some to suggest that either he retracted his earlier position, or that these principles are descriptive rather than prescriptive.[61][62][63][64][65]

Legal works[edit]
Main article: Mishneh Torah
With Mishneh Torah, Maimonides composed a code of Jewish law with the widest-possible scope and depth. The work gathers all the binding laws from the Talmud, and incorporates the positions of the Geonim (post-Talmudic early Medieval scholars, mainly from Mesopotamia).
Later codes of Jewish law, e.g. Arba'ah Turim by Rabbi Jacob ben Asher and Shulchan Aruch by Rabbi Yosef Karo, draw heavily on Mishneh Torah: both often quote whole sections verbatim. However, it met initially with much opposition.[66] There were two main reasons for this opposition. First, Maimonides had refrained from adding references to his work for the sake of brevity; second, in the introduction, he gave the impression of wanting to "cut out" study of the Talmud,[67] to arrive at a conclusion in Jewish law, although Maimonides later wrote that this was not his intent. His most forceful opponents were the rabbis of Provence (Southern France), and a running critique by Rabbi Abraham ben David (Raavad III) is printed in virtually all editions of Mishneh Torah. It was still recognized as a monumental contribution to the systemized writing of halakha. Throughout the centuries, it has been widely studied and its halakhic decisions have weighed heavily in later rulings.
In response to those who would attempt to force followers of Maimonides and his Mishneh Torah to abide by the rulings of his own Shulchan Aruch or other later works, Rabbi Yosef Karo wrote: "Who would dare force communities who follow the Rambam to follow any other decisor, early or late? … The Rambam is the greatest of the decisors, and all the communities of the Land of Israel and the Arabistan and the Maghreb practice according to his word, and accepted him as their rabbi."[68]
An oft-cited legal maxim from his pen is: "It is better and more satisfactory to acquit a thousand guilty persons than to put a single innocent one to death." He argued that executing a defendant on anything less than absolute certainty would lead to a slippery slope of decreasing burdens of proof, until we would be convicting merely according to the judge's caprice.[69]
Scholars specializing in the study of the history and subculture of Judaism in premodern China (Sino-Judaica) have noted surprising similarities between this work and the liturgy of the Kaifeng Jews, descendants of Persian Jewish merchants who settled in the Middle Kingdom during the early Song dynasty.[70] Beyond scriptural similarities, Michael Pollak comments the Jews' Pentateuch was divided into 53 sections according to the Persian style.[71] He also points out:

There is no proof, to be sure, that Kaifeng Jewry ever had direct access to the works of "the Great Eagle," but it would have had ample time and opportunity to acquire or become acquainted with them well before its reservoir of Jewish learning began to run out. Nor do the Maimonidean leanings of the kehillah contradict the historical evidence that has the Jews arriving in Kaifeng no later than 1126, the year in which the Sung fled the city—and nine years before Maimonides was born. In 1163, when the kehillah built the first of its synagogues, Maimonides was only twenty-eight years old, so that it is highly unlikely that even his earliest authoritative teachings could by then have reached China.[72]
Tzedakah (charity)[edit]
One of the sections of the Mishneh Torah is the section dealing with tzedakah. In Hilkhot Matanot Aniyim (Laws about Giving to Poor People), Chapter 10:7–14, Maimonides lists his famous Eight Levels of Giving (where the first level is most preferable, and the eighth the least):[73]

Giving an interest-free loan to a person in need; forming a partnership with a person in need; giving a grant to a person in need; finding a job for a person in need; so long as that loan, grant, partnership, or job results in the person no longer living by relying upon others.
Giving tzedakah anonymously to an unknown recipient via a person (or public fund) which is trustworthy, wise, and can perform acts of tzedakah with your money in a most impeccable fashion.
Giving tzedakah anonymously to a known recipient.
Giving tzedakah publicly to an unknown recipient.
Giving tzedakah before being asked.
Giving adequately after being asked.
Giving willingly, but inadequately.
Giving "in sadness" (giving out of pity): It is thought that Maimonides was referring to giving because of the sad feelings one might have in seeing people in need (as opposed to giving because it is a religious obligation). Other translations say "Giving unwillingly."
Philosophy[edit]
Through The Guide for the Perplexed (which was initially written in Arabic as Dalālat al-ḥāʾirīn) and the philosophical introductions to sections of his commentaries on the Mishna, Maimonides exerted an important influence on the Scholastic philosophers, especially on Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus. He was a Jewish Scholastic. Educated more by reading the works of Arab Muslim philosophers than by personal contact with Arabian teachers, he acquired an intimate acquaintance not only with Arab Muslim philosophy, but with the doctrines of Aristotle. Maimonides strove to reconcile Aristotelianism and science with the teachings of the Torah.[74] In his Guide for the Perplexed, he often explains the function and purpose of the statutory provisions contained in the Torah against the backdrop of the historical conditions. Maimonides is said to have been influenced by Asaph the Jew, who was the first Hebrew medical writer.

Theology[edit]
  Depiction of Maimonides teaching students about the 'measure of man' in an illuminated manuscript.
Maimonides equated the God of Abraham to what philosophers refer to as the Necessary Being. God is unique in the universe, and the Torah commands that one love and fear God (Deut 10:12) on account of that uniqueness. To Maimonides, this meant that one ought to contemplate God's works and to marvel at the order and wisdom that went into their creation. When one does this, one inevitably comes to love God and to sense how insignificant one is in comparison to God. This is the basis of the Torah.[75]
The principle that inspired his philosophical activity was identical to a fundamental tenet of scholasticism: there can be no contradiction between the truths which God has revealed and the findings of the human mind in science and philosophy. Maimonides primarily relied upon the science of Aristotle and the teachings of the Talmud, commonly finding basis in the former for the latter.[76]
Maimonides' admiration for the Neoplatonic commentators led him to doctrines which the later Scholastics did not accept. For instance, Maimonides was an adherent of apophatic theology. In this theology, one attempts to describe God through negative attributes. For instance, one should not say that God exists in the usual sense of the term; it can be said that God is not non-existent. We should not say that "God is wise"; but we can say that "God is not ignorant," i.e., in some way, God has some properties of knowledge. We should not say that "God is One," but we can state that "there is no multiplicity in God's being." In brief, the attempt is to gain and express knowledge of God by describing what God is not, rather than by describing what God "is."[77]
Maimonides argued adamantly that God is not corporeal. This was central to his thinking about the sin of idolatry. Maimonides insisted that all of the anthropomorphic phrases pertaining to God in sacred texts are to be interpreted metaphorically.[77] A related tenet of Maimonidean theology is the notion that the commandments (especially those relates sacrifices) are intend to help wean the Israelites away from idolatry.[78]

Character development[edit]
See also: Golden mean (Judaism)
Part of a series onJewish philosophy
showHellenistic
Positions: HasmoneanSadduceanPhariseeBoethusian
People: Aristobulus of AlexandriaPhilo of Alexandria

hideMedieval
Influenced by: Brethren of PurityIbn Bajjah (Avempace)Ismaili philosophyJewish KalamKabbalahRabbinic Judaism
Spanish and European: Hasdai ibn ShaprutIbn GabirolAbraham bar HiyyaBahya ibn PaqudaJudah HaleviAbraham ibn DaudJoseph ibn TzaddikAbraham ibn EzraMaimonidesNachmanidesSamuel ibn TibbonJoseph ben JudahShem-Tov ibn FalaqueraGersonidesMoses of NarbonneIsaac ben SheshetHasdai CrescasJoseph AlboElia del MedigoJudah MinzIsaac AbarbanelJudah Leon Abravanel
Yemenite: Natan'el al-FayyumiMansur ibn Sulayman al-Ghamari
Other: Isaac IsraeliSaadia Gaonal-MukkamasHibat Allah Abu'l-BarakatIbn Kammuna
Positions: Maimonidean / Anti-MaimonideanKabbalistKaraismTalmudicTosafist

showModern
Positions: OrthodoxSephardicChabadChassidicConservativeReformExistentialistReconstructionistHolocaustRenewalNeo-HasidicMussarRambamist
People: Francisco SanchesUriel da CostaBaruch SpinozaSalomon MaimonJoseph Solomon DelmedigoElijah Ba'al Shem of ChelmEliezer ben Elijah AshkenaziTzvi AshkenaziJacob EmdenSamuel HirschShneur Zalman of LiadiSimcha Bunim of PeshischaSamson Raphael HirschJacob AbendanaIsaac CardosoDavid NietoIsaac Orobio de CastroMoses MendelssohnSamuel David LuzzattoElijah BenamozeghMoses HessEliezer BerkovitsEliyahu DesslerMonsieur ChouchaniEmmanuel LevinasMartin BuberGershom ScholemAbraham Isaac KookJoseph SoloveitchikMenachem Mendel Schneerson

showTopics
AngerChosen peopleEschatologyEthicsFaithGodHappinessHolinessHolocaustMessiahMicrocosm–macrocosmRighteousness
vte
Maimonides taught about the developing of one's moral character. Although his life predated the modern concept of a personality, Maimonides believed that each person has an innate disposition along an ethical and emotional spectrum. Although one's disposition is often determined by factors outside of one's control, human beings have free will to choose to behave in ways that build character.[79] He wrote, "One is obligated to conduct his affairs with others in a gentle and pleasing manner."[80] Maimonides advised those with anti-social character traits ought to identify those traits and then make a conscious effort to behave in the opposite way. For example, an arrogant person should practice humility.[81] If the circumstances of one's environment are such that it is impossible to behave ethically, one must move to a new location.[82]

Prophecy[edit]
He agrees with "the Philosopher" (Aristotle) in teaching that the use of logic is the "right" way of thinking. In order to build an inner understanding of how to know God, every human being must, by study, meditation and uncompromising strong will, attain the degree of complete logical, spiritual and physical perfection required in the prophetic state. Here he rejects previous ideas (especially portrayed by Rabbi Yehuda Halevi in "Hakuzari") that in order to become a prophet, God must intervene. Maimonides claims that any man or woman[83] has the potential to become a prophet (not just Jews) and that in fact it is the purpose of the human race.

The problem of evil[edit]
Maimonides wrote on theodicy (the philosophical attempt to reconcile the existence of a God with the existence of evil). He took the premise that an omnipotent and good God exists.[84][85][86][87] In The Guide for the Perplexed, Maimonides writes that all the evil that exists within human beings stems from their individual attributes, while all good comes from a universally shared humanity (Guide 3:8). He says that there are people who are guided by higher purpose, and there are those who are guided by physicality and must strive to find the higher purpose with which to guide their actions.
To justify the existence of evil, assuming God is both omnipotent and omnibenevolent, Maimonides postulates that one who created something by causing its opposite not to exist is not the same as creating something that exists; so evil is merely the absence of good. God did not create evil, rather God created good, and evil exists where good is absent (Guide 3:10). Therefore, all good is divine invention, and evil both is not and comes secondarily.
Maimonides contests the common view that evil outweighs good in the world. He says that if one were to examine existence only in terms of humanity, then that person may observe evil to dominate good, but if one looks at the whole of the universe, then he sees good is significantly more common than evil (Guide 3:12). Man, he reasons, is too insignificant a figure in God's myriad works to be their primary characterizing force, and so when people see mostly evil in their lives, they are not taking into account the extent of positive Creation outside of themselves.
Maimonides believes that there are three types of evil in the world: evil caused by nature, evil that people bring upon others, and evil man brings upon himself (Guide 3:12). The first type of evil Maimonides states is the rarest form, but arguably of the most necessary—the balance of life and death in both the human and animal worlds itself, he recognizes, is essential to God's plan. Maimonides writes that the second type of evil is relatively rare, and that humanity brings it upon itself. The third type of evil humans bring upon themselves and is the source of most of the ills of the world. These are the result of people's falling victim to their physical desires. To prevent the majority of evil which stems from harm we do to ourselves, we must learn how to respond to our bodily urges.

On poisons and death[edit]
In a separate work recently translated from Arabic, Maimonides warns against lethal drugs which he calls poisons. According to this work these poisons will cause the most severe apathies, and the decay of the human being's vigor right up to death.[88]

Skepticism of astrology[edit]
Further information: Jewish views on astrology
Maimonides answered an inquiry concerning astrology, addressed to him from Marseille.[89] He responded that man should believe only what can be supported either by rational proof, by the evidence of the senses, or by trustworthy authority. He affirms that he had studied astrology, and that it does not deserve to be described as a science. He ridicules the concept that the fate of a man could be dependent upon the constellations; he argues that such a theory would rob life of purpose, and would make man a slave of destiny.[90]

True beliefs versus necessary beliefs[edit]
In The Guide for the Perplexed Book III, Chapter 28,[91] Maimonides draws a distinction between "true beliefs," which were beliefs about God that produced intellectual perfection, and "necessary beliefs," which were conducive to improving social order. Maimonides places anthropomorphic personification statements about God in the latter class. He uses as an example the notion that God becomes "angry" with people who do wrong. In the view of Maimonides (taken from Avicenna), God does not become angry with people, as God has no human passions; but it is important for them to believe God does, so that they desist from doing wrong.

Eschatology[edit]
See also: Jewish eschatology
The Messianic era[edit]
Perhaps one of Maimonides's most highly acclaimed and renowned writings is his treatise on the Messianic era, written originally in Judeo-Arabic and which he elaborates on in great detail in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Introduction to the 10th chapter of tractate Sanhedrin, also known as Pereḳ Ḥeleḳ). (Open window for text)




showFull text of Maimonides on the Messianic Era




Maimonides on the Messianic Era



Mishnah Commentary
Tractate Sanhedrin
Pereḳ Ḥeleḳ (Chapter 10)
"… 'The days of the Messiah' (i.e., the Messianic Era) is a timeframe in which the kingdom shall return to Israel, and they (i.e., the people of Israel) will return to the Land of Israel, and the king who shall stand-up will establish the place of his kingdom in Zion, whose name shall be extolled and it will reach unto the ends of the earth, being [even] greater than Solomon's kingdom, and the nations will enter a covenant of peace with him, and all lands shall serve him on account of the abundance of his righteousness, and for the wondrous things that shall be revealed through him; whosoever shall rise-up against him, the Lord will cut him off and deliver him into his hands. All of the Scriptural verses bear witness of him, and of us with him, but there is nothing which exists now that will change, excepting that the kingdom will be given over to Israel; thus have we heard it in the language used by the Sages: 'There is no difference between this world and the days of the Messiah, excepting only the subjugation of kingdoms' (San. 91b). There shall remain in his days, both, the strong and the weak, in comparison to others, only that in those days the people's livelihood will be made much easier for them, insofar that if a man should work any work no matter how short-lived, he will gain much thereby. This is that which they have spoken about, saying: 'In the future, the Land of Israel shall produce sweet-rolls of bread and clothes made of white woollen fabric' (Shab. 30b), seeing that people will say whenever a man finds something ready [and prepared for use] in abundance that so-and-so has found baked bread and a cooked dish, the proof of which being what is written: 'And the sons of the stranger shall be your field workers and vine dressers' (Isa. 61:5). Meaning, a time of ploughing and a time of reaping will be there; Wherefore, it was for this reason that that erudite man who said these things[a] was angered at his disciple when he failed to understand their import and had thought rather that these things should be understood in their plain sense, and he was compelled to answer him in a way that he'd understand, even though that wasn't the proper response [to give him]. The evidence for this, viz., that he didn't give him a truthful answer in accordance with what he learned of the verse, is this: 'Don't answer a foolish man in accordance with his folly' (Proverbs 26:4).
	
Now the greatest advantage at that time will be that we'll have rest from the subjugation of the wicked kingdom, which prevents us from performing that which God has enjoined unto us to do, while knowledge will be vastly increased, as it says: 'For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lo-rd' (Isa. 11:9). Meanwhile, battles and wars will come to an end, as it says: 'Nation shall not lift up a sword against nation' (Micha 4:3), while all those who will be in those days will attain to great perfection, by which he will merit the world to come. The Messiah will then die [as all men], and his son, and his son's son will rule after him. Now God has already described his death; he says: 'He shall not tire nor be weary, till he establish judgment in the earth: and the isles shall hope for his law' (Isa. 42:4). His kingdom shall continue for a very long time, while the lives of men will also be prolonged; for by the absence of worries and troubles they shall prolong their lives. Neither should it seem strange that his kingdom will continue for thousands of years, inasmuch as the Sages have already said that no matter how noble the things that are collected together, when they are but few that are amassed together, they will fall apart. Nevertheless, we do not desire the days of the Messiah so that our grain and possessions might increase, or so that we can mount horses, or be engaged in revelry of drink and musical instruments, as those who are confused may think. Rather, the prophets fervently desired them and the pious men longed for them because of what shall be there of the ingathering of righteous men, and of proper conduct, and wisdom, and the uprightness of the king and his great wisdom and his drawing nigh unto the Creator, just as it was said of him: 'Thou art my son, [etc.]' (Psalm 2:7), as well as the observance of the entire Law of Moses, without worries and without fear, and without constraint, just as He has promised 'And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the LORD. For they shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them' (Jer. 31:33 [34]); 'and I shall put my Law in their heart,' 'and I shall remove the heart of stone from your flesh' (Ezek. 36:26), and there are many similar verses that speak of such matters. It is in this manner [that a man] will acquire the next world with a firm acquisition, while the desired end [of every man] is the world to come, and all that comes before it is [merely] human effort.
	
Wherefore, he that can perceive the truth has looked at the ultimate purpose of life and has forsaken all other things, whereby He says: 'All of Israel has a portion in the world to come.' Moreover, seeing that this is the desired end and purpose of one's life, it is not fitting that he who wishes to serve [his Maker] out of love should serve Him for the sole intent of attaining the next world, as we have premised earlier, but rather that he may serve Him in the manner that I shall prescribe, viz., that if he has already come to believe that knowledge has been imparted unto the prophets from God, and that by it (i.e., that knowledge) He has revealed to them that the [coveted] virtues are such and such, and the faults are such and such, it behooves him, therefore, by reason of his being a moderate man of reason, to draw near to the virtues and to shun that which is deficient. If he has done this, Lo! He would have completed the mortal chapter [related to his existence], and he is then distinguished from the [brute] beasts; and since he would have become a [more] perfect man, one of the virtues of man is that no hindrance be found that will hinder him from attaining life for his soul in what is his remaining [spiritual] existence through her (i.e., the soul's) [continued] consciousness,[b] and which is the world to come as we have explained.[c]  Moreover, it is that which is said: 'Be ye not like a horse, [or] like a mule, which has no understanding; [who must be held back by bit and bridle]' (Psalm 32:9), meaning, the thing that prevents them from idleness and uncontrollable conduct is an external thing like a bit and a bridle. May a man never be like this, but rather, let his soul be what stops him from acting in such a manner, that is to say, his [inner] human form[d] [given to man by God at the hour of Creation] – if it were perfected, it will prevent him from whatever thing that withholds from him perfection (i.e., the betterment of his condition), which things are called deficiencies, but it will spurn him on in whatever is considered wholesome, which things are the virtues. This then is what has become clear unto me from all of their words relating to this noble matter, but things that can be easily misconstrued."[e] 



Notes:

.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ Rabban Gamliel; see: Babylonian Talmud, Shabbat 30b

^ The Judeo-Arabic word used by Maimonides is מעלומהא, or "that which is known by her (i.e., by the soul)," meaning, the ens intelligibile. Some translate this word as "perceived intellect."

^ See: Mishne Torah (Hil. Teshuvah, chapter 8), for more on what is meant by "the world to come."

^ See: Mishne Torah (Hil. Yesodei HaTorah 4:8[14]) for a discussion on the soul. Elsewhere, in Hil. Teshuvah 8:3, Maimonides writes: "Every 'soul' that is mentioned here in this context isn't the [animated] spirit that stands in need of a body, but rather the 'form of the soul,' which is the knowledge [attained by the mind] with which one comprehends the Creator according to its ability." See also the Guide for the Perplexed, part iii, the last chapter, on the fourth kind of perfection.

^ This last addition, "but things that can be easily misconstrued," is written in Maimonides's original Judeo-Arabic text, but was omitted in the translated printed texts. Rabbi Yosef Qafih points out the omission, and inserts it in his new translation. See: Mishnah, with Commentary of Maimonides (ed. Yosef Qafih), vol. 2, Rav Kook Institute, Jerusalem 1963 (Hebrew)




Resurrection[edit]
Religious Jews believed in immortality in a spiritual sense, and most believed that the future would include a messianic era and a resurrection of the dead. This is the subject of Jewish eschatology. Maimonides wrote much on this topic, but in most cases he wrote about the immortality of the soul for people of perfected intellect; his writings were usually not about the resurrection of dead bodies. Rabbis of his day were critical of this aspect of this thought, and there was controversy over his true views.[92]
Eventually, Maimonides felt pressured to write a treatise on the subject, known as "The Treatise on Resurrection." In it, he wrote that those who claimed that he believed the verses of the Hebrew Bible referring to the resurrection were only allegorical were spreading falsehoods. Maimonides asserts that belief in resurrection is a fundamental truth of Judaism about which there is no disagreement.[93]
While his position on the World to Come (non-corporeal eternal life as described above) may be seen as being in contradiction with his position on bodily resurrection, Maimonides resolved them with a then unique solution: Maimonides believed that the resurrection was not permanent or general. In his view, God never violates the laws of nature. Rather, divine interaction is by way of angels, whom Maimonides often regards to be metaphors for the laws of nature, the principles by which the physical universe operates, or Platonic eternal forms. [This is not always the case. In Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah Chaps. 2–4, Maimonides describes angels that are actually created beings.] Thus, if a unique event actually occurs, even if it is perceived as a miracle, it is not a violation of the world's order.[94]
In this view, any dead who are resurrected must eventually die again. In his discussion of the 13 principles of faith, the first five deal with knowledge of God, the next four deal with prophecy and the Torah, while the last four deal with reward, punishment and the ultimate redemption. In this discussion Maimonides says nothing of a universal resurrection. All he says it is that whatever resurrection does take place, it will occur at an indeterminate time before the world to come, which he repeatedly states will be purely spiritual.

The World to Come[edit]
Maimonides distinguishes two kinds of intelligence in man, the one material in the sense of being dependent on, and influenced by, the body, and the other immaterial, that is, independent of the bodily organism. The latter is a direct emanation from the universal active intellect; this is his interpretation of the noûs poietikós of Aristotelian philosophy. It is acquired as the result of the efforts of the soul to attain a correct knowledge of the absolute, pure intelligence of God.[citation needed]
The knowledge of God is a form of knowledge which develops in us the immaterial intelligence, and thus confers on man an immaterial, spiritual nature. This confers on the soul that perfection in which human happiness consists, and endows the soul with immortality. One who has attained a correct knowledge of God has reached a condition of existence, which renders him immune from all the accidents of fortune, from all the allurements of sin, and from death itself. Man is in a position to work out his own salvation and his immortality.[citation needed]
Spinoza's doctrine of immortality was strikingly similar. But Spinoza teaches that the way to attain the knowledge which confers immortality is the progress from sense-knowledge through scientific knowledge to philosophical intuition of all things sub specie æternitatis, while Maimonides holds that the road to perfection and immortality is the path of duty as described in the Torah and the rabbinic understanding of the oral law.[citation needed]
Maimonides describes the world to come as the stage after a person lives his or her life in this world as well as the final state of existence after the Messianic Era. Some time after the resurrection of the dead, souls will live forever without bodies. They will enjoy the radiance of the Divine Presence without the need for food, drink or sexual pleasures.[95]

Maimonides and Kabbalah[edit]
In The Guide for the Perplexed, Maimonides declares his intention to conceal from the average reader his explanations of Sod [96] esoteric meanings of Torah. The nature of these "secrets" is debated. Religious Jewish rationalists, and the mainstream academic view, read Maimonides' Aristotelianism as a mutually-exclusive alternative metaphysics to Kabbalah.[97] Some academics hold that Maimonides' project fought against the Proto-Kabbalah of his time.[98] However, many Kabbalists and their heirs read Maimonides according to Kabbalah or as an actual covert subscriber to Kabbalah,[99] due to the similarities between the Kabbalistic approach and Maimonides' approach toward interpreting the Bible with metaphor, Maimonides' understanding of God through attributes of action, thought and negative attributes, Maimonides' description of the roles of the imagination and intellect in life, sin, and prophesy, Maimonides' assertion that the commandments have a function that can be understood, and Maimonides' description of a 3-tiered cosmic order whereby God's will is implemented through a system of angels.[citation needed] According to this, he employed rationalism to defend Judaism rather than limit inquiry of Sod only to rationalism. His rationalism, if not taken as an opposition,[100] also assisted the Kabbalists, purifying their transmitted teaching from mistaken corporeal interpretations that could have been made from Hekhalot literature,[101] though Kabbalists held that their theosophy alone allowed human access to Divine mysteries.[102]

The Oath of Maimonides[edit]
The Oath of Maimonides is a document about the medical calling and recited as a substitute for the Hippocratic Oath. It is not to be confused with a more lengthy Prayer of Maimonides. These documents may not have been written by Maimonides, but later.[8] The Prayer appeared first in print in 1793 and has been attributed to Markus Herz, a German physician, pupil of Immanuel Kant.[103]

Views on circumcision[edit]
In The Guide for the Perplexed, Maimonides proposes that two important purposes of circumcision (brit milah) are to temper sexual desire and to join in an affirmation of faith and the covenant of Abraham:[104][105]

As regards circumcision, I think that one of its objects is to limit sexual intercourse, and to weaken the organ of generation as far as possible, and thus cause man to be moderate. Some people believe that circumcision is to remove a defect in man's formation; but every one can easily reply: How can products of nature be deficient so as to require external completion, especially as the use of the fore-skin to that organ is evident. This commandment has not been enjoined as a complement to a deficient physical creation, but as a means for perfecting man's moral shortcomings. The bodily injury caused to that organ is exactly that which is desired; it does not interrupt any vital function, nor does it destroy the power of generation. Circumcision simply counteracts excessive lust; for there is no doubt that circumcision weakens the power of sexual excitement, and sometimes lessens the natural enjoyment: the organ necessarily becomes weak when it loses blood and is deprived of its covering from the beginning. Our Sages (Beresh. Rabba, c. 80) say distinctly: It is hard for a woman, with whom an uncircumcised had sexual intercourse, to separate from him. This is, as I believe, the best reason for the commandment concerning circumcision. And who was the first to perform this commandment? Abraham, our father! of whom it is well known how he feared sin; it is described by our Sages in reference to the words, "Behold, now I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon" (Gen. xii. 11). There is, however, another important object in this commandment. It gives to all members of the same faith, i.e., to all believers in the Unity of God, a common bodily sign, so that it is impossible for any one that is a stranger, to say that he belongs to them. For sometimes people say so for the purpose of obtaining some advantage, or in order to make some attack upon the Jews. No one, however, should circumcise himself or his son for any other reason but pure faith; for circumcision is not like an incision on the leg, or a burning in the arm, but a very difficult operation. It is also a fact that there is much mutual love and assistance among people that are united by the same sign when they consider it as [the symbol of] a covenant. Circumcision is likewise the [symbol of the] covenant which Abraham made in connection with the belief in God's Unity. So also every one that is circumcised enters the covenant of Abraham to believe in the unity of God, in accordance with the words of the Law, "To be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee" (Gen. xvii. 7). This purpose of the circumcision is as important as the first, and perhaps more important.— Maimonides, The Guide to the Perplexed (1190)
Influence[edit]
  The title page of The Guide for the Perplexed
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah is considered by Jews even today as one of the chief authoritative codifications of Jewish law and ethics. It is exceptional for its logical construction, concise and clear expression and extraordinary learning, so that it became a standard against which other later codifications were often measured.[106] It is still closely studied in rabbinic yeshivot (seminaries). The first to compile a comprehensive lexicon containing an alphabetically-arranged list of difficult words found in Maimonides' Mishne Torah was Tanḥum ha-Yerushalmi (1220–1291).[107] A popular medieval saying that also served as his epitaph states, From Mosheh (of the Torah) to Mosheh (Maimonides) there was none like Mosheh. It chiefly referred to his rabbinic writings.
But Maimonides was also one of the most influential figures in medieval Jewish philosophy. His brilliant adaptation of Aristotelian thought to Biblical faith deeply impressed later Jewish thinkers, and had an unexpected immediate historical impact.[108] Some more acculturated Jews in the century that followed his death, particularly in Spain, sought to apply Maimonides's Aristotelianism in ways that undercut traditionalist belief and observance, giving rise to an intellectual controversy in Spanish and southern French Jewish circles.[109] The intensity of debate spurred Catholic Church interventions against "heresy" and a general confiscation of rabbinic texts. In reaction, the more radical interpretations of Maimonides were defeated. At least amongst Ashkenazi Jews, there was a tendency to ignore his specifically philosophical writings and to stress instead the rabbinic and halakhic writings. These writings often included considerable philosophical chapters or discussions in support of halakhic observance; David Hartman observes that Maimonides clearly expressed "the traditional support for a philosophical understanding of God both in the Aggadah of Talmud and in the behavior of the hasid [the pious Jew]."[110] Maimonidean thought continues to influence traditionally observant Jews.[111][112]
The most rigorous medieval critique of Maimonides is Hasdai Crescas's Or Adonai. Crescas bucked the eclectic trend, by demolishing the certainty of the Aristotelian world-view, not only in religious matters but also in the most basic areas of medieval science (such as physics and geometry). Crescas's critique provoked a number of 15th-century scholars to write defenses of Maimonides. A partial translation of Crescas was produced by Harry Austryn Wolfson of Harvard University in 1929.
Because of his path-finding synthesis of Aristotle and Biblical faith, Maimonides had an influence on the great Christian theologian Saint Thomas Aquinas who refers to Maimonides in several of his works, including the Commentary on the Sentences.[113]
Maimonides's combined abilities in the fields of theology, philosophy and medicine make his work attractive today as a source during discussions of evolving norms in these fields, particularly medicine. An example is the modern citation of his method of determining death of the body in the controversy regarding declaration of death to permit organ donation for transplantation.[114]

Maimonides and the Modernists[edit]
Maimonides remains one of the most widely debated Jewish thinkers among modern scholars. He has been adopted as a symbol and an intellectual hero by almost all major movements in modern Judaism, and has proven important to philosophers such as Leo Strauss; and his views on the importance of humility have been taken up by modern humanist philosophers.
In academia, particularly within the area of Jewish Studies, the teaching of Maimonides has been dominated by traditional scholars, generally Orthodox, who place a very strong emphasis on Maimonides as a rationalist; one result is that certain sides of Maimonides's thought, including his opposition to anthropocentrism, have been obviated.[citation needed] There are movements in some postmodern circles to claim Maimonides for other purposes, as within the discourse of ecotheology.[115] Maimonides's reconciliation of the philosophical and the traditional has given his legacy an extremely diverse and dynamic quality.

Tributes and memorials[edit]
  Plaque of Maimonides at Rambam Medical Center, Haifa
Maimonides has been memorialized in numerous ways. For example, one of the Learning Communities at the Tufts University School of Medicine bears his name. There is also Maimonides School in Brookline, Massachusetts, Maimonides Academy School in Los Angeles, California, Lycée Maïmonide in Casablanca, the Brauser Maimonides Academy in Hollywood, Florida,[116] and Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn, New York. Beit Harambam Congregation, a Sephardi synagogue in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, is named after him.[117]
Issued from May 8, 1986 to 1985, the Series A of the Israeli New Shekel featured an illustration of Maimonides on the obverse and the place of his burial in Tiberias on the reverse on its 1-shekel bill.[118]
In 2004, conferences were held at Yale, Florida International University, Penn State, and the Rambam Hospital in Haifa, Israel, which is named after him. To commemorate the 800th anniversary of his death, Harvard University issued a memorial volume.[119] In 1953, the Israel Postal Authority issued a postage stamp of Maimonides, pictured.
In March 2008, during the Euromed Conference of Ministers of Tourism, The Tourism Ministries of Israel, Morocco and Spain agreed to work together on a joint project that will trace the footsteps of the Rambam and thus boost religious tourism in the cities of Córdoba, Fes and Tiberias.[120]
Between December 2018 and January 2019 the Israel Museum held a special exhibit dedicated to the writings of Maimonides.[121]

Works and bibliography[edit]
Judaic and philosophical works[edit]
  Manuscript page by Maimonides. Judeo-Arabic language in Hebrew letters.
  The original manuscript of the Commentary on the Mishnah, handwritten by Musa bin Maymun in Judeo-Arabic in a Rashi script.
Maimonides composed works of Jewish scholarship, rabbinic law, philosophy, and medical texts. Most of Maimonides's works were written in Judeo-Arabic. However, the Mishneh Torah was written in Hebrew. His Jewish texts were:

Commentary on the Mishna (Arabic Kitab al-Siraj, translated into Hebrew as Pirush Hamishnayot), written in Classical Arabic using the Hebrew alphabet. This was the first full commentary ever written on the entire Mishnah, which took Maimonides seven years to complete, and it enjoyed great popularity both in its Arabic original and its medieval Hebrew translation. The commentary includes three philosophical introductions which were also highly influential:
The Introduction to the Mishnah deals with the nature of the oral law, the distinction between the prophet and the sage, and the organizational structure of the Mishnah.
The Introduction to Mishnah Sanhedrin, chapter ten (Perek Helek), is an eschatological essay that concludes with Maimonides's famous creed ("the thirteen principles of faith").
The Introduction to Tractate Avot (popularly called The Eight Chapters) is an ethical treatise.
Sefer Hamitzvot (trans. The Book of Commandments). In this work, Maimonides lists all the 613 mitzvot traditionally contained in the Torah (Pentateuch). He describes fourteen shorashim (roots or principles) to guide his selection.
Sefer Ha'shamad (letter of Martydom)
Mishneh Torah, a comprehensive code of Jewish law. It is also known as Yad ha-Chazaka or simply Yad/"יד" which has the numerical value 14, representing the 14 books of the work.
The Guide for the Perplexed, a philosophical work harmonising and differentiating Aristotle's philosophy and Jewish theology. Written in Judeo-Arabic, and completed between 1186 and 1190.[122] The first translation of this work into Hebrew was done by Samuel ibn Tibbon in 1204.[74]
Teshuvot, collected correspondence and responsa, including a number of public letters (on resurrection and the afterlife, on conversion to other faiths, and Iggereth Teiman – addressed to the oppressed Jewry of Yemen).
Hilkhot ha-Yerushalmi, a fragment of a commentary on the Jerusalem Talmud, identified and published by Saul Lieberman in 1947.
Medical works[edit]
Maimonides' achievements in the medical field are well known, and are cited by many medieval authors. One of his more important medical works is his Guide to Good Health (Regimen Sanitis) which he composed in Arabic for the Sultan al-Afdal, son of Saladin, who suffered from depression.[123] The work was translated into Latin, and published in Florence in 1477, becoming the first medical book to appear in print there.[124] While his prescriptions may have become obsolete, "his ideas about preventive medicine, public hygiene, approach to the suffering patient, and the preservation of the health of the soul have not become obsolete."[125] Maimonides wrote ten known medical works in Arabic that have been translated by the Jewish medical ethicist Fred Rosner into contemporary English.[44][126] Lectures, conferences and research on Maimonides, even recently in the 21st century, have been done at medical universities in Morocco.

Regimen Sanitatis, Suessmann Muntner (ed.), Mossad Harav Kook: Jerusalem 1963 (translated into Hebrew by Moshe Ibn Tibbon) (.mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}OCLC 729184001)
The Art of Cure – Extracts from Galen (Barzel, 1992, Vol. 5)[127] is essentially an extract of Galen's extensive writings.
Commentary on the Aphorisms of Hippocrates (Rosner, 1987, Vol. 2; Hebrew:[128] פירוש לפרקי אבוקראט) is interspersed with his own views.
Medical Aphorisms[129] of Moses (Rosner, 1989, Vol. 3) titled Fusul Musa in Arabic ("Chapters of Moses," Hebrew:[130] פרקי משה) contains 1500 aphorisms and many medical conditions are described.
Treatise on Hemorrhoids (in Rosner, 1984, Vol. 1; Hebrew:[131] ברפואת הטחורים) discusses also digestion and food.
Treatise on Cohabitation (in Rosner, 1984, Vol. 1) contains recipes as aphrodisiacs and anti-aphrodisiacs.
Treatise on Asthma (Rosner, 1994, Vol. 6)[132] discusses climates and diets and their effect on asthma and emphasizes the need for clean air.
Treatise on Poisons and Their Antidotes (in Rosner, 1984, Vol. 1) is an early toxicology textbook that remained popular for centuries.
Regimen of Health (in Rosner, 1990, Vol. 4; Hebrew:[133] הנהגת הבריאות) is a discourse on healthy living and the mind-body connection.
Discourse on the Explanation of Fits advocates healthy living and the avoidance of overabundance.
Glossary of Drug Names (Rosner, 1992, Vol. 7)[134] represents a pharmacopeia with 405 paragraphs with the names of drugs in Arabic, Greek, Syrian, Persian, Berber, and Spanish.
Treatise on logic[edit]
The Treatise on Logic (Arabic: Maqala Fi-Sinat Al-Mantiq) has been printed 17 times, including editions in Latin (1527), German (1805, 1822, 1833, 1828), French (1935), and English (1938), and in an abridged Hebrew form. The work illustrates the essentials of Aristotelian logic to be found in the teachings of the great Islamic philosophers such as Avicenna and, above all, Al-Farabi, "the Second Master," the "First Master" being Aristotle. In his work devoted to the Treatise, Rémi Brague stresses the fact that Al-Farabi is the only philosopher mentioned therein. This indicates a line of conduct for the reader, who must read the text keeping in mind Al-Farabi's works on logic. In the Hebrew versions, the Treatise is called The words of Logic which describes the bulk of the work. The author explains the technical meaning of the words used by logicians. The Treatise duly inventories the terms used by the logician and indicates what they refer to. The work proceeds rationally through a lexicon of philosophical terms to a summary of higher philosophical topics, in 14 chapters corresponding to Maimonides's birthdate of 14 Nissan. The number 14 recurs in many of Maimonides's works. Each chapter offers a cluster of associated notions. The meaning of the words is explained and illustrated with examples. At the end of each chapter, the author carefully draws up the list of words studied.
Until very recently, it was accepted that Maimonides wrote the Treatise on Logic in his twenties or even in his teen[135] years. Herbert Davidson has raised questions about Maimonides's authorship of this short work (and of other short works traditionally attributed to Maimonides). He maintains that Maimonides was not the author at all, based on a report of two Arabic-language manuscripts, unavailable to Western investigators in Asia Minor.[136] Rabbi Yosef Kafih maintained that it is by Maimonides and newly translated it to Hebrew (as Beiur M'lekhet HaHiggayon) from the Judeo-Arabic.[137]

See also[edit]
Averroes
Iggeret Teman (Epistle to Yemen)
Maimonides Foundation
Mimouna
Notes[edit]


^ Hebrew: מֹשֶׁה בֶּן־מַיְמוֹן Mōše ben-Maymōn; Arabic: موسى بن ميمون Mūsā bin Maymūn

^ Greek: Μωυσής Μαϊμωνίδης Mōusḗs Maïmōnídēs; Latin: Moses Maimonides

^ /ˌrɑːmˈbɑːm/, for Rabbeinu Mōše bēn Maimun, "Our Rabbi Moses, son of Maimon"


References[edit]


^ "Moses Maimonides | Biography, Philosophy, & Teachings". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 2016-12-20. Retrieved 2016-12-08.

^ "Hebrew Date Converter - 14th of Nisan, 4895 | Hebcal Jewish Calendar". www.hebcal.com. Archived from the original on 2021-03-07. Retrieved 2021-03-31.

^ "Hebrew Date Converter - 14th of Nisan, 4898 | Hebcal Jewish Calendar". www.hebcal.com. Archived from the original on 2021-03-07. Retrieved 2021-03-31.

^ Goldin, Hyman E. Kitzur Shulchan Aruch – Code of Jewish Law, Foreword to the New Edition. (New York: Hebrew Publishing Company, 1961)

^ "H-Net". Archived from the original on 2007-10-09. Retrieved 2007-05-06.

^ "The Influence of Islamic Thought on Maimonides". Maimonides Islamic Influences. Plato. Stanford. 2016. Archived from the original on 2014-12-09. Retrieved 2007-05-06.

^ "Isaac Newton: "Judaic monotheist of the school of Maimonides"". Achgut.com. 2007-06-19. Archived from the original on 2015-04-28. Retrieved 2010-03-13.

^ Jump up to: a b c d Julia Bess Frank (1981). "Moses Maimonides: rabbi or medicine". The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine. 54 (1): 79–88. PMC 2595894. PMID 7018097.

^ Maimonides: Abū ʿImrān Mūsā [Moses] ibn ʿUbayd Allāh [Maymūn] al‐Qurṭubī www.islamsci.mcgill.ca Archived 2011-08-27 at the Wayback Machine

^ "History of Medicine". AIME. Archived from the original on May 24, 2013.

^ S. R. Simon (1999). "Moses Maimonides: medieval physician and scholar". Arch Intern Med. 159 (16): 1841–5. doi:10.1001/archinte.159.16.1841. PMID 10493314.

^ Athar Yawar Email Address (2008). "Maimonides's medicine". The Lancet. 371 (9615): 804. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60365-7. S2CID 54415482.

^ Date of 1138 of the Common Era being the date of birth given by Maimonides himself, in the very last chapter and comment made by Maimonides in his Commentary of the Mishnah, Maimonides (1967), s.v. Uktzin 3:12 (end), and where he writes: "I began to write this composition when I was twenty-three years old, and I completed it in Egypt while I was aged thirty, which year is the 1,479th year of the Seleucid era (1168 CE)."

^ Joel E. Kramer, "Moses Maimonides: An Intellectual Portrait," p. 47 note 1. In Kenneth Seeskin, ed. (September 2005). The Cambridge Companion to Maimonides. ISBN 9780521525787.

^ 1138 in Stroumsa, Maimonides in His World: Portrait of a Mediterranean Thinker, Princeton University Press, 2009, p. 8

^ Sherwin B. Nuland (2008), Maimonides, Random House LLC, p. 38

^ "Moses Maimonides | biography – Jewish philosopher, scholar, and physician". Archived from the original on 2015-04-30. Retrieved 2015-06-04.

^ Gedaliah ibn Yahya ben Joseph, Shalshelet HaKabbalah Archived 2021-05-13 at the Wayback Machine Jerusalem 1962, p. ק; but in PDF p. 109 (Hebrew)

^ Abraham Zacuto, Sefer Yuchasin Archived 2021-05-06 at the Wayback Machine, Cracow 1580 (Hebrew), p. 261 in PDF, which reads: "… I saw in a booklet that the Ark of God, even Rabbi Moses b. Maimon, of blessed memory, had been taken up (i.e. euphemism for "had died"), in the year [4],965 anno mundi (= 1204/5 CE) in Egypt, and the Jews wept for him – as did [all] the Egyptians – three days, and they coined a name for that time of year, [saying], 'there was wailing,' and on the seventh day [of his passing], the news reached Alexandria, and on the eighth day, [the news reached] Jerusalem, and in Jerusalem they made a great public mourning [on his behalf] and called for a fast and public gathering, where it was that the prayer precentor read out the admonitions, 'If you shall walk in my statutes [etc.]' (Leviticus 26:3-ff.), as well as read the concluding verse [from the Prophets], 'And it came to pass that Samuel spoke to all of Israel [etc.],' and he then concluded by saying that the Ark of God had been taken away. Now after certain days they brought up his coffin to the Land of Israel, during which journey thieves encountered them, causing those who had gone up to flee, leaving there the coffin. Now the thieves, when they saw that they had all fled, they desired to have the coffin cast into the sea, but were unable with all their strength to uproot the coffin from the ground, even though they had been more than thirty men, and when they considered the matter, they then said to themselves that he was a godly and holy man, and so they went their way. However, they gave assurances to the Jews that they would escort them to their destination, and so it was that they also accompanied him and he was buried in Tiberias."

^ Marder, Michael (2014-11-11). The Philosopher's Plant: An Intellectual Herbarium. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 97. ISBN 978-0-231-53813-8. Archived from the original on 2021-07-17. Retrieved 2020-09-20.

^ "Maimonides". he.chabad.org (in Hebrew). Archived from the original on 2021-08-01. Retrieved 2021-08-02.

^ "Early Years". www.chabad.org. Archived from the original on 2020-07-16. Retrieved 2020-05-21.

^ "Maimonides Ancestors". Archived from the original on 2021-12-25. Retrieved 2020-05-21.

^ "Iggerot HaRambam, Iggeret Teiman". www.sefaria.org. Archived from the original on 2021-04-23. Retrieved 2021-03-31.

^ Stroumsa, Maimonides in His World: Portrait of a Mediterranean Thinker, Princeton University Press, 2009, p.65

^ Abraham Heschel, Maimonides (New York: Farrar Straus, 1982), Chapter 15, "Meditation on God," pp. 157–162.

^ Jump up to: a b 1954 Encyclopedia Americana, vol. 18, p. 140.

^ Y. K. Stillman, ed. (1984). "Libās". Encyclopaedia of Islam. Vol. 5 (2nd ed.). Brill Academic Publishers. p. 744. ISBN 978-90-04-09419-2.

^ "Almohads". Jewish Virtual Library. 2008. Archived from the original on 31 July 2016. Retrieved 22 March 2021.

^ Stroumsa (2009), Maimonides in His World, p.59

^ A.K. Bennison; M.A. Gallego García (2008). "Jewish Trading in Fez on the Eve of the Almohad Conquest" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-11-22. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Seder HaDoros (year 4927) quotes Maimonides as saying that he began writing his commentary on the Mishna when he was 23 years old, and published it when he was 30. Because of the dispute about the date of Maimonides's birth, it is not clear which year the work was published.

^ See for example: Solomon Zeitlin, "MAIMONIDES", The American Jewish Year Book, Vol. 37, pp 65 - 66. Archived 2021-12-25 at the Wayback Machine

^ Davidson, p. 29.

^ Jump up to: a b Goitein, S.D. Letters of Medieval Jewish Traders, Princeton University Press, 1973 (ISBN 0-691-05212-3), p. 208

^ Magazine, rambam_temple_mount, Jewish. "No Jew had been permitted to enter the holy city which has become a Christian bastion since the Crusaders conquered it in 1096". www.jewishmag.com. Archived from the original on 2018-11-03. Retrieved 2018-02-09.

^ Cohen, Mark R. Poverty and Charity in the Jewish Community of Medieval Egypt. Princeton University Press, 2005 (ISBN 0-691-09272-9), pp. 115–116

^ The "India Trade" (a term devised by the Arabist S.D. Goitein) was a highly lucrative business venture in which Jewish merchants from Egypt, the Mediterranean, and the Middle East imported and exported goods ranging from pepper to brass from various ports along the Malabar Coast between the 11th–13th centuries. For more info, see the "India Traders" chapter in Goitein, Letters of Medieval Jewish Traders, 1973 or Goitein, India Traders of the Middle Ages, 2008.

^ Goitein, Letters of Medieval Jewish Traders, p. 207

^ Cohen, Poverty and Charity in the Jewish Community of Medieval Egypt, p. 115

^ Baron, Salo Wittmayer (1952). A Social and Religious History of the Jews: High Middle Ages, 500-1200. Columbia University Press. p. 215. ISBN 978-0-231-08843-5. Archived from the original on 2021-12-25. Retrieved 2020-11-16.

^ Rustow, Marina (2010-10-01). "Sar Shalom ben Moses ha-Levi". Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Archived from the original on 2020-06-18. Retrieved 2020-06-17.

^ "Moses Maimonides". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Archived from the original on 2020-09-28. Retrieved 2020-06-17.

^ Jump up to: a b c Fred Rosner (2002). "The Life of Moses Maimonides, a Prominent Medieval Physician" (PDF). Einstein Quart J Biol Med. 19 (3): 125–128. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-03-05. Retrieved 2009-01-14.

^ Gesundheit B, Or R, Gamliel C, Rosner F, Steinberg A (April 2008). "Treatment of depression by Maimonides (1138–1204): Rabbi, Physician, and Philosopher" (PDF). Am J Psychiatry. 165 (4): 425–428. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.07101575. PMID 18381913. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-03-05.

^ Abraham Heschel, Maimonides (New York: Farrar Straus, 1982), Chapter 15, "Meditation on God," pp. 157–162, and also pp. 178–180, 184–185, 204, etc. Isadore Twersky, editor, A Maimonides Reader (New York: Behrman House, 1972), commences his "Introduction" with the following remarks, p. 1: "Maimonides's biography immediately suggests a profound paradox. A philosopher by temperament and ideology, a zealous devotee of the contemplative life who eloquently portrayed and yearned for the serenity of solitude and the spiritual exuberance of meditation, he nevertheless led a relentlessly active life that regularly brought him to the brink of exhaustion."

^ Responsa Pe’er HaDor, 143.

^ Such views of his works are found in almost all scholarly studies of the man and his significance. See, for example, the "Introduction" sub-chapter by Howard Kreisel to his overview article "Moses Maimonides," in History of Jewish Philosophy, edited by Daniel H. Frank and Oliver Leaman, Second Edition (New York and London: Routledge, 2003), pp. 245–246.

^ Karo, Joseph (2002).  David Avitan (ed.). Questions & Responsa Avqat Rokhel (in Hebrew). Jerusalem: Siyach Yisrael. p. 139 (responsum # 32). (first printed in Saloniki 1791)

^ Click to see full English translation of Maimonides's "Epistle to Yemen"

^ The comment on the effect of his "incessant travail" on his health is by Salo Baron, "Moses Maimonides," in Great Jewish Personalities in Ancient and Medieval Time, edited by Simon Noveck (B'nai B'rith Department of Adult Jewish Education, 1959), p. 227, where Baron also quotes from Maimonides's letter to Ibn Tibbon regarding his daily regime.

^ The Life of Maimonides jnul.huji.ac.il Archived 2010-11-20 at the Wayback Machine, Jewish National and University Library

^ hsje.org Amiram Barkat, "The End of the Exodus from Egypt" Archived 2011-07-17 at the Wayback Machine, Haaretz (Israel), 21 April 2005

^ אגרות הרמב"ם מהדורת שילת

^ Sarah E. Karesh; Mitchell M. Hurvitz (2005). Encyclopedia of Judaism. Facts on File. p. 305. ISBN 978-0-8160-5457-2. Archived from the original on 2021-12-25. Retrieved 2020-09-20.

^ H. J. Zimmels (1997). Ashkenazim and Sephardim: Their Relations, Differences, and Problems as Reflected in the Rabbinical Responsa (Revised ed.). Ktav Publishing House. p. 283. ISBN 978-0-88125-491-4. Archived from the original on 2021-12-25. Retrieved 2020-09-20.

^ Dogma in Medieval Jewish Thought, Menachem Kellner

^ "The Thirteen Principles of Jewish Faith". www.chabad.org. Archived from the original on 2015-09-05. Retrieved 2015-08-21.

^ See, for example: Marc B. Shapiro. The Limits of Orthodox Theology: Maimonides' Thirteen Principles Reappraised. Littman Library of Jewish Civilization (2011). pp. 1–14.

^ "Siddur Edot HaMizrach 2C, Additions for Shacharit: Thirteen Principles of Faith". www.sefaria.org. Archived from the original on 2020-11-28. Retrieved 2020-09-27.

^ Landau, Rabbi Reuven (1884). Sefer Degel Mahaneh Reuven (in Hebrew). Chernovitsi. OCLC 233297464. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved September 27, 2020.

^ Brown, Jeremy (2008). "Rabbi Reuven Landau and the Jewish Reaction to Copernican Thought in Nineteenth Century Europe". The Torah U-Madda Journal. Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary, an affiliate of Yeshiva University. 15 (2008): 112–142. JSTOR 40914730. Archived from the original on November 2, 2020. Retrieved September 27, 2020.

^ Shapiro, Marc B. (1993). "Maimonides' Thirteen Principles: The Last Word in Jewish Theology?". The Torah U-Madda Journal. Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary, an affiliate of Yeshiva University. 4 (1993): 187–242. JSTOR 40914883. Archived from the original on October 4, 2020. Retrieved September 27, 2020.

^ Levy, David B. "Book Review: New Heavens and a New Earth: The Jewish Reception of Copernican Thought". www.touroscholar.touro.edu. Journal of Jewish Identities. 8(1) (2015): 218–220. Archived from the original on 2020-07-11. Retrieved 2020-09-27.

^ Brown, Jeremy (2013). New Heavens and a New Earth: The Jewish Reception of Copernican Thought. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199754793.001.0001. ISBN 9780199754793.

^ Siegelbaum, Chana Bracha (2010) Women at the crossroads : a woman's perspective on the weekly Torah portion Archived 2015-09-12 at the Wayback Machine Gush Etzion: Midreshet B'erot Bat Ayin. ISBN 9781936068098 page 199

^ Last section of Maimonides's Introduction to Mishneh Torah

^ "אבקת רוכל - קרו, יוסף בן אפרים, 1488-1575 (page 70 of 417)". hebrewbooks.org. Archived from the original on 2021-05-06. Retrieved 2021-03-31.

^ Moses Maimonides, The Commandments, Neg. Comm. 290, at 269–71 (Charles B. Chavel trans., 1967).

^ Leslie, Donald. The Survival of the Chinese Jews; The Jewish Community of Kaifeng. Tʻoung pao, 10. Leiden: Brill, 1972, p. 157

^ Pollak, Michael. Mandarins, Jews, and Missionaries: The Jewish Experience in the Chinese Empire. The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1980, p. 413

^ Pollak, Mandarins, Jews, and Missionaries, pp. 297–298

^ "Hebrew Source of Maimonides's Levels of Giving with Danny Siegel's translation" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-10-26. Retrieved 2012-09-19.

^ Jump up to: a b "The Guide to the Perplexed". World Digital Library. Archived from the original on 23 July 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013.

^ Kraemer, 326-8

^ Kraemer, 66

^ Jump up to: a b Robinson, George. "Maimonides’ Conception of God/" Archived 2018-05-01 at the Wayback Machine My Jewish Learning. 30 April 2018.

^ Reuven Chaim Klein, "Weaning Away from Idolatry: Maimonides on the Purpose of Ritual Sacrifices Archived 2021-10-29 at the Wayback Machine", Religions 12(5), 363.

^ Telushkin, 29

^ Commentary on The Ethics of the Fathers 1:15. Qtd. in Telushkin, 115

^ Kraemer, 332-4

^ MT De'ot 6:1

^ "Maimonides believed that women were capable of being instructed in Talmud and even that women can be prophetesses." Kraemer, 336

^ Moses Maimonides (2007). The Guide to the Perplexed. BN Publishers.

^ Joseph Jacobs. "Moses Ben Maimon". Jewish Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 2011-05-23. Retrieved 2011-03-13.

^ Shlomo Pines (2006). "Maimonides (1135–1204)". Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 5: 647–654.

^ Isadore Twersky (2005). "Maimonides, Moses". Encyclopedia of Religion. 8: 5613–5618.

^ Maimonides, On Poisons and the Protection against Lethal Drugs - PART OF THE MEDICAL WORKS OF MOSES MAIMONIDES Brigham Young University Press - Provo, Utah (USA) 2009 ISBN 978-0-8425-2730-9; which specific drugs are called poisons by him would still need to be culled off from the book.

^ Joel E. Kramer, "Moses Maimonides: An Intellectual Portrait," p. 45. In Kenneth Seeskin, ed. (September 2005). The Cambridge Companion to Maimonides. ISBN 9780521525787.

^ Rudavsky, T. (March 2010). Maimonidies. Singapore: Wiley-Blackwell. p. 10. ISBN 978-1-4051-4898-6.

^ "Guide for the Perplexed, on". Sacred-texts.com. Archived from the original on 2010-04-14. Retrieved 2010-03-13.

^ See: Maimonides's Ma'amar Teḥayyath Hamethim (Treatise on the Resurrection of the Dead), published in Book of Letters and Responsa (ספר אגרות ותשובות), Jerusalem 1978, p. 9 (Hebrew). According to Maimonides, certain Jews in Yemen had sent to him a letter in the year 1189, evidently irritated as to why he had not mentioned the physical resurrection of the dead in his Hil. Teshuvah, chapter 8, and how that some persons in Yemen had begun to instruct, based on Maimonides's teaching, that when the body dies it will disintegrate and the soul will never return to such bodies after death. Maimonides denied that he ever insinuated such things, and reiterated that the body would indeed resurrect, but that the "world to come" was something different in nature.

^ Kraemer, 422

^ Commentary on the Mishna, Avot 5:6

^ "Mishneh Torah, Repentance 9:1". www.sefaria.org. Archived from the original on 1 August 2021. Retrieved 2 August 2021.

^ Within [the Torah] there is also another part which is called ‘hidden’ (mutsnaʿ), and this [concerns] the secrets (sodot) which the human intellect cannot attain, like the meanings of the statutes (ḥukim) and other hidden secrets. They can neither be attained through the intellect nor through sheer volition, but they are revealed before Him who created [the Torah] (Rabbi Abraham ben Asher, The Or ha-Sekhel)

^ Such as the first (religious) criticism of Kabbalah, Ari Nohem, by Leon Modena from 1639. In it, Modena urges a return to Maimonidean Aristotelianism. The Scandal of Kabbalah: Leon Modena, Jewish Mysticism, Early Modern Venice, Yaacob Dweck, Princeton University Press, 2011.

^ Menachem Kellner, Maimonides' Confrontation With Mysticism, Littman Library, 2006

^ Maimonides: Philosopher and Mystic Archived 2018-09-13 at the Wayback Machine from Chabad.org

^ Contemporary academic views in the study of Jewish mysticism, hold that 12-13th century Kabbalists wrote down and systemised their transmitted oral doctrines in oppositional response to Maimonidean rationalism. See e.g. Moshe Idel, Kabbalah: New Perspectives

^ The first comprehensive systemiser of Kabbalah, Moses ben Jacob Cordovero, for example, was influenced by Maimonides. One example is his instruction to undercut any conception of a Kabbalistic idea after grasping it in the mind. One's intellect runs to God in learning the idea, then returns in qualified rejection of false spatial/temporal conceptions of the idea's truth, as the human mind can only think in material references. Cited in Louis Jacobs, The Jewish Religion: A Companion, Oxford University Press, 1995, entry on Cordovero

^ Norman Lamm, The Religious Thought of Hasidism: Text and Commentary, Ktav Pub, 1999: Introduction to chapter on Faith/Reason has historical overview of religious reasons for opposition to Jewish philosophy, including the Ontological reason, one Medieval Kabbalist holding that "we begin where they end"

^ "Oath and Prayer of Maimonides". Library.dal.ca. Archived from the original on 2008-06-29. Retrieved 2010-03-13.

^ Friedländer, Michael (January 1956). Guide for the Perplexed. Dover Publications. ISBN 9780486203515. Archived from the original on 2019-10-20. Retrieved 2020-03-11.

^ Maimonides, Moses, 1135-1204 (1974-12-15). The guide of the perplexed. Pines, Shlomo, 1908-1990,, Strauss, Leo, Bollingen Foundation Collection (Library of Congress). [Chicago]. ISBN 0226502309. OCLC 309924.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ Isidore Twersky, Introduction to the Code of Maimonides (Mishneh Torah), Yale Judaica Series, vol. XII (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1980). passim, and especially Chapter VII, "Epilogue," pp. 515–538.

^ Reif, Stefan C. (1994). "Review of 'Sobre la Vida y Obra de Maimonides', ed. Jesus Pelaez del Rosal". Journal of Semitic Studies. 39 (1): 124. doi:10.1093/jss/XXXIX.1.123.

^ This is covered in all histories of the Jews. E.g., including such a brief overview as Cecil Roth, A History of the Jews, Revised Edition (New York: Schocken, 1970), pp. 175–179.

^ D.J. Silver, Maimonidean Criticism and the Maimonidean Controversy, 1180–1240 (Leiden: Brill, 1965), is still the most detailed account.

^ David Hartman, Maimonides: Torah and Philosophic Quest (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1976), p. 98.

^ On the extensive philosophical aspects of Maimonides's halakhic works, see in particular Isidore Twersky's Introduction to the Code of Maimonides (Mishneh Torah), Yale Judaica Series, vol. XII (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1980). Twersky devotes a major portion of this authoritative study to the philosophical aspects of the Mishneh Torah itself.

^ The Maimunist or Maimonidean controversy is covered in all histories of Jewish philosophy and general histories of the Jews. For an overview, with bibliographic references, see Idit Dobbs-Weinstein, "The Maimonidean Controversy," in History of Jewish Philosophy, Second Edition, edited by Daniel H. Frank and Oliver Leaman (London and New York: Routledge, 2003), pp. 331–349. Also see Colette Sirat, A History of Jewish Philosophy in the Middle Ages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), pp. 205–272.

^ Mercedes Rubio (2006). "Aquinas and Maimonides on the Divine Names". Aquinas and Maimonides on the possibility of the knowledge of god. Springer-Verlag. pp. 11, 65–126, 211, 218. doi:10.1007/1-4020-4747-9_2. ISBN 978-1-4020-4720-6.

^ Vivian McAlister, Maimonides's cooling period and organ retrieval (Canadian Journal of Surgery 2004; 47: 8 – 9)

^ "NeoHasid.org | Rambam and Gaia". neohasid.org. Archived from the original on 2013-12-08. Retrieved 2013-12-11.

^ David Morris. "Major Grant Awarded to Maimonides". Florida Jewish Journal. Archived from the original on July 30, 2007. Retrieved 2010-03-13.

^ Eisner, Jane (June 1, 2000). "Fear meets fellowship". The Philadelphia Inquirer. p. 25. Archived from the original on November 23, 2020. Retrieved August 29, 2020 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Linzmayer, Owen (2012). "Israel". The Banknote Book. San Francisco, CA: www.BanknoteNews.com. Archived from the original on 2012-08-29. Retrieved 2021-12-25.

^ "Harvard University Press: Maimonides after 800 Years : Essays on Maimonides and his Influence by Jay M. Harris". Hup.harvard.edu. Archived from the original on 2009-05-19. Retrieved 2010-03-13.

^ Shelly Paz (8 May 2008) Tourism Ministry plans joint project with Morocco, Spain. The Jerusalem Post

^ "The Israel Museum, Jerusalem". www.imj.org.il. 2 October 2018. Archived from the original on 2019-05-20. Retrieved 2019-07-11.

^ Kehot Publication Society, Chabad.org.

^ Maimonides (1963), Introduction, p. XIV

^ Maimonides (1963), Preface, p. VI

^ Maimonides (1963), Preface, p. VII

^ Volume 5 translated by Barzel (foreword by Rosner).

^ Title page, TOC.

^ "כתבים רפואיים – ג (פירוש לפרקי אבוקראט) / משה בן מימון (רמב"ם) / ת"ש-תש"ב – אוצר החכמה". Archived from the original on 2016-06-21. Retrieved 2016-07-19.

^ Maimonides. Medical Aphorisms (Treatises 1–5 6–9 10–15 16–21 22–25), Brigham Young University, Provo – Utah

^ "כתבים רפואיים – ב (פרקי משה ברפואה) / משה בן מימון (רמב"ם) / ת"ש-תש"ב – אוצר החכמה". Archived from the original on 2016-06-21. Retrieved 2016-07-19.

^ "כתבים רפואיים – ד (ברפואת הטחורים) / משה בן מימון (רמב"ם) / ת"ש-תש"ב – אוצר החכמה". Archived from the original on 2016-06-21. Retrieved 2016-07-19.

^ Title page, TOC.

^ "כתבים רפואיים – א (הנהגת הבריאות) / משה בן מימון (רמב"ם) / ת"ש-תש"ב – אוצר החכמה". Archived from the original on 2016-06-29. Retrieved 2016-07-19.

^ Title page, TOC.

^ Abraham Heschel, Maimonides. New York: Farrar Straus, 1982 p. 22 ("at sixteen")

^ Davidson, pp. 313 ff.

^ "באור מלאכת ההגיון / משה בן מימון (רמב"ם) / תשנ"ז – אוצר החכמה". Archived from the original on 2016-06-21. Retrieved 2016-07-19.




See also[edit]
 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Joseph Jacobs, Isaac Broydé, The Executive Committee of the Editorial Board, and Jacob Zallel Lauterbach (1901–1906). "Moses Ben Maimon".  In Singer, Isidore;  et al. (eds.). The Jewish Encyclopedia. New York: Funk & Wagnalls.{{cite encyclopedia}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Bibliography[edit]
.mw-parser-output .refbegin{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul{margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li{margin-left:0;padding-left:3.2em;text-indent:-3.2em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents ul,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents ul li{list-style:none}@media(max-width:720px){.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li{padding-left:1.6em;text-indent:-1.6em}}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-columns ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
Barzel, Uriel (1992). Maimonides's Medical Writings: The Art of Cure Extracts. Vol. 5. Galen: Maimonides Research Institute. Archived from the original on 2016-06-17. Retrieved 2015-11-14.
Bos, Gerrit (2002). Maimonides. On Asthma (vol.1, vol.2). Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press.
Bos, Gerrit (2007). Maimonides. Medical Aphorisms Treatise 1–5 (6–9, 10–15, 16–21, 22–25). Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press.
Davidson, Herbert A. (2005). Moses Maimonides: The Man and his Works. Oxford University Press.
Feldman, Rabbi Yaakov (2008). Shemonah Perakim: The Eight Chapters of the Rambam. Targum Press.
Fox, Marvin (1990). Interpreting Maimonides. Univ. of Chicago Press.
Guttman, Julius (1964).  David Silverman (ed.). Philosophies of Judaism. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America.
Halbertal, Moshe (2013). Maimonides: Life and Thought. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691158518. Archived from the original on 2015-09-05. Retrieved 2015-06-23.
Hart Green, Kenneth (2013). Leo Strauss on Maimonides: The Complete Writings. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hartman, David (1976). Maimonides: Torah and Philosophic Quest. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America. ISBN 9780827600836.
Heschel, Abraham Joshua (1982). Maimonides: The Life and Times of a Medieval Jewish Thinker. New York: Farrar Straus.
Husik, Isaac (2002) [1941]. A History of Jewish Philosophy. Dover Publications, Inc. Originally published by the Jewish Publication of America, Philadelphia.
Kaplan, Aryeh (1994). "Maimonides Principles: The Fundamentals of Jewish Faith". The Aryeh Kaplan Anthology. I.
Kellner, Menachem (1986). Dogma in Medieval Jewish Thought. London: Oxford University press. ISBN 978-0-19-710044-8.
Kohler, George Y. (2012). "Reading Maimonides's Philosophy in 19th Century Germany". Amsterdam Studies in Jewish Philosophy. 15.
Kraemer, Joel L. (2008). Maimonides: The Life and World of One of Civilization's Greatest Minds. Doubleday.
Leaman, Daniel H.; Leaman, Frank; Leaman, Oliver (2003). History of Jewish Philosophy (Second ed.). London and New York: Routledge. See especially chapters 10 through 15.
Maimonides (1963).  Suessmann Muntner (ed.). Moshe Ben Maimon (Maimonides) Medical Works (in Hebrew). Translated by Moshe Ibn Tibbon. Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook. OCLC 729184001.
Maimonides (1967). Mishnah, with Maimonides' Commentary (in Hebrew). Vol. 3. Translated by Yosef Qafih. Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook. OCLC 741081810.
Rosner, Fred (1984–1994). Maimonides's Medical Writings. Vol. 7 Vols. Maimonides Research Institute. (Volume 5 translated by Uriel Barzel; foreword by Fred Rosner.)
Seidenberg, David (2005). "Maimonides – His Thought Related to Ecology". The Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature. Archived from the original on 2013-12-08. Retrieved 2013-12-11.
Shapiro, Marc B. (1993). "Maimonides Thirteen Principles: The Last Word in Jewish Theology?". The Torah U-Maddah Journal. 4.
Shapiro, Marc B. (2008). Studies in Maimonides and His Interpreters. Scranton (PA): University of Scranton Press.
Sirat, Colette (1985). A History of Jewish Philosophy in the Middle Ages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. See chapters 5 through 8.
Strauss, Leo (1974).  Shlomo Pines (ed.). How to Begin to Study the Guide: The Guide of the Perplexed – Maimonides (in Arabic). Vol. 1. University of Chicago Press.
Strauss, Leo (1988). Persecution and the Art of Writing. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226777115. reprint
Stroumsa, Sarah (2009). Maimonides in His World: Portrait of a Mediterranean Thinker. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13763-6. Archived from the original on 2016-06-03. Retrieved 2011-01-19.
Telushkin, Joseph (2006). A Code of Jewish Ethics. Vol. 1 (You Shall Be Holy). New York: Bell Tower. OCLC 460444264.
Twersky, Isadore (1972).  I Twersky (ed.). A Maimonides Reader. New York: Behrman House.
Twersky, Isador (1980). "Introduction to the Code of Maimonides (Mishneh Torah". Yale Judaica Series. New Haven and London. XII.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Moshe ben Maimon.




Wikiquote has quotations related to: Maimonides




Wikisource has original works written by or about:Moshe ben Maimon

About Maimonides
Video lecture on Maimonides by Dr. Henry Abramson
Maimonides entry in Jewish Encyclopedia
Maimonides entry in the Encyclopædia Britannica
Maimonides entry in the Encyclopaedia Judaica, 2nd edition
Seeskin, Kenneth. "Maimonides".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Maimonides entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"
Maimonides, a biography — book by David Yellin and Israel Abrahams
Maimonides as a Philosopher
The Influence of Islamic Thought on Maimonides
"The Moses of Cairo," Article from Policy Review
Rambam and the Earth: Maimonides as a Proto-Ecological Thinker – reprint on neohasid.org from The Encyclopedia of Religion and Ecology
Anti-Maimonidean Demons by Jose Faur, describing the controversy surrounding Maimonides's works
David Yellin and Israel Abrahams, Maimonides (1903) (full text of a biography)
Y. Tzvi Langermann (2007). "Maimonides: Abū ʿImrān Mūsā [Moses] ibn ʿUbayd Allāh [Maymūn] al‐Qurṭubī".  In Thomas Hockey;  et al. (eds.). The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers. New York: Springer. pp. 726–7. ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0. (PDF version)
Maimonides at intellectualencounters.org
Kriesel, Howard (2015). Judaism as Philosophy: Studies in Maimonides and the Medieval Jewish Philosophers of Provence. Boston: Academic Studies Press. doi:10.2307/j.ctt21h4xpc. ISBN 9781618117892. JSTOR j.ctt21h4xpc.
Friedberg, Albert (2013). Crafting the 613 Commandments: Maimonides on the Enumeration, Classification, and Formulation of the Scriptural Commandments. Boston: Academic Studies Press. doi:10.2307/j.ctt21h4wf8. ISBN 9781618118486. JSTOR j.ctt21h4wf8.
Yahoo Maimonides Discussion Group
The Guide: An Explanatory Commentary on Each Chapter of Maimonides' Guide of The Perplexed by Scott Michael Alexander (covers all of Book I, currently)
Maimonides's works
Complete Mishneh Torah online, halakhic work of Maimonides
Sefer Hamitzvot, English translation
Oral Readings of Mishne Torah — Free listening and Download, site also had classes in Maimonides's Iggereth Teiman
Maimonides 13 Principles
Intellectual Encounters – Main Thinkers – Moses Maimonides, in intellectualencounters.org
Maimonides, Mishneh Torah, Autograph Draft, Egypt, c. 1180
British Library - Autograph responsum of Moses Maimonides, pre-eminent Jewish polymath and spiritual leader, Ilana Tahan
Digitized works by Maimonides at the Leo Baeck Institute
Texts by Maimonides
Siddur Mesorath Moshe, a prayerbook based on the early Jewish liturgy as found in Maimonides's Mishne Tora
Rambam's introduction to the Mishneh Torah (English translation)
Rambam's introduction to the Commentary on the Mishnah (Hebrew language|Hebrew Fulltext)
The Guide For the Perplexed by Moses Maimonides translated into English by Michael Friedländer
Writings of Maimonides; manuscripts and early print editions. Jewish National and University Library
Facsimile edition of Moreh Nevukhim/The Guide for the Perplexed (illuminated Hebrew manuscript, Barcelona, 1347–48). The Royal Library, Copenhagen
University of Cambridge Library collection of Judeo-Arabic letters and manuscripts written by or to Maimonides. It includes the last letter his brother David sent him before drowning at sea.
A. Ashur, A newly discovered medical recipe written by Maimonides
M.A Friedman and A. Ashur, A newly-discovered autograph responsum of Maimonides
Works by Maimonides at Post-Reformation Digital Library




.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}showvteMedieval philosophersIslamicEarly
Jabir ibn Hayyan (Geber)
al-Nazzam
Al-Kindi (Alkindus)
Abu Bakr al-Razi (Rhazes)
Ikhwan al-Safa' (Brethren of Purity)
Matta ibn Yunus
Al-Farabi (Alpharabius)
Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani
Ibn Masarra
Abd al-Jabbar
Al-Amiri
Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani
Miskawayh
Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen)
Abu Rayhan al-Biruni
al-Kirmani
High
Ibn Sina (Avicenna)
Ibn Hazm
Al-Ghazali (Algazel)
Abu l-Barakat al-Baghdadi
Ibn Bajjah (Avempace)
Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani 
Ibn Tufail
Ibn Rushd (Averroes)
Late
Ibn Sab'in
Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi
Fakhr al-Din ar-Razi
Rashid al-Din
Ibn Arabi
al-Qazwini
Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi
Athir al-Din al-Abhari
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
Ibn al-Nafis
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ibn Khaldun
JewishMedieval
Isaac Israeli ben Solomon
Saadia Gaon
Solomon ibn Gabirol
Judah Halevi
Abraham ibn Daud
Maimonides
Nachmanides
Gersonides
Hasdai Crescas
Joseph Albo
ChristianEarly
"Church Fathers"
Augustine of Hippo
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Isidore of Seville
John Scotus Eriugena
Alcuin
11–12thcentury
"Scholasticism"
Anselm of Canterbury
Peter Abelard
Anselm of Laon
Hugh of Saint Victor
Richard of Saint Victor
Roscelin
Peter Lombard
Alexander of Hales
Bernard of Chartres
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Gilbert de la Porrée
Alain de Lille
13–14thcentury
Michael Scot
Robert Grosseteste
Albertus Magnus
Bonaventure
Thomas Aquinas
Siger of Brabant
Boetius of Dacia
Henry of Ghent
Roger Bacon
John Peckham
Ramon Llull
Petrus Aureolus
Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt
Durandus
Giles of Rome
Godfrey of Fontaines
Duns Scotus
William of Ockham
Late
Jean Buridan
Nicole Oresme
Albert of Saxony
Francesc Eiximenis
Vincent Ferrer
Paul of Venice
Lambertus de Monte
John Hennon
See also Renaissance philosophy
showvtePhilosophy of religionConcepts in religion
Afterlife
Euthyphro dilemma
Faith
or religious belief
Intelligent design
Miracle
Problem of evil
Soul
Spirit
Theodicy
Theological veto
Conceptions of God
Aristotelian view
Brahman
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Egoism
Holy Spirit
Misotheism
Pandeism
Personal god
Process theology
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover
God in
Abrahamic religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Mormonism
Sikhism
Baháʼí Faith
Wicca
Existence of GodFor
Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological
Kalam
Contingency
Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuning of the universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Necessary existent
Ontological
Pascal's wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological
Natural law
Watchmaker analogy
Transcendental
Against
747 gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot
Theology
Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Demonology
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism
Christian
Agnostic
Atheistic
Feminist theology
Thealogy
Womanist theology
Fideism
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism
Religious
Secular
Christian
Inclusivism
Theories about religions
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism
Metaphysical
Religious
Humanistic
New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Possibilianism
Process theology
Religious skepticism
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism
more...
Religious language
Eschatological verification
Language game
Logical positivism
Apophatic theology
Verificationism
Problem of evil
Augustinian theodicy
Best of all possible worlds
Euthyphro dilemma
Inconsistent triad
Irenaean theodicy
Natural evil
Theodicy
Philosophersof religion(by date active)Ancient andmedieval
Anselm of Canterbury
Augustine of Hippo
Avicenna
Averroes
Boethius
Erasmus
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers
Pico della Mirandola
Heraclitus
King James VI and I
Marcion of Sinope
Thomas Aquinas
Maimonides
Early modern
Augustin Calmet
René Descartes
Blaise Pascal
Baruch Spinoza
Nicolas Malebranche
Gottfried W Leibniz
William Wollaston
Thomas Chubb
David Hume
Baron d'Holbach
Immanuel Kant
Johann G Herder
18001850
Friedrich Schleiermacher
Karl C F Krause
Georg W F Hegel
William Whewell
Ludwig Feuerbach
Søren Kierkegaard
Karl Marx
Albrecht Ritschl
Afrikan Spir
18801900
Ernst Haeckel
W K Clifford
Friedrich Nietzsche
Harald Høffding
William James
Vladimir Solovyov
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Otto
Lev Shestov
Sergei Bulgakov
Pavel Florensky
Ernst Cassirer
Joseph Maréchal
1920postwar
George Santayana
Bertrand Russell
Martin Buber
René Guénon
Paul Tillich
Karl Barth
Emil Brunner
Rudolf Bultmann
Gabriel Marcel
Reinhold Niebuhr
Charles Hartshorne
Mircea Eliade
Frithjof Schuon
J L Mackie
Walter Kaufmann
Martin Lings
Peter Geach
George I Mavrodes
William Alston
Antony Flew
197019902010
William L Rowe
Dewi Z Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
Anthony Kenny
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Richard Swinburne
Robert Merrihew Adams
Ravi Zacharias
Peter van Inwagen
Daniel Dennett
Loyal Rue
Jean-Luc Marion
William Lane Craig
Ali Akbar Rashad
Alexander Pruss
Related topics
Criticism of religion
Desacralization of knowledge
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
History of religion
Religion
Religious language
Religious philosophy
Relationship between religion and science
Faith and rationality
more...

 Portal
 Category

showvteSocial and political philosophyAncient
Aristotle
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Han Fei
Lactantius
Laozi
Mencius
Mozi
Origen
Philo
Plato
Plutarch
Polybius
Shang
Sun Tzu
Tertullian
Thucydides
Valluvar
Xenophon
Xunzi
Medieval
Alpharabius
Aquinas
Avempace
Averroes
Baldus
Bartolus
Bruni
Dante
Gelasius
al-Ghazali
Giles
Gratian
Gregory
Ibn Khaldun
John of Salisbury
Latini
Maimonides
Marsilius
Muhammad
Nizam al-Mulk
Ockham
Photios
Ibn Tufail
Wang
Early modern
Beza
Boétie
Bodin
Bossuet
Buchanan
Calvin
Duplessis-Mornay
Erasmus
Filmer
Grotius
Guicciardini
Harrington
Hayashi
Hobbes
Hotman
James
Leibniz
Locke
Luther
Machiavelli
Malebranche
Milton
Montaigne
More
Müntzer
Pufendorf
Sidney
Spinoza
Suárez
18th–19th-century
Bakunin
Bastiat
Bentham
Bolingbroke
Bonald
Burke
Comte
Condorcet
Constant
Cortés
Emerson
Engels
Fichte
Fourier
Franklin
Godwin
Hamann
Hegel
Herder
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
political philosophy
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Madison
Maistre
Marx
Mazzini
Mill
Montesquieu
Nietzsche
Novalis
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Schiller
Smith
Spencer
de Staël
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Vico
Vivekananda
Voltaire
20th–21st-century
Adorno
Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Bernstein
Butler
Camus
Chomsky
de Beauvoir
Debord
Deleuze
Dewey
Dmowski
Du Bois
Durkheim
Dworkin
Evola
Foucault
Fromm
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Guénon
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Irigaray
Kautsky
Kirk
Kropotkin
Laclau
Lenin
Luxemburg
MacIntyre
Mansfield
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Maurras
Michels
Mises
Mouffe
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Nursî
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Polanyi
Popper
Qutb
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Röpke
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Scruton
Searle
Shariati
Simmel
Skinner
Sombart
Sorel
Spann
Spooner
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Tucker
Voegelin
Walzer
Weber
Weil
Žižek
Social theories
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Elitism
Fascism
Feminist political theory
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Individualism
Islam
Islamism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Related articles
Critique of political economy
Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology
Index

Category

showvteMedicine in the medieval Islamic worldPhysicians7th century
Al-Harith ibn Kalada and his son
Abu Hafsa Yazid
Bukhtishu
Masarjawaih
Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi
Rufaida Al-Aslamia
Ibn Uthal
Zaynab al-Awadiya
8th century
Bukhtishu family
Ja'far al-Sadiq
9th century
Ali al-Ridha
Albubather
Bukhtishu family
Jabril ibn Bukhtishu
Jabir ibn Hayyan
Hunayn ibn Ishaq and his son
Yusuf Al-Khuri
Yahya ibn Sarafyun
Al-Kindi
Masawaiyh
Shapur ibn Sahl
al-Tabari
Al-Ruhawi
Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu
Salmawaih ibn Bunan
10th century
Qusta ibn Luqa
Abu ul-Ala Shirazi
Abul Hasan al-Tabari
Al-Natili
Qumri
Abu Zayd al-Balkhi
Isaac Israeli ben Solomon
al-Majusi
 al-Masihi
Abu Mansur Muwaffaq
al-Razi
Ibn Juljul
al-Jabali
Al-Tamimi, the physician
al-Zahrawi
Ibn al-Jazzar
Al-Kashkari
Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath
Ibn al-Batriq
Ibrahim ibn Baks
Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i
Abu Bakr Bokhari
Aayon Ibn Aayon
11th century
Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani
Ibn al-Haytham
Al-Biruni
Ali ibn Ridwan
Avicenna
Ephraim ibn al-Za'faran
Ibn al-Wafid
Ammar al-Mawsili
Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu
Ibn Butlan
al-Kirmani
Ibn al-Kattani
Ibn Jazla
Marwan ibn Ganah
Masawaih al-Mardini
al-Ilaqi
Ibn Al-Thahabi
Ibn Abi Sadiq
Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal
Ibn Hindu
Al-Badi' al-Asturlabi
12th century
Avempace
Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar
Ahmad ibn Farrokh
Ibn Hubal
Zayn al-Din Gorgani
Maimonides
Serapion the Younger
Ibn Zuhr
Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili
 al-Turjali
Averroes
Ibn Tufail
Al-Ghafiqi
Ibn Abi al-Hakam
Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Al-Samawal al-Maghribi
Ibn al-Tilmidh
Ibn Jumay‘
13th century
Ibn al-Baitar
Ibn Tumlus
Sa'ad al-Dawla
Al-Shahrazuri
Rashidun al-Suri
As-Suwaydi
Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat
Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon
Da'ud Abu al-Fadl
Al-Dakhwar
Ibn Abi Usaybi'a
Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta
Ibn al‐Raqqam
Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi
Ibn al-Nafis
Zakariya al-Qazwini
Najib ad-Din-e-Samarqandi
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Ibn al-Quff
Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi
14th century
Ibn al-Akfani
Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli
Al-Nagawri
Aqsara'i
Zayn-e-Attar
Mansur ibn Ilyas
Jaghmini
Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi
Najm al-Din al-Shirazi
Nakhshabi
al-Kazaruni
al-Kutubi
Ibn Shuayb
Ibn al-Khatib
Rashid al-Din Hamadani
15th century
Abu Sa'id al-Afif
Muhammad Ali Astarabadi
Husayni Isfahani
Burhan-ud-din Kermani
Sabuncuoglu Sherefeddin
al-Harawi
Nurbakhshi
Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb
16th century
Hakim-e-Gilani
Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani
Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf
Dawud al-Antaki
Sultan Ali Khorasani
17th century
Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri
Concepts
Psychology
Ophthalmology
Works
Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah
The Canon of Medicine
Tacuinum Sanitatis
Anatomy Charts of the Arabs
The Book of Healing
Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye
De Gradibus
Al-Tasrif
Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi
Adab al-Tabib
Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya
Al-Hawi
Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon
Lives of the Physicians
Centers
Bimaristan
Nur al-Din Bimaristan
Al-'Adudi
Influences
Ancient Greek medicine
Ancient Iranian medicine
Ayurveda
Influenced
Medieval medicine
Medical Renaissance
Renaissance medicine
Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences

showvteAristotelianismOverview
Aristotle
Lyceum
Peripatetic school
Physics
Biology
Ethics
Logic
Theology (unmoved mover)
Ideas and interests
Active intellect
Antiperistasis
Arete
Category of being
Catharsis
Classical unities
Correspondence theory of truth
Essence–accident
Eudaimonia
Four causes
Future contingents
Genus–differentia
Hexis
Hylomorphism
Intromission theory of vision
Ignoratio elenchi
Lexis
Magnanimity
Mimesis
Minima naturalia
Moderate realism
Aristotle's theory of universals (substantial form)
Mythos
Philosophy of nature (sublunary sphere)
Philia
Plenism
Rational animal
Phronesis
Potentiality and actuality
Sensus communis
Substance theory (hypokeimenon, ousia)
Syllogism
Telos
Temporal finitism
To ti en einai/to ti esti
Use value/exchange value
Virtue ethics
Corpus Aristotelicum
Physics
Organon
Nicomachean Ethics
Politics
Metaphysics
On the Soul
Rhetoric
Poetics
Followers
Alexander the Great
Lyceum
Aristoxenus
Clearchus of Soli
Dicaearchus
Eudemus of Rhodes
Theophrastus
Strato of Lampsacus
Lyco of Troas
Aristo of Ceos
Critolaus
Diodorus of Tyre
Erymneus
Andronicus of Rhodes

Islamic Golden Age
Al-Kindi
Al-Farabi
Avicenna
Averroes

Jewish
Maimonides

Scholastics
Peter Lombard
Albertus Magnus
Thomas Aquinas
Duns Scotus
Peter of Spain
Jacopo Zabarella
Pietro Pomponazzi
Cesar Cremonini

Modern
Newman
Trendelenburg
Brentano
Adler
Foot
MacIntyre
Smith
Hursthouse
Nussbaum

Related topics
Platonism
Commentaries on Aristotle
Renaissance commentators
Recovery of Aristotle
Scholasticism
Thomism
Conimbricenses
Pseudo-Aristotle
Views on women
Aristotle's wheel paradox
Aristotle's razor
Metabasis paradox

 Category
 Philosophy portal

showvteRishonimNorth Africa
Isaac Alfasi (Rif)
Chananel ben Chushiel
Dunash ben Labrat
Zechariah Aghmati
Nissim ben Jacob
Samuel ben Jacob ibn Jam
Shemariah ben Elhanan
Sar Shalom ben Moses
Spain (except Catalonia)
Maimonides
Judah Halevi
Abraham ibn Ezra
Yom Tov Asevilli (Ritva)
Joseph ibn Migash (Ri Migash)
Meir Abulafia (Ramah)
Bahya ibn Paquda
Bahya ben Asher
David Abudirham
Joseph Albo
Isaac ben Moses Arama (Akeidat Yitzchak)
Rabbenu Yerucham
Shem Tov ben Abraham ibn Gaon (Migdal Oz)
Meir ben Solomon Abi-Sahula
Isaac ibn Ghiyyat
Maimon ben Joseph
Isaac Aboab I
Abraham ibn Daud
Moses ibn Ezra
Jonah ibn Janah
Abraham Saba
Catalonia
Nachmanides
Menachem Meiri
Nissim of Gerona (Ran)
Shlomo ibn Aderet (Rashba)
Yonah Gerondi (Rabbeinu Yonah)
Zerachiah ha-Levi of Girona (Baal HaMaor)
Hasdai Crescas
Aharon HaLevi (Ra'ah)
Isaac ben Sheshet (Rivash)
Simeon ben Zemah Duran (Tashbatz)
Vidal of Tolosa (Maggid Mishneh)
Joseph ibn Habib (Nimmukei Yosef)
Azriel of Gerona
Moshe Chalava
Judah ben Yakar
Judah ben Barzillai
Provence
Hachmei Provence
Abraham ben David (Raavad)
Gersonides (Ralbag)
David Kimhi (Radak)
Abba Mari
Isaac ben Abba Mari (HaIttur)
Abraham ben Nathan (HaManhig)
David ben Levi of Narbonne (HaMichtam)
Moses ben Joseph (Rambi)
Abraham ben Isaac of Narbonne (Raavad II, HaEshkol)
Moshe ha-Darshan
Meshullam ben Jacob
Asher ben Meshullam
Abraham of Montpellier
Joseph Caspi
Isaac the Blind
Samuel ibn Tibbon
Isaac of Narbonne
Aaron ben Jacob ha-Kohen
France (except Provence)
Rashi
List of Tosafists
Rabbeinu Tam
Rashbam
Eliezer ben Samuel (Yereim)
Isaac ben Samuel (Ri HaZaken)
Moses ben Jacob of Coucy (Semag)
Judah ben Nathan (Rivan)
Bechor Shor
Abraham ben Joseph of Orleans
Yechiel of Paris
Rivam
Peretz ben Elijah
Eliezer of Toul
Chaim Paltiel
Jacob of Orléans
Samson of Chinon
Jacob of Chinon
Eliezer of Touques
Isaac ben Abraham of Dampierre
Elhanan ben Isaac of Dampierre
Baruch ben Isaac
Samson ben Abraham of Sens
Isaac ben Eliezer Halevi
Meir ben Samuel
Moses of Évreux
Samuel of Évreux
Samuel ben Solomon of Falaise
Judah ben Isaac Messer Leon
Joseph ben Samuel Bonfils
Menahem ben Helbo
Simeon Kara
Shemaiah of Soissons
Elijah ben Menahem HaZaken
Ephraim ben Samson
Germany
Gershom ben Judah (Rabbeinu Gershom)
Asher ben Jehiel (Rosh)
Jacob ben Asher (Baal HaTurim)
Mordechai ben Hillel (Mordechai)
Meir of Rothenburg (Maharam MeRotenberg)
Yaakov ben Moshe Levi Moelin (Maharil)
Eliezer ben Nathan (Ra'aven)
Eliezer ben Joel HaLevi (Raavyah)
Eleazar of Worms (Rokeach)
Meir HaKohen (Hagahot Maimuniot)
Judah ben Samuel of Regensburg (Yehudah haHasid)
Yaakov ben Yakar
Isaac ben Mordecai of Regensburg
Ephraim ben Isaac of Regensburg
Eliezer ben Isaac ha-Gadol
Judah ben Kalonymus
Yehuda HaKohen ben Meir
Meir ben Baruch Halevi
Israel Bruna
Israel of Bamberg
Ephraim of Bonn
Judah ben Asher
Joel ben Isaac ha-Levi
Jacob ben Judah Landau
Samuel ben Natronai
Alexander Suslin
Jacob Weil
Isaac ben Asher ha-Levi
Simha of Speyer
Isaac Asir HaTikvah
England
Aaron of Canterbury
Aaron of York
Elias of London
Eliyahu Menachem of London
Hagin Deulacres
Jacob ben Judah of London
Josce of London
Moses ben Isaac ben ha-Nessiah
Moses of London
Yom Tov of Joigny
Berechiah de Nicole
Austria
Israel Isserlein (Terumat HaDeshen)
Isaac of Vienna (Or Zarua)
Avigdor Cohen of Vienna
Isaac Tyrnau
Italy
Nathan ben Jehiel (the Aruch)
Isaiah di Trani (Rid)
Isaiah di Trani the Younger (Riaz)
Obadiah Bartenura
Menahem Recanati
Zedekiah Anaw (Shibbolei HaLeket)
Benjamin Anaw
Judah Anav
Moses ben Meir of Ferrara
Eliezer ben Samuel of Verona
Hillel ben Samuel
Joseph Colon Trabotto
Isaac ben Melchizedek
Judah Messer Leon
Elsewhere
Isaac Abarbanel
Elijah Mizrachi
Tobiah ben Eliezer (Lekach Tov)
Zerahiah the Greek
Isaac ben Dorbolo
Isaac ben Samuel of Acre
Moses Taku
Isaac ben Jacob ha-Lavan
Nathan ben Abraham I
Hillel ben Eliakim
Judah Leon ben Moses Mosconi
Nethanel ben Isaiah‎

showAuthority control General
Integrated Authority File (Germany)
ISNI
1
Online PWN
VIAF
1
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Spain
France (data)
Catalonia
Italy
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Israel
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Russia
Sweden
Vatican
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
RERO (Switzerland)
1
Social Networks and Archival Context
SUDOC (France)
1
Encyclopedia of Islam
Trove (Australia)
1






