
Title:
Disability
Text:
Impairments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}For the poem by Wilfred Owen, see Disabled (poem). For the Middle Age restrictions, see Disabilities (Jewish). For the restrictions on Catholics in England, see Disabilities (Catholics).
"Impaired" redirects here. For other uses, see Impairment.


  Disability symbols
.mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:22em;float:right;clear:right;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em;background:#f8f9fa;border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.2em;text-align:center;line-height:1.4em;font-size:88%;border-collapse:collapse;display:table}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .sidebar{display:table!important;float:right!important;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em!important}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-subgroup{width:100%;margin:0;border-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-left{float:left;clear:left;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-none{float:none;clear:both;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-outer-title{padding:0 0.4em 0.2em;font-size:125%;line-height:1.2em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-image{padding:0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-caption,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle-with-top-image,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-caption{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle{padding:0.4em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.2em 0.8em;font-size:145%;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-image{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-heading{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content{padding:0 0.5em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content-with-subgroup{padding:0.1em 0.4em 0.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-below{padding:0.3em 0.8em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-below{border-top:1px solid #aaa;border-bottom:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-navbar{text-align:right;font-size:115%;padding:0 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:left;font-weight:bold;line-height:1.6em;font-size:105%}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title-c{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:center;margin:0 3.3em}@media(max-width:720px){body.mediawiki .mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:100%!important;clear:both;float:none!important;margin-left:0!important;margin-right:0!important}}Disability
Theory and models
Disability theory
Ableism / Disablism
Medical model
Social model


Education
Mainstreaming
Individualized Education Program (IEP)

Special needs
Special school
Special education
Learning disability


Therapy
Physical
Occupational
Speech


Societal implications
Disability rights movement
Inclusion
Normalization
People-first language
Pejorative terms


Personal assistance
Unlicensed assistive personnel (ADLs)

Orthotics and braces
Prosthetics
Assistive technology
Assisted living
Mobility aid
Physical accessibility
Universal design
Web accessibility


Socioeconomic assistance
Social Security Disability Insurance
Supplemental Security Income
Ticket to Work
Disability Living Allowance
Disabled students allowance
Disabled Persons Railcard
Freedom Pass
Assured Income forthe Severely Handicapped

GroupsOrganizations
National Telecommuting Institute
Society for Disability Studies
Disabled Peoples' International (DPI)
Visitability
WeThe15

Parasports
Special Olympics
Paralympic Games
Deaflympics
Invictus Games


Culture
Disability in the arts
Disability art
Disability in the media

 DisabilityLists.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vte
Part of a series onDiscrimination
General forms
Age
Disability (Mental disorder)
Genetics (Hair color, Hair texture, Height, Looks, Size, Skin color)
Language
Race / Ethnicity / Nationality
Rank (Class, Caste)
Religion
Sex
Sexual orientation


Social
Acephobia
Adultism
Anti-albinism
Anti-autism
Anti-drug addicts
Anti-homelessness
Anti-intellectualism
Anti-intersex
Anti-left handedness
Anti-Masonry
Aporophobia
Audism
Biphobia
Cancel culture
Clannism
Cronyism
Elitism
Ephebiphobia
Fatphobia
Gayphobia
Gerontophobia
Heterosexism
HIV/AIDS stigma
Homophobia
Leprosy stigma
Lesbophobia
Misandry
Misogyny
Nepotism
Pedophobia
Perpetual foreigner
Pregnancy
Reverse
Sectarianism
Supremacism
Black
White
Transphobia
Non-binary
Transmisogyny
Vegaphobia
Xenophobia


Religious
Ahmadiyya
Atheism
Baháʼí Faith
Buddhism
Catholicism
Christianity
post–Cold War era
Druze
Falun Gong
Hinduism
Persecution
Untouchability
Islam
Persecution
Jehovah's Witnesses
Judaism
Persecution
LDS or Mormon
Neopaganism
non-Muslims
Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox
Copts
Protestantism
Rastafari
Sikhs
Shi'ism
Sufism
Sunnism
Zoroastrianism


Ethnic/national
African
Albanian
Arab
Armenian
Azerbaijani
Catalan
Chechen
Chinese
Croat
Filipino
Finnish
Fulani
Georgian
Greek
Haitian
Hazara
Hispanic
Hungarian
Igbo
Indian
Canadian and US indigenous peoples
Iranian
Irish
Israeli
Italian
Japanese
Jewish
Korean
Kurdish
Malay
Mexican
Middle Eastern
Mongolian
Montenegrin
Pakistani
Pashtun
Polish
Quebec
Romani
Romanian
Russian
Serb
Slavic
Somali
Tatar
Thai
Tibetan
Turkish
Ukrainian
Uyghur
Venezuelan
Vietnamese


Manifestations
Blood libel
Bullying
online
Compulsory sterilization
Corrective rape
Counter-jihad
Cultural genocide
Defamation
Democide
Disability hate crime
Dog-whistle politics
Eliminationism
Economic
Education
Employment
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic conflict
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnocide
Forced conversion
Freak show
Gay bashing
Gendercide
Genital modification and mutilation
Genocide
examples
Glass ceiling
Hate crime
LGBT
Hate group
Hate speech
online
Homeless dumping
Housing
Indian rolling
Lavender scare
Lynching
Mortgage
Murder music
Native American mascots
Occupational segregation
Opposition to immigration
Persecution
Pogrom
Purge
Red Scare
Religious persecution
Religious terrorism
Religious violence
Religious war
Scapegoating
Segregation academy
Sex-selective abortion
Slavery
Slut-shaming
Trans bashing
Victimisation
Violence against men
Violence against women
White flight
White power music
Wife selling
Witch-hunt


Policies
Age of candidacy
Blood purity
Blood quantum
Crime of apartheid
Disabilities
Catholic
Jewish
Ethnocracy
Ethnopluralism
Gender pay gap
Gender roles
Gerontocracy
Gerrymandering
Ghetto benches
Internment
Jewish quota
Jim Crow laws
Ketuanan Melayu
Law for Protection of the Nation
McCarthyism
MSM blood donation restrictions
Nonpersons
Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota)
Nuremberg Laws
One-drop rule
Racial quota
Racial steering
Redlining
Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting)
Segregation
age
racial
religious
sexual
Sodomy law
State atheism
State religion
Ugly law
Voter suppression


Countermeasures
Affirmative action
Anti-discrimination law
Cultural assimilation
Cultural pluralism
Diversity training
Empowerment
Feminism
Fighting Discrimination
Hate speech laws by country
Human rights
Intersex rights
LGBT rights
Masculism
Multiculturalism
Nonviolence
Racial integration
Reappropriation
Self-determination
Social integration
Toleration


Related topics
Allophilia
Amatonormativity
Anti-cultural, anti-national, and anti-ethnic terms
Bias
Christian privilege
Civil liberties
Dehumanization
Diversity
Ethnic penalty
Eugenics
Heteronormativity
Internalized oppression
Intersectionality
Male privilege
Masculism
Medical model of disability
autism
Multiculturalism
Net bias
Neurodiversity
Oikophobia
Oppression
Police brutality
Political correctness
Polyculturalism
Power distance
Prejudice
Prisoner abuse
Racial bias in criminal news
Racism by country
Religious intolerance
Second-generation gender bias
Snobbery
Social exclusion
Social model of disability
Social stigma
Speciesism
Stereotype
threat
The talk
White privilege
Woke

vte
A disability is any  condition that makes it more difficult for a person to do certain activities or effectively interact with the world around them (socially or materially). These conditions, or impairments, may be cognitive, developmental, intellectual, mental, physical, sensory, or a combination of multiple factors. Impairments causing disability may be present from birth or can be acquired during a person's lifetime. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities defines disability as:

.mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}long-term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which in interaction with various barriers may hinder [a person's] full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others.[1]
Disability is a contested concept, with shifting meanings in different communities.[2] It has been referred to as an "embodied difference,"[3] but the term may also refer to physical or mental attributes that some institutions, particularly medicine, view as needing to be fixed (the medical model). It may also refer to limitations imposed on people by the constraints of an ableist society (the social model); or the term may serve to refer to the identity of disabled people. Physiological functional capacity (PFC) is a measure of an individual's performance level that gauges one's ability to perform the physical tasks of daily life and the ease with which these tasks are performed. PFC declines with  age and may result to frailty, cognitive disorders, or physical disorders, all of which may lead to labeling individuals as disabled.[4] According to the World Report on Disability, 15% of the world's population or 1 billion people are affected by disability.[5] A disability may be readily visible, or invisible in nature.

Contents

1 Terminology
2 Causes
3 Invisible disability
4 Episodic disability
5 History
6 Sociology

6.1 People-first language
6.2 Identity-first language
6.3 Aging
6.4 Employment

6.4.1 Intellectual Disability


6.5 Poverty
6.6 Disasters


7 Theory

7.1 Medical model
7.2 Social model

7.2.1 Social construction


7.3 Other models


8 Identity

8.1 Tropes

8.1.1 Inspiration porn
8.1.2 Supercrip
8.1.3 Disabled villain


8.2 Self advocacy
8.3 Intersections

8.3.1 Race
8.3.2 Gender




9 Assistive technology
10 Adapted physical activity and sports
11 Rights and government policies

11.1 Rights movement
11.2 Policies and actions

11.2.1 Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
11.2.2 International Year of Disabled Persons
11.2.3 Policies in the United States

11.2.3.1 Rehabilitation Act of 1973
11.2.3.2 The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990


11.2.4 Policies in the United Kingdom
11.2.5 Policies in former Soviet Union republics


11.3 Political issues

11.3.1 Abuse
11.3.2 Insurance




12 Demographics

12.1 Developing nations


13 See also
14 References

14.1 Citations
14.2 Sources


15 Further reading
16 External links



Terminology[edit]
Handicap
The term handicap derives from the medieval game Hand-in-cap, in which two players trade possessions, and a third, neutral person judges the difference of value between the possessions.[6] The concept of a neutral person evening up the odds was extended to handicap racing in the mid-18th century, where horses carry different weights based on the umpire's estimation of what would make them run equally. In the early 20th century the word gained the additional meaning of describing a disability, in the sense that a person with a handicap was carrying a heavier burden than normal.[7] This concept, then, adds to the conception of disability as a burden, or individual problem, rather than a societial problem.[8]
Accessibility
Accessibility is the degree to which a product, service or environment is  available for use  to the people that need it.  People with certain types of disabilities struggle to get equal access to some things in society.  For example, a blind person cannot read printed ballot papers, and therefore does not have access to voting that requires paper ballots.
Accommodation
A change that improves access.  For example, if voting ballots are available in Braille or on a text-to-speech machine, or if another person reads the ballot to the blind person and recorded the choices, then the blind person would have access to voting.
Causes[edit]
There are many different causes of disability that often affect basic activities of daily living, such as eating, dressing, transferring, and maintaining personal hygiene; or advanced activities of daily living such as shopping, food preparation, driving, or working. However, it is important to note that causes of disability are usually determined by a person's capability to perform the activities of daily life. As Marta Russell and Ravi Malhotra argue, "The 'medicalization' of disablement and the tools of classification clearly played an important role in establishing divisions between the "disabled" and the "able-bodied."[9] This positions disability as a problem to be solved via medical intervention, which hinders our understanding about what disability can mean.
For the purposes of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission regulations provide a list of conditions that should easily be concluded to be disabilities: deafness, blindness, an intellectual disability, partially or completely missing limbs or mobility impairments requiring the use of a wheelchair, autism, cancer, cerebral palsy, diabetes, epilepsy, HIV/AIDS, multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy, major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, and schizophrenia.[10]
This is not an exhaustive list and many injuries and medical problems cause disability. Some causes of disability, such as injuries, may resolve over time and are considered temporary disabilities. An acquired disability is the result of impairments that occur suddenly or chronically during the lifespan, as opposed to being born with the impairment. Invisible disabilities may not be obviously noticeable.

Invisible disability[edit]
Main article: Invisible disability 
Invisible disabilities, also known as Hidden Disabilities or Non-visible Disabilities (NVD), are disabilities that are not immediately apparent. They are often chronic illnesses and conditions that significantly impair normal activities of daily living. Invisible disabilities can hinder a person's efforts to go to school, work, socialize, and more. 
Some examples of invisible disabilities include intellectual disabilities, autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, mental disorders, asthma, epilepsy, allergies, migraines, arthritis, and chronic fatigue syndrome.[11]
Employment discrimination is reported to play a significant part in the high rate of unemployment among those with a diagnosis of mental illness.[12]

Episodic disability[edit]
People health conditions such as arthritis, bi-polar disorder, HIV, or multiple sclerosis have periods of wellness between episodes of illness. During the illness episodes people's ability to perform normal tasks, such as work, can be intermittent.[13]

History[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (February 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Contemporary understandings of disability derive from concepts that arose during the scientific Enlightenment in the west; prior to the Enlightenment, physical differences were viewed through a different lens.[14]
There is evidence of humans during prehistory that looked after people with disabilities. At the Windover Archeological Site, one of the skeletons that was found was a male about 15 years old, who had spina bifida. The condition meant that the boy, probably paralyzed below the waist, was taken care of in a Hunter-gatherer community.[15][16]
Provisions that enabled individuals with impaired mobility to access temples and healing sanctuaries were made in ancient Greece.[17] Specifically, by 370 B.C., at the most important healing sanctuary in the wider area, the Sanctuary of Asclepius at Epidaurus, there were at least 11 permanent stone ramps that provided access to mobility-impaired visitors to nine different structures; evidence that people with disabilities were acknowledged and cared for, at least partly, in ancient Greece.[18]
During the Middle Ages, madness and other conditions were thought to be caused by demons. They were also thought to be part of the natural order, especially during and in the fallout of the Plague, which wrought impairments throughout the general population.[19] In the early modern period there was a shift to seeking biological causes for physical and mental differences, as well as heightened interest in demarcating categories: for example, Ambroise Pare, in the sixteenth century, wrote of "monsters", "prodigies", and "the maimed".[20] The European Enlightenment's emphases on knowledge derived from reason and on the value of natural science to human progress helped spawn the birth of institutions and associated knowledge systems that observed and categorized human beings; among these, the ones significant to the development of today's concepts of disability were asylums, clinics, and, prisons.[19]
Contemporary concepts of disability are rooted in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century developments. Foremost among these was the development of clinical medical discourse, which made the human body visible as a thing to be manipulated, studied, and transformed. These worked in tandem with scientific discourses that sought to classify and categorize and, in so doing, became methods of normalization.[21]
The concept of the "norm" developed in this time period, and is signaled in the work of the Belgian statistician, sociologist, mathematician, and astronomer Adolphe Quetelet, who wrote in the 1830s of l'homme moyen – the average man. Quetelet postulated that one could take the sum of all people's attributes in a given population (such as their height or weight) and find their average and that this figure should serve as a statistical norm toward which all should aspire.
This idea of the statistical norm threads through the rapid take-up of statistics gathering by Britain, the United States, and the Western European states during this time period, and it is tied to the rise of eugenics. Disability, as well as other concepts including: abnormal, non-normal, and normalcy came from this.[22] The circulation of these concepts is evident in the popularity of the freak show, where showmen profited from exhibiting people who deviated from those norms.[23]
With the rise of eugenics in the latter part of the nineteenth century, such deviations were viewed as dangerous to the health of entire populations. With disability viewed as part of a person's biological make-up and thus their genetic inheritance, scientists turned their attention to notions of weeding such as "deviations" out of the gene pool. Various metrics for assessing a person's genetic fitness, which was then used to deport, sterilize, or institutionalize those deemed unfit. At the end of the Second World War, with the example of Nazi eugenics, eugenics faded from public discourse, and increasingly disability cohered into a set of attributes that medicine could attend to – whether through augmentation, rehabilitation, or treatment. In both contemporary and modern history, disability was often viewed as a by-product of incest between first-degree relatives or second-degree relatives.[24]

Play media  A short government advisory animation on the social model of disability
Disability scholars have also pointed to the Industrial Revolution, along with the economic shift from feudalism to capitalism, as prominent historical moments in the understanding of disability. Although there was a certain amount of religious superstition surrounding disability during the Middle Ages, disabled people were still able to play significant roles in the rural production based economy, allowing them to make genuine contributions to daily economic life. The Industrial Revolution and the advent of capitalism made it so that people were no longer tied to the land and were then forced to find work that would pay a wage in order to survive. The wage system, in combination with industrialized production, transformed the way bodies were viewed as people were increasingly valued for their ability to produce like machines. Capitalism and the industrial revolution effectively created a new class of "disabled" people who could not conform to the standard worker's body or level of work power. As a result, disabled people came to be regarded as a problem, to be solved or erased.[25]
In the early 1970s, disability activists began to challenge how society treated disabled people and the medical approach to disability. Due to this work, physical barriers to access were identified. These conditions functionally disabled them, and what is now known as the social model of disability emerged. Coined by Mike Oliver in 1983, this phrase distinguishes between the medical model of disability – under which an impairment needs to be fixed – and the social model of disability – under which the society that limits a person needs to be fixed.[26]

Sociology[edit]
  Museum of disABILITY History, Buffalo, New York
Main article: Disability studies
People-first language[edit]
Main article: People-first language
People-first language is one way to talk about disability which some people prefer. Using people-first language is said to put the person before the disability. Those individuals who prefer people-first language would prefer to be called, "a person with a disability". This style is reflected in major legislation on disability rights, including the Americans with Disabilities Act and the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

"Cerebral Palsy: A Guide for Care" at the University of Delaware describes people-first language:[27]The American Psychological Association style guide states that, when identifying a person with a disability, the person's name or pronoun should come first, and descriptions of the disability should be used so that the disability is identified, but is not modifying the person. Acceptable examples included "a woman with Down syndrome" or "a man who has schizophrenia". It also states that a person's adaptive equipment should be described functionally as something that assists a person, not as something that limits a person, for example, "a woman who uses a wheelchair" rather than "a woman in/confined to a wheelchair".People-first terminology is used in the UK in the form "people with impairments" (such as "people with visual impairments"). However, in the UK, identity-first language is generally preferred over people-first language.
The use of people-first terminology has given rise to the use of the acronym PWD to refer to person(s) (or people) with disabilities (or disability).[28][29][30] However other individuals and groups prefer identity-first language to emphasize how a disability can impact people's identities. Which style of language used varies between different countries, groups and individuals.

Identity-first language[edit]
Identity-first language describes the person as "disabled". Some people prefer this and argue that this fits the social model of disability better than people-first language, as it emphasizes that the person is disabled not by their body, but by a world that does not accommodate them.[31]
This is especially true in the UK, where it is argued under the social model that while someone's impairment (for example, having a spinal cord injury) is an individual property, "disability" is something created by external societal factors such as a lack of accessibility.[32] This distinction between the individual property of impairment and the social property of disability is central to the social model. The term "disabled people" as a political construction is also widely used by international organizations of disabled people, such as Disabled Peoples' International.

Using the identity-first language also parallels how people talk about other aspects of identity and diversity. For example:[33]In the autism community, many self-advocates and their allies prefer terminology such as 'Autistic,' 'Autistic person,' or 'Autistic individual' because we understand autism as an inherent part of an individual's identity — the same way one refers to 'Muslims,' 'African-Americans,' 'Lesbian/Gay/Bisexual/Transgender/Queer,' 'Chinese,' 'gifted,' 'athletic,' or 'Jewish.'Similarly, Deaf communities in the U.S. reject people-first language in favor of identity-first language.[34]
In 2021, the US Association on Higher Education and Disability (AHEAD) announced their decision to use identity-first language in their materials, explaining:
"Identity-first language challenges negative connotations by claiming disability directly. Identity-first language references the variety that exists in how our bodies and brains work with a myriad of conditions that exist, and the role of inaccessible or oppressive systems, structures, or environments in making someone disabled."[35]

  The rainbow-colored infinity symbol represents the diversity of the autism spectrum as well as the greater neurodiversity movement.[36]
Aging[edit]
To a certain degree, physical impairments and changing mental states are almost ubiquitously experienced by people as they age. Aging populations are often stigmatized for having a high prevalence of disability. Kathleen Woodward, writing in Key Words for Disability Studies, explains the phenomenon as follows:

Aging is invoked rhetorically – at times ominously – as a pressing reason why disability should be of crucial interest to all of us (we are all getting older, we will all be disabled eventually), thereby inadvertently reinforcing the damaging and dominant stereotype of aging as solely an experience of decline and deterioration. But little attention has been given to the imbrication of aging and disability.[37]
In Feminist, Queer, Crip, Alison Kafer mentions aging and the anxiety associated with it. According to Kafer, this anxiety stems from ideas of normalcy. She says: 

Anxiety about aging, for example, can be seen as a symptom of compulsory able-bodiedness/able-mindedness, as can attempts to "treat" children who are slightly shorter than average with growth hormones; in neither case are the people involved necessarily disabled, but they are certainly affected by cultural ideals of normalcy and ideal form and function.[38]
Employment[edit]
Studies have illustrated a correlation between disability and poverty. Notably, jobs offered to disabled people are scarce. Marta Russell notes that "[a] primary basis for oppression of disabled persons (those who could work with accommodations) is their exclusion from exploitation as wage laborers."[39]

Intellectual Disability[edit]
Many countries have programs which aid intellectually disabled (ID) people to acquire skills needed in the workforce.[40]  Such programs include sheltered workshops and adult day care programs. Sheltered programs consist of daytime activities such as gardening, manufacturing, and assembling. These activities facilitate routine-oriented tasks that in turn allow ID people to gain experience before entering the workforce. Similarly, adult day care programs also include day time activities. However, these activities are based in an educational environment where ID people are able to engage in educational, physical, and communication-based tasks which helps facilitate communication, memory, and general living skills. In addition, adult day care programs arranged community activities by scheduling field trips to public places (e.g. zoos, and movie theaters). Despite both programs providing essential skills for intellectually disabled people prior to entering the workforce, researchers have found that ID people prefer to be involved with community-integrated employment.[40] Community-integrated employment opportunities are offered to ID people at minimum or higher wages, in a variety of occupations ranging from customer service, clerical, janitorial, hospitality and manufacturing positions. ID employees work alongside employees without disabilities who are able to assist them with training. All three options allow intellectually disabled people to develop and exercise social skills that are vital to everyday life. However, it is not guaranteed that ID employees receive the same treatment as employees without ID; according to Lindstrom et al., community-integrated employees are less likely to receive raises, and only 26% are able to retain full-time status.[41]
Finding a stable workforce poses additional challenges. A study published in the Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disability indicated that although finding a job may be difficult, stabilizing a job is even harder.[42] Chadsey-Rusch proposed that securing employment for ID people requires adequate production skills and effective social skills.[42] Other underlying factors for job loss include structural factors and worker-workplace integration. As stated by Kilsby, limited structural factors can affect a multitude of factors in a job, such as a restricted number of hours an ID person is allowed to work. This in return, according to Fabian et al., leads to a lack of opportunity to develop relationships with coworkers or to better integrate within the workplace. Nevertheless, those who are unable to stabilize a job often are left discouraged. According to the same study conducted by JARID, many who had participated found that they had made smaller incomes when compared to their co-workers, had an excess of time throughout their days, because they did not have work. They also had feelings of hopelessness and failure. According to the U.S. National Organization on Disability, not only do ID people face constant discouragement, but many live below the poverty line, because they are unable to find or stabilize employment and because of employee restricting factors placed on ID workers.[41] This renders ID people unable to provide for themselves, including basic necessities such as food, medical care, transportation, and housing.

Poverty[edit]
Main article: Disability and poverty
  The Cripples, Pieter Bruegel, 1568
The poverty rate for working-age people with disabilities is nearly two and a half times higher than that for people without disabilities. Disability and poverty may form a vicious circle, in which physical barriers and stigma of disability make it more difficult to get income, which in turn diminishes access to health care and other necessities for a healthy life.[43] In societies without state funded health and social services, living with a disability could require spending on medication and frequent health care visits, in-home personal assistance, and adaptive devices and clothing, along with the usual costs of living. The World report on disability indicates that half of all disabled people cannot afford health care, compared to a third of abled people.[44] In countries without public services for adults with disabilities, their families may be impoverished.[45]

Disasters[edit]
Main article: Disability and disasters
There is limited research knowledge, but many anecdotal reports, on what happens when disasters impact disabled people.[46][47] Individuals with disabilities are greatly affected by disasters.[46][48] Those with physical disabilities can be at risk when evacuating if assistance is not available. Individuals with cognitive impairments may struggle with understanding instructions that must be followed in the event a disaster occurs.[48][49][50] All of these factors can increase the degree of variation of risk in disaster situations with disabled individuals.[51]
Research studies have consistently found discrimination against individuals with disabilities during all phases of a disaster cycle.[46] The most common limitation is that people cannot physically access buildings or transportation, as well as access disaster-related services.[46] The exclusion of these individuals is caused in part by the lack of disability-related training provided to emergency planners and disaster relief personnel.[52]

Theory[edit]
The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), produced by the World Health Organization, distinguishes between body functions (physiological or psychological, such as vision) and body structures (anatomical parts, such as the eye and related structures). Impairment in bodily structure or function is defined as involving an anomaly, defect, loss or other significant deviation from certain generally accepted population standards, which may fluctuate over time. Activity is defined as the execution of a task or action. The ICF lists 9 broad domains of functioning which can be affected:

Learning and applying knowledge
General tasks and demands
Communication
Basic physical mobility, Domestic life, and Self-care (for example, activities of daily living)
Interpersonal interactions and relationships
Community, social and civic life, including employment
Other major life areas
In concert with disability scholars, the introduction to the ICF states that a variety of conceptual models have been proposed to understand and explain disability and functioning, which it seeks to integrate. These models include the following:

Medical model[edit]
Main article: Medical model of disability
The medical model views disability as a problem of the person, directly caused by disease, trauma, or other health conditions which therefore requires sustained medical care in the form of individual treatment by professionals. In the medical model, management of the disability is aimed at a "cure", or the individual's adjustment and behavioral change that would lead to an "almost-cure" or effective cure. The individual, in this case, must overcome their disability by medical care. In the medical model, medical care is viewed as the main issue, and at the political level, the principal response is that of modifying or reforming healthcare policy.[53][54]

Social model[edit]
Main article: Social model of disability
The social model of disability sees "disability" as a socially created problem and a matter of the full integration of individuals into society. In this model, disability is not an attribute of an individual, but rather a complex collection of conditions, created by the social environment. The management of the problem requires social action and it is the collective responsibility of society to create a society in which limitations for disabled people are minimal. Disability is both cultural and ideological in creation. According to the social model, equal access for someone with an impairment/disability is a human rights concern.[55][54] The social model of disability has come under criticism. While recognizing the importance played by the social model in stressing the responsibility of society, scholars, including Tom Shakespeare, point out the limits of the model and urge the need for a new model that will overcome the "medical vs. social" dichotomy.[56] The limitations of this model mean that often the vital services and information persons with disabilities face are simply not available, often due to limited economic returns in supporting them.[57]
Some say medical humanities is a fruitful field where the gap between the medical and the social model of disability might be bridged.[58]

Social construction[edit]
The social construction of disability is the idea that disability is constructed by social expectations and institutions rather than biological differences. Highlighting the ways society and institutions construct disability is one of the main focuses of this idea.[59] In the same way that race and gender are not biologically fixed, neither is disability.
Around the early 1970s, sociologists, notably Eliot Friedson, began to argue that labeling theory and social deviance could be applied to disability studies. This led to the creation of the social construction of disability theory. The social construction of disability is the idea that disability is constructed as the social response to a deviance from the norm. The medical industry is the creator of the ill and disabled social role. Medical professionals and institutions, who wield expertise over health, have the ability to define health and physical and mental norms. When an individual has a feature that creates an impairment, restriction, or limitation from reaching the social definition of health, the individual is labeled as disabled. Under this idea, disability is not defined by the physical features of the body but by a deviance from the social convention of health.[60]
The social construction of disability would argue that the medical model of disability's view that a disability is an impairment, restriction, or limitation is wrong. Instead what is seen as a disability is just a difference in the individual from what is considered "normal" in society.[61]

Other models[edit]
The political/relational model is an alternative to and critical engagement with both the social and medical models. This analytic posed by Alison Kafer shows not only how the "problem" of disability "is located in inaccessible buildings, discriminatory attitudes, and ideological systems that attribute normalcy and deviance to particular minds and bodies" but also how mind and bodily impairments can still have disabling effects. Furthermore, the political/relational model frames the medicalization of disabled folks as political in nature given it should always be interrogated.[62]
The spectrum model refers to the range of audibility, sensibility, and visibility under which people function. The model asserts that disability does not necessarily mean a reduced spectrum of operations. Rather, disability is often defined according to thresholds set on a continuum of disability.[63]
The moral model refers to the attitude that people are  morally responsible for their own disability.[64] For example, disability may be seen as a result of bad actions of parents if congenital, or as a result of practicing witchcraft if not.[65] Echoes of this can be seen in the doctrine of karma in Indian religions. It also includes notions that a disability gives a person "special abilities to perceive, reflect, transcend, be spiritual".[66]
The expert/professional model has provided a traditional response to disability issues and can be seen as an offshoot of the medical model. Within its framework, professionals follow a process of identifying the impairment and its limitations (using the medical model), and taking the necessary action to improve the position of the disabled person. This has tended to produce a system in which an authoritarian, over-active service provider prescribes and acts for a passive client.[67]
The tragedy/charity model depicts disabled people as victims of circumstance who are deserving of pity. This, along with the medical model, are the models most used by non-disabled people to define and explain disability.[68]
The legitimacy model views disability as a value-based determination about which explanations for the atypical are legitimate for membership in the disability category. This viewpoint allows for multiple explanations and models to be considered as purposive and viable.[69]
The social adapted model states although a person's disability poses some limitations in an able-bodied society, often the surrounding society and environment are more limiting than the disability itself.[70]
The economic model defines disability in terms of reduced ability to work, the related loss of productivity and economic effects on the individual, employer and society in general.[71]
The empowering model (also, customer model) allows for the person with a disability and his/her family to decide the course of his/her treatment. This turns the professional into a service provider whose role is to offer guidance and carry out the client's decisions. This model "empowers" the individual to pursue his/her own goals.[70]
The market model of disability is minority rights and consumerist model of disability that recognizing disabled people and their stakeholders as representing a large group of consumers, employees, and voters.  This model looks to personal identity to define disability and empowers people to chart their own destiny in everyday life, with a particular focus on economic empowerment.  By this model, based on US Census data, there are 1.2 billion people in the world who consider themselves to have a disability. "This model states that due to the size of the demographic, companies and governments will serve the desires, pushed by demand as the message becomes prevalent in the cultural mainstream."[54]
The consumer model of disability is based upon the "rights-based" model and claims that disabled people should have equal rights and access to products, goods, and services offered by businesses.  The consumer model extends the rights-based model by proposing that businesses, not only accommodate customers with disabilities under the requirements of legislation but that businesses actively seek, market to, welcome and fully engage disabled people in all aspects of business service activities.  The model suggests that all business operations, for example, websites, policies, and procedures, mission statements, emergency plans, programs, and services, should integrate access and inclusion practices.  Furthermore, these access and inclusion practices should be based on established customer service access and inclusion standards that embrace and support the active engagement of people of all abilities in business offerings.[72] In this regard, specialized products and specialized services become important, such as auxiliary means, prostheses, special foods, domestic help, and assisted living.[73]
Different theories revolve around prejudice, stereotyping, discrimination, and stigma related to disability. One of the more popular ones, as put by Weiner, Perry, and Magnusson 's (1988) work with attribution theory, physical stigmas are perceived as to be uncontrollable and elicit pity and desire to help, whereas, mental-behavioral stigmas are considered to be controllable and therefore elicit anger and desire to neglect the individuals with disabilities.[74]
The 'just world hypothesis' talks about how a person is viewed as deserving the disability. And because it is the fault of that person, an observer does not feel obligated to feel bad for him or to help him.[75]
Identity[edit]
In contexts where their differences are visible, persons with disabilities often face stigma. People frequently react to disabled presence with fear, pity, patronization, intrusive gazes, revulsion, or disregard. These reactions can, and often do, exclude persons with disabilities from accessing social spaces along with the benefits and resources these spaces provide.[76] Disabled writer/researcher Jenny Morris describes how stigma functions to marginalize persons with disabilities:[77]

Going out in public so often takes courage. How many of us find that we can't dredge up the strength to do it day after day, week after week, year after year, a lifetime of rejection and revulsion? It is not only physical limitations that restrict us to our homes and those whom we know. It is the knowledge that each entry into the public world will be dominated by stares, by condescension, by pity, and by hostility.
Additionally, facing stigma can cause harm to the psycho-emotional well-being of the person being stigmatized. One of the ways in which the psycho-emotional health of persons with disabilities is adversely affected is through the internalization of the oppression they experience, which can lead to feeling that they are weak, crazy, worthless or any number of other negative attributes that may be associated with their conditions. Internalization of oppression damages the self-esteem of the person affected and shapes their behaviors in ways that are compliant with nondisabled dominance.[76] Ableist ideas are frequently internalized when disabled people are pressured by the people and institutions around them to hide and downplay their disabled difference, or, "pass". According to writer Simi Linton, the act of passing takes a deep emotional toll by causing disabled individuals to experience loss of community, anxiety and self-doubt.[78] The media play a significant role in creating and reinforcing stigma associated with disability. Media portrayals of disability usually cast disabled presence as necessarily marginal within society at large. These portrayals simultaneously reflect and influence the popular perception of disabled difference.

Tropes[edit]
Further information: Disability in the media
There are distinct tactics that the media frequently employ in representing disabled presence. These common ways of framing disability are heavily criticized for being dehumanizing and failing to place importance on the perspectives of persons with disabilities.

Inspiration porn[edit]
Inspiration porn refers to portrayals of persons with disabilities in which they are presented as being inspiring simply because the person has a disability. These portrayals are criticized because they are created with the intent of making non-disabled viewers feel better about themselves in comparison to the individual portrayed. Rather than recognizing the humanity of persons with disabilities, inspiration porn turns them into objects of inspiration for a non-disabled audience.[79]

Supercrip[edit]
The supercrip trope refers to instances when media reports on or portray a disabled person who has made a noteworthy achievement; but center on their disability rather than what they actually did. They are portrayed as awe-inspiring for being exceptional compared to others with the same or similar conditions. This trope is widely used in reporting on disabled athletes as well as in portrayals of autistic savants.[80][81]
Many disabled people denounce these representations as reducing people to their condition rather than viewing them as full people. Furthermore, supercrip portrayals are criticized for creating the unrealistic expectation that disability should be accompanied by some type of special talent, genius, or insight.

Disabled villain[edit]
Characters in fiction that bear physical or mental markers of difference from perceived societal norms are frequently positioned as villains within a text. Lindsey Row-Heyveld notes, for instance, "that villainous pirates are scraggly, wizened, and inevitably kitted out with a peg leg, eye patch, or hook hand whereas heroic pirates look like Johnny Depp's Jack Sparrow."[82] Disabled people's visible differences from the abled majority are meant to evoke fear in audiences that can perpetuate the mindset of disabled people being a threat to individual or public interests and well-being.

Self advocacy[edit]
Some disabled people have attempted to resist marginalization through the use of the social model in opposition to the medical model; with the aim of shifting criticism away from their bodies and impairments and towards the social institutions that oppress them relative to their abled peers. Disability activism that demands many grievances be addressed, such as lack of accessibility, poor representation in media, general disrespect, and lack of recognition, originates from a social model framework.
Embracing disability as a positive identity by becoming involved in disabled communities and participating in disabled culture can be an effective way to combat internalized prejudice; and can challenge dominant narratives about disability.[83]

Intersections[edit]
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (February 2018)
The experiences that disabled people have to navigate social institutions vary greatly as a function of what other social categories they may belong to. The categories that intersect with a disability to create unique experiences of ableism include, but are not limited to, race and gender. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities differentiates two kinds of disability intersection: race-disability intersection, and gender-disability intersection.[84] Disability is defined differently for each person, and multiple intersections arise for particular individuals.

Race[edit]
Incidence of disability is reported to be greater among several minority communities across the globe, according to a systematic analysis of the Global Burden of Disease Study.[85] Disabled people who are also racial minorities generally have less access to support and are more vulnerable to violent discrimination.[86] A study in the journal Child Development indicated that minority disabled children are more likely to receive punitive discipline in low and middle income countries.[87] Due to the fact that children with disabilities are mistreated more often than those without disability; racialized children in this category are at an even higher risk.[88][89][90][91][92] With respect to disability in the United States, Camille A. Nelson, writing for the Berkeley Journal of Criminal Law, notes the dual discrimination that racial minorities with disabilities experience from the criminal justice system, expressing that for "people who are negatively racialized, that is people who are perceived as being non-white, and for whom mental illness is either known or assumed, interaction with police is precarious and potentially dangerous."[93]

Gender[edit]
The marginalization of disabled people can leave persons with disabilities unable to actualize what society expects of gendered existence. This lack of recognition for their gender identity can leave persons with disabilities with feelings of inadequacy. Thomas J. Gerschick of Illinois State University describes why this denial of gendered identity occurs:[94]

Bodies operate socially as canvases on which gender is displayed and kinesthetically as the mechanisms by which it is physically enacted. Thus, the bodies of disabled people make them vulnerable to being denied recognition as women and men.
To the extent that women and men with disabilities are gendered, the interactions of these two identities lead to different experiences. Disabled women face a sort of "double stigmatization" in which their membership to both of these marginalized categories simultaneously exacerbates the negative stereotypes associated with each as they are ascribed to them. According to The UN Woman Watch, "Persistence of certain cultural, legal and institutional barriers makes women and girls with disabilities the victims of two-fold discrimination: as women and as persons with disabilities."[95] As Rosemarie Garland-Thomson puts it, "Women with disabilities, even more intensely than women in general, have been cast in the collective cultural imagination as inferior, lacking, excessive, incapable, unfit, and useless."[96]

Assistive technology[edit]
Main article: Assistive technology
Assistive Technology is a generic term for devices and modifications (for a person or within a society) that help overcome or remove a disability. The first recorded example of the use of a prosthesis dates to at least 1800 BC.[97] The wheelchair dates from the 17th century.[98] The curb cut is a related structural innovation. Other examples are standing frames, text telephones, accessible keyboards, large print, Braille, & speech recognition software. Disabled people often develop adaptations which can be personal (e.g. strategies to suppress tics in public) or community (e.g. sign language in deaf communities).
As the personal computer has become more ubiquitous, various organizations have formed to develop software and hardware to make computers more accessible for disabled people. Some software and hardware, such as Voice Finger, Freedom Scientific's JAWS, the Free and Open Source alternative Orca etc. have been specifically designed for disabled people while other software and hardware, such as Nuance's Dragon NaturallySpeaking, were not developed specifically for disabled people, but can be used to increase accessibility.[99] The LOMAK keyboard was designed in New Zealand specifically for persons with disabilities.[100]
The World Wide Web consortium recognized a need for International Standards for Web Accessibility for persons with disabilities and created the Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI).[101] As at Dec 2012 the standard is WCAG 2.0 (WCAG = Web Content Accessibility Guidelines).[102]

Adapted physical activity and sports[edit]
Main article: Disability sports
Adapted physical activities may had been adapted from traditional physical activities to allow people with impairments and disabilities to take part in physical activities and sport through physical education, rehabilitation and para sports.

  Wheelchair basketball match between South Africa and Iran at the 2008 Summer Paralympics
The Paralympic Games (meaning "alongside the Olympics") are held after the (Summer and Winter) Olympics. The Paralympic Games include athletes with a wide range of physical disabilities. In member countries, organizations exist to organize competition in the Paralympic sports on levels ranging from recreational to elite (for example, Disabled Sports USA and BlazeSports America in the United States).
The Paralympics developed from a rehabilitation program for British war veterans with spinal injuries. In 1948, Sir Ludwig Guttman, a neurologist working with World War II veterans with spinal injuries at Stoke Mandeville Hospital in Aylesbury in the UK, began using sport as part of the rehabilitation programs of his patients.
In 2006, the Extremity Games were formed for physically disabled people, specifically limb loss or limb difference, to be able to compete in extreme sports.[103]

Rights and government policies[edit]
Main article: Ableism
Rights movement[edit]
Main article: Disability rights movement
The disability rights movement aims to secure equal opportunities and equal rights for disabled people. The specific goals and demands of the movement are accessibility and safety in transportation, architecture, and the physical environment; equal opportunities in independent living, employment, education, and housing; and freedom from abuse, neglect, and violations of patients' rights.[104] Effective civil rights legislation is sought to secure these opportunities and rights.[104][105][106]
The early disability rights movement was dominated by the medical model of disability, where emphasis was placed on curing or treating disabled people so that they would adhere to the social norm, but starting in the 1960s, rights groups began shifting to the social model of disability, where disability is interpreted as an issue of discrimination, thereby paving the way for rights groups to achieve equality through legal means.[107]
Advocacy for disability issues and accessibility in the republics of the former Soviet Union has become more organized and influential in policymaking.[108]

Policies and actions[edit]
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities[edit]
On December 13, 2006, the United Nations formally agreed on the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the first human rights treaty of the 21st century, to protect and enhance the rights and opportunities of the world's estimated 650 million disabled people.[109]  As of January 2021[update], 182 nations have ratified or accepted accession to the convention.[110] Countries that sign the convention are required to adopt national laws, and remove old ones, so that persons with disabilities will, for example, have equal rights to education, employment, and cultural life; to the right to own and inherit property; to not be discriminated against in marriage, etc.; and to not be unwilling subjects in medical experiments. UN officials, including the High Commissioner for Human Rights, have characterized the bill as representing a paradigm shift in attitudes toward a more rights-based view of disability in line with the social model.[109]

International Year of Disabled Persons[edit]
In 1976, the United Nations began planning for its International Year of Disabled Persons (1981),[111] later renamed the International Year of Disabled Persons. The UN Decade of Disabled Persons (1983–1993) featured a World Programme of Action Concerning Disabled Persons. In 1979, Frank Bowe was the only person with a disability representing any country in the planning of IYDP-1981. Today, many countries have named representatives who are themselves individuals with disabilities. The decade was closed in an address before the General Assembly by Robert Davila. Both Bowe and Davila are deaf. In 1984, UNESCO accepted sign language for use in the education of deaf children and youth.

Policies in the United States[edit]
In the United States, the Department of Labor's 2014 rules for federal contractors, defined as companies that make more than $50,000/year from the federal government, required them to have as a goal that 7% of their workforce must be disabled people.[112] In schools, the ADA requires that all classrooms must be wheelchair accessible.[113] The U.S. Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board, commonly known as the Access Board, created the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to help offer guidelines for transportation and accessibility for the physically disabled.[114]
About 12.6% of the U.S. population are individuals who have a mental or physical disability. Many are unemployed because of prejudiced assumptions that a person with disabilities is unable to complete tasks that are commonly required in the workforce. This became a major human rights issue because of the discrimination that this group faced when trying to apply for jobs in the U.S. Many advocacy groups protested against such discrimination, asking the federal government to implement laws and policies that would help individuals with disabilities.

Rehabilitation Act of 1973[edit]
The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 was enacted with the purpose of protecting individuals with disabilities from prejudicial treatment by government-funded programs, employers, and agencies. The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 has not only helped protect U.S. citizens from being discriminated against but it has also created confidence amongst individuals to feel more comfortable with their disability. There are many sections within The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, that contains detailed information about what is covered in this policy.

Section 501
An employer must hire an individual who meets the qualifications of a job description despite any preexisting disabilities.
Section 503
Requires contractors or subcontractors, who receive more than $10,000 from the government to hire people with disabilities and to accommodate them with the needs that they need to achieve in the workforce.
Section 504
States that receive federal money may not discriminate against any person with disabilities who qualifies for a program or job.
On June 22, 1999, the United States Supreme Court issued a ruling in Olmstead vs. L. C. that said unjustified segregation of persons with disabilities constitutes discrimination in violation of title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act. This has been interpreted as meaning people with disabilities must be given all opportunities by the government to stay in their own homes as opposed to assisted living, nursing homes or worse, institutions for the disabled. It has been interpreted as meaning the government must make all reasonable efforts to allow people with disabilities to be included in their respective communities and enjoy family and friends, work if possible, get married, own homes and interact with nondisabled people. This is why the United States has so many community-based services today for the disabled including but not limited to home health aides, personal care attendants and other programs to keep people with disabilities in their own homes and communities.

The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990[edit]
The federal government enacted The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, which was created to allow equal opportunity for jobs, access to private and government-funded facilities, and transportation for disabled people. This act was created with the purpose to ensure that employers would not discriminate against any individual despite their disability. In 1990, data was gathered to show the percentage of disabled people who worked in the U.S. Out of the 13% who filled out the survey, only 53% percent of individuals with disabilities worked while 90% of this group population did not, the government wanted to change this, they wanted Americans with disabilities to have the same opportunities as those who did not have a disability. The ADA required corporations to not only hire qualified disabled people but also accommodate them and their needs.

Title I
Employment
An employer must give a qualified individual with disabilities the same opportunities as any other employee despite their disability. The employer must offer equal work privileges to someone who has a disability including but not limited to pay, work hours, training, etc. The employer must also create accommodations suitable for the person and their physical or mental disabilities.
Title II
State and Local Government Activities
Requires that the government give disabled people the same opportunities involving work, programs, building access, and services. Title II also requires that buildings create easy access for disabled people and provide communicators who will be able to help those with hearing or speaking impairments. Public spaces are however not required to create accommodations that would, in turn, alter their services as long as the services proved that they did all they could to prevent discrimination against disabled people.
Title II
Transportation
Public transportation should be customized so that disabled people may have easy access to public transit. Paratransit is a service that provides transportation to people who are unable to get from one destination to another due to their mental or physical disability.
Title II
Public Accommodations
Public accommodations require that private businesses create accommodations that will allow disabled people easy access to buildings. Private businesses may not discriminate against disabled people and must provide accommodations that are reasonable, alterations may be made so that a person with disabilities can have equal access to facilities that are provided, communicators for the hearing impaired, devices for the visually impaired, and wheelchair access. Facilities must regulate with the ADA, when regulating the building's infrastructure so it meets the ADA regulations.
Title IV
Telecommunication Relay Services
Requires telephone companies to have TRS seven days a week, twenty-four hours a day. It requires telephone companies to create accommodations for deaf and hard-of-hearing people by providing a third party able to assist both parties in communicating with one another.
Policies in the United Kingdom[edit]
In the UK, the Department for Work and Pension is a government department responsible for promoting disability awareness and among its aims is to increase the understanding of disability and removal of barriers for disabled people in the workplace. According to a news report, a people survey conducted in the UK shows a 23% increase in reported discrimination and harassment in the workplace at The Department for Work and Pension. The survey shows the number of reports for discrimination due to disability was in the majority compared to discrimination due to gender, ethnicity or age. DWP received criticism for the survey results. As a department responsible for tackling discrimination at work, the DWP results may indicate room for improvement from within. A DWP spokesperson said the survey results do not necessarily indicate an increase in the number of reports, but rather reflecting the outcomes of efforts to encourage people to come forward.[115]

Policies in former Soviet Union republics[edit]
UN programs & OSCE work to align policy & programs in countries that were part of the former Soviet Union with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.[116]

Political issues[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (February 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
  A 28-year-old Iraqi woman who lost both of her legs during the Iraq War in 2005
Political rights, social inclusion and citizenship have come to the fore in developed and some developing countries. The debate has moved beyond a concern about the perceived cost of maintaining dependent disabled people to finding effective ways to ensure that disabled people can participate in and contribute to society in all spheres of life.
In developing nations, where the vast bulk of the estimated 650 million disabled people reside, a great deal of work is needed to address concerns ranging from accessibility and education to self-empowerment, self-supporting employment, and beyond.[117]
In the past few years, disability rights activists have focused on obtaining full citizenship for the disabled.
There are obstacles in some countries in getting full employment; public perception of disabled people may vary.

Abuse[edit]
Main article: Disability abuse
Disability abuse happens when a person is abused physically, financially, verbally or mentally due to the person having a disability. As many disabilities are not visible (for example, asthma, learning disabilities) some abusers cannot rationalize the non-physical disability with a need for understanding, support, and so on.[118]
As the prevalence of disability and the cost of supporting disability increases with medical advancement and longevity in general, this aspect of society becomes of greater political importance. How political parties treat their disabled constituents may become a measure of a political party's understanding of disability, particularly in the social model of disability.[119]

Insurance[edit]
Disability benefit, or disability pension, is a major kind of disability insurance that is provided by government agencies to people who are temporarily or permanently unable to work due to a disability. In the U.S., the disability benefit is provided in the category of Supplemental Security Income. In Canada, it is within the Canada Pension Plan. In other countries, disability benefits may be provided under social security systems.
Costs of disability pensions are steadily growing in Western countries, mainly in Europe and the United States. It was reported that, in the UK, expenditure on disability pensions accounted for 0.9% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1980; two decades later it had reached 2.6% of GDP.[118][120] Several studies have reported a link between increased absence from work due to sickness and elevated risk of future disability pension.[121]
A study by researchers in Denmark suggests that information on self-reported days of absence due to sickness can be used to effectively identify future potential groups for disability pension.[120] These studies may provide useful information for policymakers, case managing authorities, employers, and physicians.
In Switzerland, social policies in the field of disability have been significantly reshaped over the last two decades by reducing the number of allowances awarded and by increasing the recourse to vocational rehabilitation measures. Drawing on interviews conducted with individuals who have been involved in programmes set up by Swiss disability insurance, a study highlights their uncertainties and concerns relating to their place in society, as well as their reactions to disability insurance's interventions.[122][123]
Private, for-profit disability insurance plays a role in providing incomes to disabled people, but the nationalized programs are the safety net that catch most claimants.

Demographics[edit]
Estimates of worldwide and country-wide numbers of disabled people are problematic. The varying approaches taken to defining disability notwithstanding, demographers agree that the world population of individuals with disabilities is very large. For example, in 2012, the World Health Organization estimated a world population of 6.5 billion people. Of those, nearly 650 million people, or 10%, were estimated to be moderately or severely disabled.[124]  In 2018 the International Labour Organization estimated that about a billion people, one-seventh of the world population, had disabilities, 80% of them in developing countries, and 80% of working age.  Excluding disabled people from the workforce was reckoned to cost up to 7% of gross domestic product.[125]

Developing nations[edit]
Disability is more common in developing than in developed nations. The connection between disability and poverty is thought to be part of a "vicious cycle" in which these constructs are mutually reinforcing.[126]

See also[edit]
.mw-parser-output .div-col{margin-top:0.3em;column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .div-col-small{font-size:90%}.mw-parser-output .div-col-rules{column-rule:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .div-col dl,.mw-parser-output .div-col ol,.mw-parser-output .div-col ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .div-col li,.mw-parser-output .div-col dd{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
Ableism
Accessibility
Assistive technology
Disability abuse
Disability Flag
Disability hate crime
Disadvantaged
Frailty syndrome
Physiological functional capacity

References[edit]
Citations[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ UN General Assembly, Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities : resolution / adopted by the General Assembly, 24 January 2007, A/RES/61/106, available at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/45f973632.html [accessed 27 December 2020]

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}Linton, Simi (1998). Claiming Disability: Knowledge and Identity. New York: New York University Press.

^ Dolmage, Jay Timothy (2014). Prothesis. Syracuse University Press.

^ Mugueta-Aguinaga I, Garcia-Zapirain B (2017). "Is Technology Present in Frailty? Technology a Back-up Tool for Dealing with Frailty in the Elderly: A Systematic Review". Aging and Disease. 8 (2): 176–95. doi:10.14336/AD.2016.0901. PMC 5362177. PMID 28400984.

^ Abidi, Javed; Sharma, Dorodi (February 6, 2014). "Poverty, Disability, and Employment: Global Perspectives From the National Centre for Promotion of Employment for Disabled People". Career Development and Transition for Exceptional Individuals. doi:10.1177/2165143413520180. S2CID 154676584.

^ "Definition of handicap in Oxford Dictionaries (British & World English)". Retrieved April 12, 2013.

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". Retrieved April 12, 2013.

^ D'Mello, Laveena; Monteiro, Meena; B.M., Govindaraju (July 24, 2017). "Psycho-Social Problems faced by Persons with Disability". International Journal of Management, Technology, and Social Sciences: 1–7. doi:10.47992/ijmts.2581.6012.0019. ISSN 2581-6012.

^ Russell, Marta (2019). Capitalism & Disability: Selected Writings by Marta Russell. Haymarket Books. p. 4.

^ "76 FR 16977". federalregister.gov. 2011.

^ "Invisible Disabilities: List & Information" (PDF). Disabled World. October 28, 2015. Retrieved February 15, 2021.

^ Stuart H (September 2006). "Mental illness and employment discrimination". Current Opinion in Psychiatry. 19 (5): 522–6. doi:10.1097/01.yco.0000238482.27270.5d. PMID 16874128. S2CID 45821626.

^ Furrie, Adele, Rebecca Gewurtz, Wendy Porch, Cameron Crawford, Maureen Haan, and John Stapleton. "Episodic Disabilities in Canada." 2016

^ Moore, Michael. "Religious Attitudes toward the Disabled (2015)". infidels.org. The Secular Web. Retrieved April 30, 2020.

^ Brown, Robin (1994). Florida's First People: 12,000 Years of Human History. p. 25. ISBN 1-56164-032-8.

^ Milanich, Jerald T. (1994). Archaeology of Precolumbian Florida. p. 75. ISBN 0-8130-1273-2.

^ Sneed, Debby (August 2020). "The architecture of access: ramps at ancient Greek healing sanctuaries". Antiquity. 94 (376): 1015–1029. doi:10.15184/aqy.2020.123. ISSN 0003-598X.

^ Geggel, Laura (July 22, 2020). "Ancient Greeks may have built 'disability ramps' on some temples". LiveScience. Retrieved August 7, 2020.

^ a b Braddock, David, and Susan Parrish, "An Institutional History of Disability," in Handbook of Disability Studies, ed. Gary Albrecht, Katherine Seelman, and Michael Bury (Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage, 2001).

^ Stiker, Henri (2000). A History of Disability. Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press. p. 91.

^ Foucault, Michel (1980). The History of Sexuality, vol. 1. New York: Vintage.

^ Davis, Lennard. "Constructing Normalcy." In his Enforcing Normalcy: Disability, Deafness, and the Body (New York: Verso, 1995), pp. 23–49.

^ Bogdan, Robert (1998). Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and Profit.

^ Barlow, Kathleen (2006). "Inbreeding, Incest, and the Incest Taboo: The State of Knowledge at the Turn of the Century". American Anthropologist. 108 (2): 447–48. doi:10.1525/aa.2006.108.2.447.

^ Russell, Marta (2019). Capitalism & disability. ISBN 9781608467198.

^ Shakespeare, Tom. "The Social Model of Disability." In The Disability Studies Reader, ed. Lennard Davis (New York: Routledge, 2006, 2d ed.), 197–204.

^ "Cerebral Palsy: a Guide for Care". The Nemours Foundation. Retrieved July 29, 2007.

^ Meyers, Stephen (2014). "Chapter 23. The past dividing the present".  In Mitchell, David; Karr, Valerie (eds.). Crises, Conflict and Disability: Ensuring Equality. Routledge. p. 195.

^ "Groups and individuals honored at PWD Day". The Manila Times. May 20, 2014. Archived from the original on July 19, 2014. Retrieved July 15, 2014.

^ Department for International Development. "Recognising & Implementing Housing Rights CSCF449". Archived from the original on July 19, 2014. Retrieved July 15, 2014.

^ Dunn, D. S.; Andrews, E. E. (2015). "Person-first and identity-first language: Developing psychologists' cultural competence using disability language". The American Psychologist. 70 (3): 255–64. doi:10.1037/a0038636. PMID 25642702.

^ Glasgow Centre for Inclusive Living: The Social Model of Disability Archived January 3, 2009, at the Wayback Machine

^ "Journalists should learn to carefully traverse a variety of disability terminology | National Center on Disability and Journalism". Retrieved April 27, 2019.

^ Lum, Doman (2010). Culturally Competent Practice: A Framework for Understanding. Cengage Learning. p. 441. ISBN 9780840034434.

^ "AHEAD Statement on Language | Association on Higher Education and Disability". Retrieved February 9, 2021.

^ Muzikar, Debra (April 20, 2015). "The Autism Puzzle Piece: A symbol that's going to stay or go?". The Art of Autism. Retrieved April 1, 2017.

^ Woodward, Kathleen (2015). "9".  In Adams, Rachel; Reiss, Benjamin; Serlin, David (eds.). Key Words for Disability Studies. New York: New York University Press. pp. 33–34. ISBN 978-1-4798-4115-8.

^ Kafer, Alison (2013). Feminist, Queer, Crip. Indiana University Press. p. 8.

^ Russell, Marta (2019). Capitalism & Disability: Selected Writings. Chicago, IL: Haymarket Books. p. 14. ISBN 9781608466863.

^ a b Blick R.N., Litz K.S., Thornhill M.G., Goreczny A.J. (2016). "Do inclusive work environments matter? Effects of community-integrated employment on quality of life for individuals with intellectual disabilities". Research in Developmental Disabilities. 53–54: 358–366. doi:10.1016/j.ridd.2016.02.015. PMID 26977937.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ a b L. Lindstrom, K.A. Hirano, C. McCarthy, C.Y. Alverson
"Just having a job": Career advancement for low-wage workers with intellectual and developmental disabilities
Career Development and Transition for Exceptional Individuals, 37 (1) (2014), pp. 1–10

^ a b Banks P., Jahoda A., Dagnan D., Kemp J., Williams V. (2010). "Supported Employment for People with Intellectual Disability: The Effects of Job Breakdown on Psychological Well-Being". Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities. 23 (4): 344–54. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3148.2009.00541.x.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ Yeo 2005.

^ World Health Organization, World report on disability, 2011.

^ "Centro DÍBÁ".

^ a b c d "Children With Disabilities in the Context of Disaster: A Social Vulnerability Perspective" (PDF). Child Development. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 12, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2013.

^ "Disaster Case Management and Individuals With Disabilities" (PDF). Retrieved January 31, 2013.

^ a b Stough 2009.

^ Ducy, Stough & Clark 2012.

^ McAdams Ducy, Elizabeth; Stough, Laura M. (July 29, 2011). "Exploring the support role of special education teachers after Hurricane Ike: Children with significant disabilities". Journal of Family Issues. 32 (10): 1325–45. doi:10.1177/0192513X11412494. S2CID 146605276.

^ "Effective Emergency Management: Making Improvements for Communities and People with Disabilities: National Council on Disability". Ncd.gov. Archived from the original on February 12, 2013. Retrieved January 29, 2013.

^ "UN Enable – Disability, natural disasters and emergency situations". Un.org. May 31, 2011. Archived from the original on February 2, 2013. Retrieved January 29, 2013.

^ Nikora et al. 2004, p. 5.

^ a b c Donovan 2012, p. 12.

^ Nikora et al. 2004, pp. 6–7.

^ Shakespeare T (2001). "The social model of disability: An outdated ideology?". Exploring Theories and Expanding Methodologies: Where we are and where we need to go. Research in Social Science and Disability. Vol. 2. pp. 9–28. doi:10.1016/S1479-3547(01)80018-X. ISBN 978-0-7623-0773-9.

^ Parker, Christopher J.; May, Andrew; Mitchell, Val; Burrows, Alison (2015). "Capturing Volunteered Information for Inclusive Service Design: Potential Benefits and Challenges". The Design Journal. 16 (11): 197–218. doi:10.2752/175630613X13584367984947. S2CID 110716823.

^ Garden R (2010). "Disability and narrative: new directions for medicine and the medical humanities". Med. Humanit. 36 (2): 70–74. doi:10.1136/jmh.2010.004143. PMID 21393285.

^ Mallon, Ron (2014).  Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Naturalistic Approaches to Social Construction (Winter 2014 ed.).

^ Freidson, Eliot (1970). Profession of Medicine: A Study of the Sociology of Applied Knowledge. Harper and Row Inc. pp. 205–10. ISBN 978-0-06-042205-9.

^ Burch, Susan (2009). Encyclopedia of American Disability History Vol. 2. Facts on File. pp. 543–44. ISBN 978-0-8160-7030-5.

^ Kafer, Alison (2013). Feminist, Queer, Crip. Indiana University Press.

^ "International organisations report on disability". Disabled Persons Assembly New Zealand. August 2011. Archived from the original on February 5, 2013. Retrieved March 6, 2013.

^ Kaplan, Deborah. "Disability Model". World Institute on Disability. Archived from the original on April 25, 2012. Retrieved October 30, 2011.

^ Lum, Doman (2010). Culturally Competent Practice: A Framework for Understanding Diverse Groups and Justice Issues. Cengage Learning. p. 449. ISBN 978-0-8400-3443-4.

^ Olkin, Rhoda (2012). What Psychotherapists Should Know About Disability. Guilford Press. p. 26. ISBN 978-1-4625-0613-2.

^ Nikora et al. 2004, pp. 5–6.

^ Nikora et al. 2004, p. 6.

^ DePoy & Gilson 2004.

^ a b Nikora et al. 2004, p. 7.

^ "Economic Model of Disability". Michigan Disability Rights Coalition. Retrieved August 11, 2012.

^ Smith, T.B. (2012). A New and Emerging Model of Disability:  The Consumer Model.  White Paper. The Pennsylvania State University

^ Aichner, T. & Shaltoni, A.M. (2018). "Marketing of specialised products and services to consumers with disabilities: exploring the role of advertising, country-of-origin, and e-commerce". The International Review of Retail, Distribution and Consumer Research. 28 (2): 115–36. doi:10.1080/09593969.2017.1364658. S2CID 169024657.

^ Weiner, B.; Perry, R.P. & Magnusson, J. (1988). "An attributional analysis of reactions to stigmas". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 55 (5): 738–48. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.55.5.738. PMID 2974883.

^ Lerner, M.J. (1980). The belief in a just world: A fundamental delusion. New York: Plenum Press.

^ a b Reeve, Donna (2004). "Psycho-emotional dimensions of disability and the social model" (PDF).  In Barnes, Colin; Mercer, Geof (eds.). Reeve Chapter 2004. Leeds, UK: The Disability Press. pp. 83–100. ISBN 978-0-9528450-8-9.

^ Morris, Jenny (1991). Pride Against Prejudice Transforming Attitudes to Disability (PDF). Aylesbury, Bucks, UK: The Women's Press. pp. 21, 22.

^ Linton, Semi (1998). Claiming Disability: Knowledge and Identity. New York: NYU Press. pp. 19–21. ISBN 978-0-8147-5134-3. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved May 3, 2016.

^ "We're not here for your inspiration". www.abc.net.au. July 2, 2012. Retrieved April 19, 2016.

^ Murray, Stuart (2008). Representing Autism Culture, Narrative, Fascination. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. ISBN 978-1-84631-092-8.

^ "Volume 7 Issue 1". physed.otago.ac.nz. Retrieved April 19, 2016.

^ Row-Heyveld, Lindsey (2015). "Reading Batman, Writing X-Men Superpowers and Disabilities in the First-Year Seminar". Pedagogy: Critical Approaches to Teaching Literature, Language, Composition, and Culture. 15 (3): 519–26. doi:10.1215/15314200-2917105. S2CID 146299487.

^ Reeve, Donna (2002). "Negotiating Psycho-Emotional Dimensions of Disability and their Influence on Identity Constructions" (PDF). Disability & Society. 17 (5): 493–508. doi:10.1080/09687590220148487. S2CID 17324956. Retrieved April 19, 2016.

^ Lawson, Anna (2016). European Union Non-Discrimination Law and Intersectionality. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-13921-8.

^ GBD 2016 Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collaborators (2017). "Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 328 diseases and injuries for 195 countries, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016". The Lancet. Elsevier BV. 390 (10100): 1211–1259. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(17)32154-2. ISSN 0140-6736. {{cite journal}}: |author= has generic name (help)

^ Frederick, Angela; Shifrer, Dara (July 11, 2018). "Race and Disability: From Analogy to Intersectionality". Sociology of Race and Ethnicity. 5 (2): 200–214. doi:10.1177/2332649218783480. ISSN 2332-6492. S2CID 150155324.

^ Hendricks, Charlene; Lansford, Jennifer E.; Deater-Deckard, Kirby; Bornstein, Marc H. (July 29, 2013). "Associations Between Child Disabilities and Caregiver Discipline and Violence in Low- and Middle-Income Countries". Child Development. 85 (2): 513–531. doi:10.1111/cdev.12132. ISSN 0009-3920. PMC 4151611. PMID 23895329.

^ Sullivan P, & Knutson J (2000). Maltreatment and disabilities: a population-based epidemiological

study. Child Abuse & Neglect, 24(10), 1257–1273. [PubMed: 11075694]

^ Randall W, Sobsey D, & Parrila R (2001). Ethnicity, disability, and risk for abuse. Developmental

Disabilities Bulletin, 29(1), 60–80.

^ Horner-Johnson W, & Drum CE (2006). Prevalence of maltreatment of people with intellectual

disabilities: A review of recently published research. Mental Retardation and Developmental

Disabilities Research Reviews, 12(1), 57–69. [PubMed: 16435331]

^ Brown J, Cohen P, Johnson JG, & Salzinger S (1998). A longitudinal analysis of risk factors for child

maltreatment: findings of a 17-year prospective study of officially recorded and self-reported child

abuse and neglect Child Abuse & Neglect, 22(11), 1065–1078. [PubMed: 9827312]

^ Perkins S. An Ecological Perspective on the Comorbidity of Childhood Violence Exposure and Disabilities: Focus on the Ecology of the School. Psychology of Violence. 2012 Jan;2(1):75-89. DOI: 10.1037/a0026137. PMID 34621555; PMCID: PMC8494429.

^ Nelson, Camille (Spring 2010). "Racializing Disability, Disabling Race: Policing Race and Mental Status" (PDF). Berkley Journal of Criminal Law. 15 (1). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 4, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2016.

^ Gerschick, Thomas (Summer 2000). "Towards a Theory of Disability and Gender". Signs. 25 (4): 1263–68. doi:10.1086/495558. JSTOR 3175525. S2CID 144519468.

^ WomenWatch, UN. "WomenWatch: Feature on Women with Disabilities". www.un.org. Retrieved October 24, 2017.

^ Garland-Thomson, Rosemarie (Winter 2005). "Feminist Disability Studies". Signs. 30 (2): 1557–87. doi:10.1086/423352. S2CID 144603782.

^ "Disability Social History Project – Timeline". Disabilityhistory.org. Retrieved August 11, 2012.

^ Cooper, Rory A; Hisaichi Ohnabe; Douglas A. Hobson (2006). An Introduction to Rehabilitation Engineering. CRC Press. p. 131. ISBN 978-1-4200-1249-1.

^ Dragon Naturally Speaking Archived April 8, 2015, at the Wayback Machine

^ Sobh, Tarek (2007). Innovations and Advanced Techniques in Computer and Information Sciences and Engineering. Springer. p. 176. ISBN 978-1-4020-6268-1.

^ "Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI)". W3.org. Retrieved January 29, 2013.

^ "Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0". W3.org. Retrieved January 29, 2013.

^ "First Extremity Games was first class success". oandp.com. Retrieved March 6, 2013.

^ a b "Disability Rights Wisconsin". Disabilityrightswi.org. Archived from the original on March 19, 2012. Retrieved August 11, 2012.

^ Bagenstos, Samuel (2009). Law and the Contradictions of the Disability Rights Movement. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12449-1.

^ Löve, Laufey; Traustadóttir, Rannveig; Rice, James (March 26, 2018). "Achieving disability equality: Empowering disabled people to take the lead". Social Inclusion. 6 (1): 1–8. doi:10.17645/si.v6i1.1180.

^ Kemple, Miriam; Ahmad, Fatima; Girijashanker, Suraj (2011). "Shaping Disability Rights through Shaping the Disability Movement". Journal of Human Rights Practice. 3 (3): 355–63. doi:10.1093/jhuman/hur019.

^ "Promote a Human Rights Based Approach to Disability". The Astana Times.

^ a b Kayess, Rosemary; French, Phillip (2008). "Out of darkness into light? Introducing the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities". Human Rights Law Review. 8: 1–34. doi:10.1093/hrlr/ngm044.

^ "Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)". United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs: Disability. Retrieved January 19, 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)

^ "International Year for Disabled Persons". Public Health Reports. 95 (5): 498–99. 1981.

^ "US Labor Department announces final rules to improve the employment of veterans, disabled people". U.S. Department of Labor. August 27, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2017.

^ "Answering Your Questions About ADA Accessible Classrooms". Access Advocates. March 12, 2014. Retrieved October 17, 2021.

^ Ansley, James (2000). "Creating Accessible Schools" (PDF). National Clearinghouse for Educational Facilities. National Institute of Building Sciences. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 4, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2016.

^ "Disabled staff at the DWP are reporting increased discrimination". The Independent. February 5, 2016. Retrieved February 7, 2016.

^ "OSCE supports roundtable discussion on the rights of persons with disabilities in Nur-Sultan". OSCE.

^ "Fact Sheet on Persons with Disabilities, by United Nation" (PDF).

^ a b OECD. Transforming disability into ability: Policies to promote work and income security for disabled people. Paris: OECD Publication Offices. 2003

^ Hough, Andrew (October 23, 2012). "'Disability hate crimes' rise by a quarter in a year". Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved January 29, 2013.

^ a b Labriola M, Lund T (2007). "Self-reported sickness absence as a risk marker of future disability pension. Prospective findings from the DWECS/DREAM study 1990–2004". Int J Med Sci. 4 (3): 153–58. doi:10.7150/ijms.4.153. PMC 1885553. PMID 17554400.

^ Virtanen M, Kivimäki M, Vahtera J, Elovainio M, Sund R, Virtanen P, Ferrie JE (2006). "Sickness absence as a risk factor for job termination, unemployment, and disability pension among temporary and permanent employees". Occup Environ Med. 63 (3): 212–17. doi:10.1136/oem.2005.020297. PMC 2078149. PMID 16497865.

^ Piecek, Monika; Perrin, Céline; Tabin, Jean-Pierre; Probst, Isabelle (January 17, 2019). "The 'compliant', the 'pacified' and the 'rebel': experiences with Swiss disability insurance". Disability & Society. 34 (4): 583–606. doi:10.1080/09687599.2018.1545115. ISSN 0968-7599.  Material was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

^ Tabin, Jean-Pierre; Piecek, Monika; Perrin, Céline; Probst, Isabelle (September 19, 2019). "Three Dimensions in the Register of Shame". Review of Disability Studies. 15 (3): 1–19. ISSN 1552-9215.

^ "Disability World Report 2011". World Health Organization. 2011. Retrieved January 8, 2015.

^ "For many, disability is part of what it means to be human". Financial Times. May 11, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2018.

^ Yeo R., Moore K. (2003). "Including disabled people in poverty reduction work: "Nothing about us, without us"". World Development. 31 (3): 571–90. doi:10.1016/S0305-750X(02)00218-8.


Sources[edit]
DePoy, Elizabeth; Gilson, Stephen French (2004). Rethinking Disability: Principles for Professional and Social Change. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks Cole. ISBN 978-0-534-54929-9.
Donovan, Rich (March 1, 2012). "The Global Economics of Disability" (PDF). Return on Disability. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 13, 2012. Retrieved August 11, 2012.
Ducy, Elizabeth McAdams; Stough, Laura M.; Clark, M. Carolyn (2012). "Choosing Agency in the Midst of Vulnerability: Using Critical Disability Theory to Examine a Disaster Narrative".  In Steinberg, Shirley R.; Cannella, Gaile S. (eds.). Critical Qualitative Research Reader. New York: Peter Lang. ISBN 978-1-4331-0688-0.
Nikora, Linda Waimari; Karapu, Rolinda; Hickey, Huhana; Te Awekotuku, Ngahuia (2004). "Disabled Maori and Disability Support Options". Maori & Psychology Research Unit, University of Waikato. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 13, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2012.
Stough, Laura M. (2009). "The Effects of Disaster on the Mental Health of Individuals With Disabilities" (PDF).  In Neria, Yuval; Galea, Sandro; Norris, Fran H. (eds.). Mental Health and Disasters. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-41282-8.
Yeo, Rebecca (2005). "Disability, poverty, and the new development agenda" (PDF). Disability Knowledge and Research Programme. Retrieved June 19, 2013.
Further reading[edit]
Albrecht, Gary L., ed. (2005). Encyclopedia of disability. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-0-7619-2565-1.
Arditi, A.; Rosenthal, B. (1998). Developing an objective definition of visual impairment. Vision '96: Proceedings of the International Low Vision Conference. Madrid. pp. 331–34.
Bowe, Frank (1978). Handicapping America: Barriers to disabled people. New York: Harper & Row. ISBN 978-0-06-010422-1.
Charlton, James I. (2004). Nothing about us without us : disability oppression and empowerment ([3. Dr] ed.). Berkeley: Univ. of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-22481-0.
Burch, Susan (July 2009). "(Extraordinary) Bodies of Knowledge: Recent Scholarship in American Disability History". OAH Magazine of History. 23 (3): 29–34. doi:10.1093/maghis/23.3.29. ISSN 0882-228X.
Burkhauser, Richard V.; Schmeiser, Maximilian D.; Weathers II, Robert R. (January 2012). "The Importance of Anti-Discrimination and Workers' Compensation Laws on the Provision of Workplace Accommodations Following the Onset of a Disability". Industrial & Labor Relations Review. 65 (1): 161–180. doi:10.1177/001979391206500109. S2CID 154605646.
Darling, Peter (August 2007). "Disabilities and the Workplace". Business NH Magazine. 24 (8).
Glenn, Eddie (1995). African American Women with Disabilities: An Overview.
Miles, Albert S (1994). "Brown v. Board of Education and the American with Disabilities Act: Vistas of equal educational opportunities for African Americans". Journal of Negro Education. 63 (3).
Johnstone, David (2001). An Introduction to Disability Studies (2nd ed.). Fulton. ISBN 978-1-85346-726-4.
Masala, Carmelo; Petretto, Donatella Rita (2008). Psicologia dell'Handicap e della Riabilitazione [The Psychology of Handicap and Rehabilitation] (in Italian). Rome: Kappa. ISBN 978-88-15-06226-0.
Oliver, Michael (1997). The Politics of Disablement. London: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-333-43293-8.
Pearson, Charlotte (2006). Direct Payments and Personalisation of Care. Edinburgh: Dunedin Academic Press. ISBN 978-1-903765-62-3.
Shakespeare, Tom; with Anne Kerr (1999). Genetic Politics: from Eugenics to Genome. Cheltenham: New Clarion Press. ISBN 978-1-873797-25-9.
Kaushik, R. (1999). "Access Denied: Can we overcome disabling attitudes". Museum International. 51 (3): 48–52. doi:10.1111/1468-0033.00217. ISSN 1468-0033.
Lansing, Michael J. (January 2009). "'Salvaging the Man Power of America': Conservation, Manhood, and Disabled Veterans during World War I". Environmental History. 14: 32–57. doi:10.1093/envhis/14.1.32. ISSN 1084-5453.
Longmore, Paul (July 2009). "Making Disability an Essential Part of American History". OAH Magazine of History. 23 (3): 11–15. doi:10.1093/maghis/23.3.11. ISSN 0882-228X.
Petretto, Masala C. (2008). "From disablement to enablement: conceptual models of disability in the 20th century". Disability and Rehabilitation. 30 (17): 1233–44. doi:10.1080/09638280701602418. ISSN 0963-8288. PMID 18821191. S2CID 19377518.
Rose, Sarah F. (2017). No Right to Be Idle: The Invention of Disability, 1840s–1930s. University of North Carolina Press. pp. xvi, 382. ISBN 978-1-4696-2489-1.
External links[edit]
.mw-parser-output .spoken-wikipedia{border:1px solid #a2a9b1;background-color:#f8f9fa;margin:0.5em 0;padding:0.2em;line-height:1.5em;font-size:90%}.mw-parser-output .spoken-wikipedia-header{text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .spoken-wikipedia-listen-to{font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .spoken-wikipedia-files{text-align:center;margin-top:10px;margin-bottom:0.4em}.mw-parser-output .spoken-wikipedia-icon{float:left;margin-left:5px;margin-top:10px}.mw-parser-output .spoken-wikipedia-disclaimer{margin-left:60px;margin-top:10px;font-size:95%;line-height:1.4em}.mw-parser-output .spoken-wikipedia-footer{margin-top:10px;text-align:center}@media(min-width:720px){.mw-parser-output .spoken-wikipedia{width:20em;float:right;clear:right;margin-left:1em}}Listen to this article (35 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 20 April 2009 (2009-04-20), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help · More spoken articles)
Disability at Curlie
 The dictionary definition of disability at Wiktionary
 Quotations related to Disability at Wikiquote
 Media related to Disabilities at Wikimedia Commons
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vteDisabilityMain topics
Disability
Disability studies
Medical model
Social model
Society for Disability Studies
Approaches
Freak show
IEP
Inclusion
Learning disability
Mainstreaming
Physical therapy
driver rehabilitation
Special needs
school
education
Rights, law, supportRights
Ableism/disablism
Disability rights
Pejorative terms
Law
AODA
ADA
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Declaration on the Rights of Disabled Persons
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
Services
Services for mental disorders
Services for disabled people
Support
DLA
ODSP
Rail
SSDI
SSI
Students
CNIB
Activist groups
CCD
DPI
MINDS
Reach Canada
Structural and assistive
Activities of daily living
Assistive technology
Independent living
Mobility aid
Orthotics and braces
Personal Care Assistant
Physical accessibility
Prosthetics
Universal design
Web accessibility
Social issues
Augmentative and alternative communication
Emotional or behavioral disability
Invisible disability
Disability and religion
Disability and poverty
Disability and sexuality
Arts, media, culture, sport
Disability culture
Disability art
Disability in the arts
Disability in the media
Disabled sports
Deaflympics
Paralympics
Special Olympics

 Category
 Lists

vteDisability by countryAfrica
Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Asia
Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
China (Hong Kong, Macau)
East Timor
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
North Korea
Oman
Pakistan
Palestine
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
South Korea
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
Europe
Albania
Andorra
Austria
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
North Macedonia
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom (Northern Ireland)
Vatican City
North America
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Oceania
Australia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
South America
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela

Authority control General
Integrated Authority File (Germany)
National libraries
France (data)
Ukraine
United States
Other
National Archives (US)






