
Title:
Sex comedy
Text:
Sex comedy, erotic comedy or more broadly sexual comedy is a genre in which comedy is motivated by sexual situations and love affairs. Although "sex comedy" is primarily a description of dramatic forms such as theatre and film, literary works such as those of Ovid[1] and Chaucer[2] may be considered sex comedies.
Sex comedy was popular in 17th century English Restoration theatre. From 1953 to 1965, Hollywood released a number of sex comedies, some featuring stars such as Doris Day, Jack Lemmon and Marilyn Monroe.[citation needed] The United Kingdom released a spate of sex comedies in the 1970s, notably the Carry On series. Hollywood released Animal House in 1978, which was followed by a long line of teen sex comedies in the early 1980s, e.g. Porky's, Bachelor Party and Risky Business. Other countries with a significant sex comedy film production include Brazil (pornochanchada), Italy (commedia sexy all'italiana) and Mexico (sexicomedias).

Contents

1 Antiquity
2 Restoration sex comedy
3 Modern sex comedy

3.1 American sex comedy
3.2 British sex comedy

3.2.1 The Confessions series
3.2.2 Carry Ons become sexy
3.2.3 Sleaze and sexploitation


3.3 French sex comedy
3.4 Italian sex comedy
3.5 Indian sex comedy
3.6 Japanese sex comedy


4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading



Antiquity[edit]
Although the ancient Greek theatre genre of the satyr play contained farcical sex, perhaps the best-known ancient comedy motivated by sexual gamesmanship is Aristophanes' Lysistrata (411 BC), in which the title character persuades her fellow women of Greece to protest the Peloponnesian War by withholding sex.[3] The "boy-meets-girl" plot that is distinctive of Western sexual comedy can be traced to Menander (343–291 BC), who differs from Aristophanes in focusing on the courtship and marital dilemmas of the middle classes rather than social and political satire.[4]
His successor Plautus, the Roman playwright whose comedies inspired the musical A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum, regularly based his plots on sexual situations.[5] The popularity of Plautus's comedies was a major influence on the creation of situation sex comedy.[6]

Restoration sex comedy[edit]
  The sex comedies of the Restoration predated the theme of the rake in William Hogarth's painting series A Rake's Progress (third painting, 1732–35)
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}Main article: Restoration comedy
During the decade 1672–82, sex comedy such as The Country Wife (1675) flourished as part of the revival of theatre in England resulting from the Restoration.[7] Forerunners of the craze were John Dryden's An Evening's Love (1668) and Thomas Betterton's The Amorous Widow (ca. 1670).[8] Sexual content was favored by the presence of female performers, in contrast to the drag performances of the Elizabethan stage.[9] The main character was often a self-important rake or libertine, posturing heroically.[10] Adultery was a major theme, and the couple is sometimes found in flagrante delicto, represented by the stage direction "in disorder."[11] The plays are often characterized by sexually charged banter, "swaggering masculine energy," and a superficially innocent heroine who is nonetheless alluring.[12] This theatrical milieu produced the first woman of the Western tradition who made her living as playwright, Aphra Behn (The Rover).

Sex comedy embraces a realm of drama in which women can be contenders. The war is fought with glances and flirtations, wit and beauty, manipulation and desire. And in this battle, women often win—even if the victory is sometimes equivocal.[13]
Presenting seduction and adultery as funny eased moral anxieties that might otherwise have attached to these themes.[14] It is an open question as to whether the plays portraying libertinism endorse the lifestyle, or hold it up to satire and criticism.[15]
After the main vogue of Restoration sex comedy, William Congreve revived and reinvented the form, and bawdy comedy remained popular into the 18th century.[16]

Modern sex comedy[edit]
American sex comedy[edit]
Film historian Tamar Jeffers McDonald highlights the period 1953 to 1965 as an era where sex comedy came to be the main form of romantic comedy in Hollywood.[17]  She claims that 1953 was a key year as the producers of the film The Moon Is Blue challenged the Motion Picture Production Code rules against using the word 'virgin', Hugh Hefner introduced Playboy magazine, and sexologist Alfred Kinsey drew attention to the way women were having sex before marriage. In the movies, playboys played by actors such as Rock Hudson or Tony Curtis would try to bed marriage-minded women played by actresses such as Doris Day or Marilyn Monroe, and the central question would seem to be "will she or won't she?", but in the end, the man would fall for the "girl", and sometimes agree to marry her. Notable sex comedies in this period were Some Like It Hot, The Apartment, Pillow Talk, Irma La Douce, The Seven Year Itch, Gentlemen Prefer Blondes and Lover Come Back. According to McDonald, by 1965, the sexual revolution was under way, so "will she or won't she?" could no longer serve as the central dynamic, and filmmakers moved on to different topics.[citation needed]
Some may also consider the 1967 film, The Graduate, to be a sex comedy due to the story being about the main character, Benjamin Braddock, being seduced and starting an affair with his family friends' mother, Mrs. Robinson. During the 70's, there were films such as Pretty Maids All in a Row, The Chicken Chronicles, The Swinging Cheerleaders, The Pom Pom Girls, and Cooley High which share some many elements from the sex comedy sub-genre. The sub-genre sometimes shares genre elements with the coming-of-age stories genre as well.
In 1978, National Lampoon's Animal House's success led to a string of raunchy gross-out and sex comedies in the late 1970s and early to mid 1980s. Animal House featured many scenes that would become iconic and often parodied, such as the scene where John "Bluto" Blutarsky (John Belushi) acts as a "peeping tom" to spy on a half-naked pillow fight at a sorority. In 1981, the film Porky's cemented the wide appeal of the sex comedy. Although it would go on to become the fifth highest-grossing film of the year, it proved to be unpopular with critics, with many accusing it of being degrading to women as well as objectifying of them. The film would lead to three sequels and is credited by many as the start of the "teen" subgenre of the sex comedy. Some examples of these types of films from this era and some of which have actors/actresses starring in them that later went on to bigger fame include Fast Times at Ridgemont High, The Last American Virgin, Losin' It, Risky Business, Mischief, Bachelor Party, Once Bitten, Revenge of the Nerds, Secret Admirer, The Sure Thing, Class, Private Lessons, Private School,  and Private Resort.
Another 80's teen comedy film that stars young actors and actresses that went onto bigger fame and is tamer on its handling of sex is Little Darlings.
Although not widely considered a "sex comedy," the 1998 critical and financial hit There's Something About Mary has many moments that have entered the pop culture lexicon, particularly the infamous scene in which Ted Stroehmann (Ben Stiller), following a scene of vigorous masturbation, discovers that his semen is hanging off of his ear. Mary (Cameron Diaz), mistaking it for hair gel, nonchalantly grabs it and runs it through her hair.
A year later, the film American Pie was credited with reviving the "teen sex comedy" subgenre. In the film, a group of high schoolers make a pact to lose their virginity before they graduate. The film's most famous scene (which also provides its namesake) involves one of the high schoolers, Jim (Jason Biggs), having intercourse with a fresh apple pie after being told by a friend that it is similar to "getting to third base." The film spawned numerous sequels and spin-off films, all with varying degrees of financial and critical success, and kicked off a second wave of American sex comedy in the late 1990s and early 2000s.
A third wave of American sex comedy emerged in the mid to late 2000s and into the early 2010s with a string of successful sex comedy films by Judd Apatow and his associates. Apatow's 2005 directorial debut The 40-Year-Old Virgin follows Andy Stitzer (Steve Carell) as he struggles with the pressures of reaching the age of 40 without ever having "done the deed." Although the film featured crude sexual humor, it was critically praised for balancing it with an underlying romantic message.[18] Another Judd Apatow related film, Superbad, shared many similar motifs from classic "teen" sex comedies of the past.[citation needed]
Sex comedies of the 2010s include The To Do List, puberty-themed series Big Mouth, and Yes, God, Yes.[19]

British sex comedy[edit]
According to David McGillivray in his history of the British sex film, Doing Rude Things, Mary Had a Little... (1961) was the first British sex comedy.[20] Bridging the gap between documentary nudist films and the later sex comedies was the film The Naked World of Harrison Marks (1965). George Harrison Marks' love of music hall and slapstick found its way into this spoof documentary biopic.
Norman Wisdom's last starring role, What's Good for the Goose (1969), was a sex comedy made by Tony Tenser. He specialised in producing exploitation films and founded his own production company Tigon British Film Productions in 1966.[21] In the movie, he leaves his wife and kids to go off on a business trip and has an affair with a young girl, played by Sally Geeson[22]
There apparently are two versions of the film: the 98-minute cut version was released in the UK, while the uncensored version (105 minutes) which shows nudity from Sally Geeson, was released in continental Europe.[citation needed]
Percy was directed by Ralph Thomas and starred Hywel Bennett, Denholm Elliott, Elke Sommer, and Britt Ekland. The film is about a successful penis transplant. An innocent and shy young man (Bennett) whose penis is mutilated in an accident and has to be amputated wakes up after an operation to find out that it has been replaced by a womanizer's, which is very large. The rest of the movie is about its new owner following in his predecessor's footsteps and meeting all the women who are able to recognize it. There was a sequel, Percy's Progress, released in 1974.
To move with the times, the Carry On series added nudity to its saucy seaside postcard innuendo. Series producer Peter Rogers saw the George Segal movie Loving (1970) and added his two favourite words to the title, making Carry On Loving (1970) the twentieth in the series.[23]  Starring "countess of cleavage" Imogen Hassall, the story of a dating agency service is still very innocent stuff. It was followed by Carry On Girls (1973), based around a Miss World-style beauty contest. Next in the series was Carry On Dick (1974), with more risqué humour and Sid James and Barbara Windsor's on- and off-screen lovemaking.[24]
It has often been noted that historically, a defining characteristic of most British sex comedies – particularly in the period after the censorship rules were relaxed slightly at the turn of the 1970s – is that they were "neither sexy nor funny".[25]

The Confessions series[edit]
The Confessions series consisted of four sex comedy films released during the 1970s starring Robin Askwith. The films in the Confessions series—Confessions of a Window Cleaner, Confessions of a Driving Instructor, Confessions of a Pop Performer, and Confessions from a Holiday Camp—concern the erotic adventures of Timothy Lea and are based on the novels of Christopher Wood, writing as Timothy Lea.
Soon came Adventures of..., directed by Stanley Long, which started with Adventures of a Taxi Driver, starring sitcom star Barry Evans, and was followed by Adventures of a Private Eye and Adventures of a Plumber's Mate, starring future record producer Christopher Neil. Long began his career as a photographer before producing striptease shorts (or "glamour home movies", as they were sometimes known), for the 8 mm market. Beginning in the late fifties, Long's feature film career would span the entire history of the British sex film, and as such exemplifies its differing trends and attitudes. His work ranges from coy nudist films (Nudist Memories 1959), to moralizing documentary (The Wife Swappers, 1970) to a more relaxed attitude to permissive material (Naughty!, 1971) to out and out comedies at the end of the 1970s. He did not like sex scenes and was dismissive of pornography, saying it did not turn him on and he turned his back when such scenes were being filmed.[26]

Carry Ons become sexy[edit]
Main article: Carry On (franchise)
British sex comedy films became mainstream with the release in 1976 of Carry On England, starring Judy Geeson, Patrick Mower, and Diane Langton, in which an experimental mixed-sex anti-aircraft battery in wartime is enjoying making love not war. However, the arrival of the new Captain S. Melly brings an end to their cosy life and causes terror in the ranks.
In Carry On Emmannuelle, the beautiful Emmannuelle Prevert just cannot get her own husband into bed. A spoof of Emmanuelle, the film revolves around the eponymous heroine (Suzanne Danielle) and her unsuccessful attempts to make love to her husband, Emile (Kenneth Williams), a French ambassador. Emile grants Emmannuelle permission to sleep with anyone she likes, and her promiscuity turns her into a celebrity and a frequent talk show guest. Meanwhile, Theodore Valentine is besotted by her and wants them to get married. But Emmannuelle is obsessed with arousing her husband's sexual desire at almost any cost. This was the last of the original Carry On films.

Sleaze and sexploitation[edit]
Main article: Sexploitation
Producer/director Kenneth F. Rowles made a copycat cash-in with his The Ups and Downs of a Handyman.[27] His next movie, Take an Easy Ride, purports to be a public information film warning of the dangers of hitchhiking but is actually a sexploitation film showing young girls being sexually assaulted and murdered (although Rowles says he had to add those scenes on request of the movie's distributor).[28]
Films like Dreams of Thirteen, The Younger the Better, Geilermanns Töchter - Wenn Mädchen mündig werden, Erika's Hot Summer, Mrs. Stone's Thing, and Come Play With Me played in Soho and elsewhere, but with the arrival of the Margaret Thatcher government in 1979 the Eady Levy was abolished in 1985, killing off the genre.[clarification needed]

French sex comedy[edit]
Some French coming of age films contain many themes of the modern "sex comedy" genre, such as Murmur of the Heart.

Italian sex comedy[edit]
Main article: commedia sexy all'italiana
The commedia sexy all'italiana (lit. "sex comedy Italian style"), also known as commedia scollacciata or commedia erotica all'italiana, is a subgenre of Italian commedia all'italiana film genre. It is characterized typically by both abundant female nudity and comedy, and by the minimal weight given to social criticism that was instead basic in the commedia all'italiana main genre.[29]

Indian sex comedy[edit]
Since the dawn of the second decade of 21st century, many Indian works have tended to belong to this genre. A touch of hesitation was followed by a gradual acceptance in the country. Movies and series in this genre comprise Vicky Donor, Mastizaade, the "Masti" series, The Shaukeens, Pyaar Ka Punchnama series, Kya kool Hai Hum series, Guddu Ki Gun, Four More Shots Please (all seasons) just to name a few. The wide and affordable availability of the Internet in the country since 2016 and affordable OTT services have greatly influenced production. A conservative political and social air that has been prevalent since 2014 has, on the other hand, been very critical to such genre. All sexual drama are received with far intense verbal attacks on the social media platform than that seen in other countries. Despite such criticisms, which are mostly not constructive in nature, production is not likely to slow down. Rather, it is likely to speed up down the road.

Japanese sex comedy[edit]
In Japanese, sexy movies or TV shows tend to be referred to as 'oiroke' お色気 which might be translated as 'with a tinge of colour.' 'Pink films' ピンク映画 are more narrowly sexy films made by independent studios for release to adult theatres. The traditional word for comedy is 'kigeki' 喜劇. It was applied to Kyōgen, short comic plays performed in theatres. The word 'kigeki' is also used in the titles of some movies from the 1960s, but more recently the loan word 'komedi' コメディ　has become the usual way of referring to humorous films or TV shows.
In 1959, director Kon Ichikawa produced an adaptation of Junichirō Tanizaki's novel The Key titled Odd Obsession wherein a man whose powers are failing finds he can restore his vigor by spying on his daughter and her fiancé, so he hatches a scheme to involve his wife. Yasuzo Masumura's 1964 film adaptation of Junichirō Tanizaki's novel Quicksand(Manji) took a tongue-in-cheek approach to the melodrama of a housewife falling in love with a younger woman. Shohei Imamura released The Pornographers in 1966, parodying the workings of a small pornographic film company.
In 1970–1, Yuji Tanno and Isao Hayashi directed a number of movies based on Go Nagai's manga Harenchi Gakuen.  Go Nagai's Kekkou Kamen manga has also been adapted into a movie and several Original Videos. Norifumi Suzuki has directed a number of sex comedies: Ero Shogun to Juuichinin no Aishou (The Erotic Shogun and his 11 Concubines 1972), Onsen Mimizu Geisha (Hot Springs Worm Geisha 1972), Onsen Suppon Geisha (Hot Springs Turtle Geisha 1972) all for big budget studio Toei as well as the teen sex comedy Pantsu no Ana (Hole in her Panties 1984).
Yoshimitsu Morita has directed a number of racey comedies including Something Like It (No You na Mono) (1981), Hot Stripper (Maru Hon Uwasa no Sutorippaa)(1982) and 24 Hour Playboy (Ai to Heisei no Iro Otoko) (1989). Director Juzo Itami's films such as The Funeral, Tampopo and A Taxing Woman are comedies principally about non-sexual topics, but all have a side story that deals with sex, and features nudity. Takeshi Kitano's Getting Any? movie is about the quest for sex. Nikkatsu's Roman Porno series was usually fairly serious, but Morita's Love Hard Love Deep and manga adaptation Minna Agechau were Roman Pornos, and other films in the series such as Pink Tush Girl and Abnormal Family: Older Brother's Bride have been described as comedies.
Recently there has been a spate of sexy coming of age comedies, e.g. Haruka Ayase's Oppai Volleyball and live action adaptations of the manga Tokyo Daigaku Monogatari, Ibitsu, Moteki and Recently, My Sister Is Unusual.
The 2003 Japanese TV drama Stand Up! starring Kazunari Ninomiya is the story of four virgin boys, and bears some resemblance to American sex comedies of the 1980s.

See also[edit]
Ribaldry
Penis jokes
Ecchi
Category:Sex comedy television series
Category:British sex comedy films
References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ Elaine Fantham, "Sexual Comedy in Ovid's Fasti: Sources and Motivation," in Harvard Studies in Classical Philology 87 (1983) 185–216.

^ Robert R. Edwards, "Narrative," in A Companion to Chaucer (Blackwell, 2000, 2002), p.                 n. 314.

^ Jon Solomon, The Ancient World in the Cinema (Yale University Press, 2001), p. 284.

^ Richard Hornby, Mad about Theatre (Applause Books, 1996), p. 261.

^ Robert Blumenfeld, Using The Stanislavsky System: A Practical Guide To Character Creation and Period Styles (Limelight Editions, 2008), p. 100.

^ Paul Kuritz, The Making of Theatre History (1988), p. 51.

^ Susan J. Owen, Perspectives on Restoration Drama (Manchester University Press, 2002), p. 42.

^ Owen, Perspectives on Restoration Drama, p. 42.

^ Elizabeth Woodrough, Women in European Theatre (Intellect Books, 1995), p. 16.

^ Owen, Perspectives on Restoration Drama, p. 43.

^ Woodrough, Women in European Theatre p. 16.

^ Deborah Payne Fisk, introduction to Four Restoration Libertine Plays (Oxford University Press, 2005), p. xii.

^ Ann Marie Stewart, The Ravishing Restoration: Aphra Behn, Violence, and Comedy (Rosemont, 2010), p. 96.

^ J.L. Styan, Restoration Comedy in Performance (Cambridge University Press, 1986), p. 242.

^ Adam Smyth, A Pleasing Sinne: Drink and Conviviality in Seventeenth-Century England (D.S. Brewer, 2004), p. 127; Owen, Perspectives on Restoration Drama, p. 43.

^ Owen, Perspectives on Restoration Drama, p. 42.

^ Tamar Jeffers McDonald. 2007. Romantic Comedy: Boy Meets Girl Meets Genre. Wallflower Press.

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}"Critic Reviews for The 40 Year Old Virgin". Metacritic.

^ Rife, Katie. Lady Bird meets American Pie in the sweetly innocent sex comedy Yes, God, Yes." G/O Media. Retrieved 2020-08-31.

^ David McGillivray Doing Rude Things: The History of the British Sex Film 1957–1981, Sun Tavern Fields Books, 1992. ISBN 9780951701225.

^ R.I.P. Tony Tenser « SHADOWPLAY

^ Peretti, Jacques (January 29, 2005). "Oo-er missus". The Guardian. London. Retrieved May 23, 2010.

^ Bright, Morris; Ross, Robert (2000). Mr Carry On: The Life and Work of Peter Rogers. London: BBC Books. ISBN 0563551836.

^ behind the scenes of Carry Ons Cor, Blimey! at IMDb

^ Brooke, Michael (19 July 2018). "10 Great Erotic British Films". British Film Institute. Retrieved 12 January 2021.

^ 
Upton, Julian. "British exploitation cinema". Archived from the original on 2009-07-13. Retrieved 2007-02-10.

^ The Ups and Downs of a Handyman (1975) at IMDb

^ Matthew Sweet's BBC Four documentary [British B Movies: Truly, Madly, Cheaply http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00c7ytb]

^ Peter E. Bondanella (12 October 2009). A history of Italian cinema. Continuum International Publishing Group, 2009. ISBN 978-1441160690.


Further reading[edit]
McDonald, Tamar Jeffers. 2007. Romantic Comedy: Boy Meets Girl Meets Genre. Wallflower Press
McDonald, Tamar Jeffers, ed. 2010. Virgin Territory: Representing Sexual Inexperience in Film. Wayne State University Press.
Sheridan, Simon. 2011. Keeping the British End Up: Four Decades of Saucy Cinema. Titan Books. 4th edition.
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vteComedyTopics
Comedian
Comedic device
Comedy festival
Comedy troupe
Comic timing
Farce
Humorist
Humour
Impersonator
Impressionist
Irony
Joke
Prank call
Punch line
Satire
Visual gag
Wit
Word play
FilmCountry
American
British
French
Italian
Genre
Fantasy
Horror
Parody
Remarriage
Romance
Science fiction
Screwball
Sex
Italian
Silent
Slapstick
Stoner
TheatreCountryEurope
Ancient Greek comedy
Comédie-Française
Comédie-Italienne
Corral de comedias
Theatre of ancient Rome
Asia
China
Xiangsheng
Hong Kong
Mo lei tau
Indonesia
Lenong
Ludruk
Japan
Kyōgen
Manzai
Owarai
Rakugo
Sarugaku
Genre
Boulevard theatre
Comedy-drama
Comedy of humours
Comedy of manners
Comedy of menace
Commedia dell'arte
Double act
Improvisational
Macchietta
One-person show
Pantomime
Restoration comedy
Sentimental comedy
Comédie larmoyante
Shadow play
Shakespearean comedy
Sketch comedy
Spex
Stand-up comedy
Street theatre
Theatre of the Absurd
Tragicomedy
Vaudeville
Musicand dance
Ballad opera
Cabaret
Café-chantant
Café-théâtre
Comédie-ballet
Comedy club
Light music
Music hall
Musical theatre
Opéra bouffe
Opéra bouffon
Opera buffa
Opéra comique
Operetta
Revue
Media
Music
Album
Rock
Hip hop
Parody
Musical comedians
Novel
Radio
Television
Mockumentary
Roast
Sitcom
Teen sitcom
Subgenres
Alternative
Black
Blue
Character
Christian
Clown
Cringe
Deadpan (dry humor)
Documentary
High / low
Horror
Insult
Observational
Physical
Prop
Shock
Sick
Slapstick
Topics
Surreal
Ventriloquism
Zombie

 Category
 Portal

vteFilm genresBy style
Action
Arthouse
Heroic bloodshed
Hong Kong action
Adventure
Survival
Art
Biographical
Christian
Comedy
Black
Commedia all'italiana
Sexy
Bromantic
Dramedy
Gross out
Horror
Parody
Mo lei tau
Thriller
Remarriage
Romantic
Sex
Screwball
Silent
Slapstick
Cyberpunk
Japanese
Documentary
Animated
Docudrama
Mockumentary
Mondo
Pseudo
Semi
Travel
Drama
Calligrafismo
Dramedy
Historical
Legal
Melodrama
Korean
Erotic
Commedia sexy all'italiana
Pink
Sexploitation
Thriller
Educational
Social guidance
Epic
Sword-and-sandal
Experimental
Exploitation
see Exploitation film template
Fantasy
Comedy
Contemporary
Fairy tale
Fantastique
High
Historical
Magic realism
Science
Film noir
Neo-noir
Pulp noir
Tech noir
Gothic
Romance
Southern
Space
Suburban
Urban
Horror
Arthouse
Body
Cannibal
Chinese horror
Comedy
Eco
Fantastique
Found footage
German underground
Ghost
Giallo
Holiday
Japanese horror
Korean horror
Lovecraftian
Mumblegore
Natural
New French Extremity
Psycho-biddy
Psychological
Religious
Science fiction
Slasher
Splatter
Satanic
Maximalist film
Minimalist film
Mumblecore
Mumblegore
Musical
Backstage
Jukebox
Musicarello
Operetta
Sceneggiata
Mystery
Detective
Occult detective
Whodunit
Giallo
Pop culture fiction
Pornographic
Hardcore pornography
Softcore pornography
Propaganda
Reality
Romantic
Comedy
Bromantic
Fantasy
Gothic
Paranormal
Thriller
Science fiction
Art
Comedy
Fantastique
Fantasy
Gothic
Horror
Military
New Wave
Parallel universe
Planetary romance
Space opera
Steampunk
Tokusatsu
Western
Slice of life
Slow cinema
Thriller
Comedy
Conspiracy
Erotic
Financial
Giallo
Legal
New French Extremity
Political
Psychological
Romantic
Techno
Transgressive
Cinema of Transgression
Extreme cinema
New French Extremity
Trick
By theme
Animals
Beach party
Body swap
Buddy
Buddy cop
Female
Cannibal
Chicano
Colonial
Coming-of-age
Concert
Crime
Detective
Gangster
Gentleman thief
Gokudō
Gong'an
Heist
Heroic bloodshed
Hood
Mafia
Mafia comedy
Mumbai underworld
Poliziotteschi
Yakuza
Dance
Disaster
Apocalyptic
Drug
Psychedelic
Stoner
Dystopian
Ecchi
Economic
Ethnographic
Exploitation
Blaxploitation
Mexploitation
Turksploitation
Extraterrestrial
Food and drink
Gendai-geki
Ghost
Goona-goona epic
Gothic
Romance
Southern
Space
Suburban
Urban
Girls with guns
Harem
Hentai
Lolicon
Shotacon
Tentacle erotica
Homeland
Isekai
Jidaigeki
Samurai
Kaitō
LGBT
Yaoi
Yuri
Luchador
Magical girl
Martial arts
Bruceploitation
Chopsocky
Gun fu
Kung fu
Ninja
Wuxia
Mecha
Anime
Monster
Giant monster
Jiangshi
Kaiju
Mummy
Vampire
Werewolf
Zombie
Zombie comedy
Mountain
Mouth of Garbage
Muslim social
Nature
Environmental issues
Opera
Outlaw biker
Ozploitation
Partisan film
Pirate
Prison
Women
Race
Rape and revenge
Road
Rubble
Rumberas
Sexploitation
Bavarian porn
Commedia sexy all'italiana
Mexican sex comedy
Nazi exploitation
Pornochanchada
Nunsploitation
Sex report
Shomin-geki
Slavery
Slice of life
Snuff
South Seas
Sports
Spy
Eurospy
Superhero
Surfing
Swashbuckler
Sword-and-sandal
Sword and sorcery
Travel
Trial
Vigilante
War
Anti-war
Euro War
Submarine
Western
Acid
Fantasy
Florida
Horror
Meat pie
Northern
Ostern
Revisionist
Science fiction
Space
Spaghetti
By movement  or period
Absolute
American Eccentric Cinema
New Objectivity
Australian New Wave
Auteur films
Berlin School
Bourekas
Brighton School
British New Wave
Kitchen sink realism
Budapest school
Calligrafismo
Cannibal boom
Cinéma du look
Cinema Novo
Cinema of Transgression
Cinéma pur
Commedia all'italiana
Czechoslovak New Wave
Documentary Film Movement
Dogme 95
Erra Cinema
European art cinema
Film gris
Free Cinema
French New Wave
German Expressionist
German underground horror
Nigerian Golden Age
Grupo Cine Liberación
Heimatfilm
Hollywood on the Tiber
Hong Kong New Wave
Iranian New Wave
Italian futurist
Italian neorealist
Japanese New Wave
Kammerspielfilm
L.A. Rebellion
Lettrist
Modernist film
Mumblecore
Neorealist
New French Extremity
New German
New Generation
New Hollywood
New Nollywood
New Queer
No wave
Nuevo Cine Mexicano
Pan-Indian film
Parallel cinema
Persian Film
Poetic realist
Polish Film School
Poliziotteschi
Praška filmska škola
Prussian film
Pure Film Movement
Remodernist
Romanian New Wave
Slow cinema
Spaghetti Western
Socialist realist
Social realist
Kitchen sink realism
Soviet Parallel
Structural
Surrealist
Sword-and-sandal
Telefoni Bianchi
Third Cinema
Toronto New Wave
Vulgar auteurism
Yugoslav Black Wave
By demographic
Adult
Black
Children and family
Anime
Men
Seinen
Stag
Teen
Shōnen
Shōjo
Women
Chick flick
Josei
By format, technique, approach, or production
3D
Actuality
Animation
Anime
Art
Cartoon
Computer
Stop-motion
Traditional
Anthology
Art
B movie
Black-and-white
Blockbuster
Cinéma vérité
Classical Hollywood cinema
Collage
Color
Compilation
Composite
Computer screen
Cult
midnight movie
Database cinema
Docufiction
Ethnofiction
Experimental
Abstract
Feature
Featurette
Film à clef
Film-poem
Found footage
Grindhouse
Hyperlink cinema
Independent
Guerrilla filmmaking
Interstitial art
Live action
animation
Low-budget
Major studio
Making-of
Masala
Maximalist film
Message picture
Meta-film
Minimalist film
Mockbuster
Modernist film
Musical short
Mythopoeia
Neorealist
No-budget
One-shot
Paracinema
Participatory
Poetry
Postmodernist
Reverse motion
Satire
Sceneggiata
Semidocumentary
Serial
Shinpa
Short
Silent
Slow cinema
Socialist realist
Sound
Underground
Video nasty
Vulgar auteurism
Z movie
 Film portal





