
Title:
Communication
Text:
Act of conveying intended meaning
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}Not to be confused with Socialization.
For other uses, see Communication (disambiguation).
"Communicate" redirects here. For other uses, see Communicate (disambiguation).


.mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:22em;float:right;clear:right;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em;background:#f8f9fa;border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.2em;text-align:center;line-height:1.4em;font-size:88%;border-collapse:collapse;display:table}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .sidebar{display:table!important;float:right!important;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em!important}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-subgroup{width:100%;margin:0;border-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-left{float:left;clear:left;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-none{float:none;clear:both;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-outer-title{padding:0 0.4em 0.2em;font-size:125%;line-height:1.2em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-image{padding:0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-caption,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle-with-top-image,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-caption{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle{padding:0.4em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.2em 0.8em;font-size:145%;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-image{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-heading{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content{padding:0 0.5em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content-with-subgroup{padding:0.1em 0.4em 0.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-below{padding:0.3em 0.8em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-below{border-top:1px solid #aaa;border-bottom:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-navbar{text-align:right;font-size:115%;padding:0 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:left;font-weight:bold;line-height:1.6em;font-size:105%}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title-c{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:center;margin:0 3.3em}@media(max-width:720px){body.mediawiki .mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:100%!important;clear:both;float:none!important;margin-left:0!important;margin-right:0!important}}Communication
PortalHistory

General aspects
Communication theory
Information
Semiotics
Language
Logic
Sociology

Fields
Discourse analysis
Linguistics
Mass communication
Organizational communication
Pragmatics
Semiotics
Sociolinguistics

Disciplines
Public speaking
Discourse
Culture
Argumentation
Persuasion
Research
Rhetoric

Categories
Outline
.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vte
Communication (from Latin communicare, meaning "to share" or "to be in relation with")[1][2][3] is "an apparent answer to the painful divisions between self and other, private and public, and inner thought and outer world."[4] As this definition indicates, communication is difficult to define in a consistent manner,[5][6] because it is commonly used to refer to a wide range of different behaviors (broadly: "the transfer of information"[7][8]), or to limit what can be included in the category of communication (for example, requiring a "conscious intent" to persuade[9]). John Peters argues the difficulty of defining communication emerges from the fact that communication is both a universal phenomenon (because everyone communicates) and a specific discipline of institutional academic study.[10]
One possible definition of communication is the act of developing meaning among entities or groups through the use of sufficiently mutually understood signs, symbols, and semiotic conventions.
In Claude Shannon's and Warren Weaver's influential[11][12] model, human communication was imagined to function like a telephone or telegraph.[13] Accordingly, they conceptualized communication as involving discrete steps:

The formation of communicative motivation or reason.
Message composition (further internal or technical elaboration on what exactly to express).
Message encoding (for example, into digital data, written text, speech, pictures, gestures and so on).
Transmission of the encoded message as a sequence of signals using a specific channel or medium.
Noise sources such as natural forces and in some cases human activity (both intentional and accidental) begin influencing the quality of signals propagating from the sender to one or more receivers.
Reception of signals and reassembling of the encoded message from a sequence of received signals.
Decoding of the reassembled encoded message.
Interpretation and making sense of the presumed original message.
These elements are now understood to be substantially overlapping and recursive activities rather than steps in a sequence.[14] For example, communicative actions can commence before a communicator formulates a conscious attempt to do so,[15] as in the case of phatics; likewise, communicators modify their intentions and formulations of a message in response to real-time feedback (e.g., a change in facial expression).[16] Practices of decoding and interpretation are culturally enacted, not just by individuals (genre conventions, for instance, trigger anticipatory expectations for how a message is to be received), and receivers of any message operationalize their own frames of reference in interpretation.[17]
The scientific study of communication can be divided into:

Information theory which studies the quantification, storage, and communication of information in general;
Communication studies which concerns human communication;
Biosemiotics which examines communication in and between living organisms in general.
Biocommunication which exemplifies sign-mediated interactions in and between organisms of all domains of life, including viruses.
The channel of communication can be visual, auditory, tactile/haptic (e.g. Braille or other physical means), olfactory, electromagnetic, or biochemical. Human communication is unique for its extensive use of abstract language.

Contents

1 Types

1.1 Non-verbal communication
1.2 Verbal communication

1.2.1 Written communication and its historical development




2 Communication models
3 As academic discipline with distinct fields of study

3.1 Organizational communication
3.2 Political communication
3.3 Interpersonal communication

3.3.1 Family communication




4 Barriers to effectiveness

4.1 Noise
4.2 Cultural aspects


5 Nonhuman

5.1 Animals
5.2 Plants and fungi
5.3 Bacteria quorum sensing


6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Types[edit]
Non-verbal communication[edit]
Main article: Nonverbal communication
Nonverbal communication explains the processes that convey a type of information in a form of non-linguistic representations. Examples of nonverbal communication include haptic communication, chronemic communication, gestures, body language, facial expressions, eye contact etc. Nonverbal communication also relates to the intent of a message. Examples of intent are voluntary, intentional movements like shaking a hand or winking, as well as involuntary, such as sweating.[18] Speech also contains nonverbal elements known as paralanguage, e.g. rhythm, intonation, tempo, and stress. It affects communication most at the subconscious level and establishes trust. Likewise, written texts include nonverbal elements such as handwriting style, the spatial arrangement of words and the use of emoticons to convey emotion.
Nonverbal communication demonstrates one of Paul Watzlawick's laws: you cannot not communicate. Once proximity has formed awareness, living creatures begin interpreting any signals received.[19] Some of the functions of nonverbal communication in humans are to complement and illustrate, to reinforce and emphasize, to replace and substitute, to control and regulate, and to contradict the denotative message.
Nonverbal cues are heavily relied on to express communication and to interpret others' communication and can replace or substitute verbal messages. However, non-verbal communication is ambiguous. When verbal messages contradict non-verbal messages, observation of non-verbal behaviour is relied on to judge another's attitudes and feelings, rather than assuming the truth of the verbal message alone.
There are several reasons as to why non-verbal communication plays a vital role in communication:
"Non-verbal communication is omnipresent."[20] They are included in every single communication act. To have total communication, all non-verbal channels such as the body, face, voice, appearance, touch, distance, timing, and other environmental forces must be engaged during face-to-face interaction. Written communication can also have non-verbal attributes. E-mails, web chats, and the social media have options to change text font colours, stationery, add emoticons, capitalization, and pictures in order to capture non-verbal cues into a verbal medium.[21]
"Non-verbal behaviours are multifunctional."[22] Many different non-verbal channels are engaged at the same time in communication acts and allow the chance for simultaneous messages to be sent and received.
"Non-verbal behaviours may form a universal language system."[22] Smiling, crying, pointing, caressing, and glaring are non-verbal behaviours that are used and understood by people regardless of nationality. Such non-verbal signals allow the most basic form of communication when verbal communication is not effective due to language barriers.

Verbal communication[edit]
Verbal communication is the spoken or written conveyance of a message. Human language can be defined as a system of symbols (sometimes known as lexemes) and the grammars (rules) by which the symbols are manipulated. The word "language" also refers to common properties of languages. Language learning normally occurs most intensively during human childhood. Most of the large number of human languages use patterns of sound or gesture for symbols which enable communication with others around them. Languages tend to share certain properties, although there are exceptions. Constructed languages such as Esperanto, programming languages, and various mathematical formalisms are not necessarily restricted to the properties shared by human languages.
As previously mentioned, language can be characterized as symbolic. Charles Ogden and I.A Richards developed The Triangle of Meaning model to explain the symbol (the relationship between a word), the referent (the thing it describes), and the meaning (the thought associated with the word and the thing).
The properties of language are governed by rules. Language follows phonological rules (sounds that appear in a language), syntactic rules (arrangement of words and punctuation in a sentence), semantic rules (the agreed upon meaning of words), and pragmatic rules (meaning derived upon context).
The meanings that are attached to words can be literal, or otherwise known as denotative; relating to the topic being discussed, or, the meanings take context and relationships into account, otherwise known as connotative; relating to the feelings, history, and power dynamics of the communicators.[23]
Contrary to popular belief, signed languages of the world (e.g., American Sign Language) are considered to be verbal communication because their sign vocabulary, grammar, and other linguistic structures abide by all the necessary classifications as spoken languages. There are however, nonverbal elements to signed languages, such as the speed, intensity, and size of signs that are made. A signer might sign "yes" in response to a question, or they might sign a sarcastic-large slow yes to convey a different nonverbal meaning. The sign yes is the verbal message while the other movements add nonverbal meaning to the message.

Written communication and its historical development[edit]
Over time the forms of and ideas about communication have evolved through the continuing progression of technology. Advances include communications psychology and media psychology, an emerging field of study.
The progression of written communication can be divided into three "information communication revolutions":[24]

Written communication first emerged through the use of pictographs. The pictograms were made in stone, hence written communication was not yet mobile. Pictograms began to develop standardized and simplified forms.
The next step occurred when writing began to appear on paper, papyrus, clay, wax, and other media with commonly shared writing systems, leading to adaptable alphabets. Communication became mobile.
The final stage is characterized by the transfer of information through controlled waves of electromagnetic radiation (i.e., radio, microwave, infrared) and other electronic signals.
Communication is thus a process by which meaning is assigned and conveyed in an attempt to create shared understanding. Gregory Bateson called it "the replication of tautologies in the universe.[25] This process, which requires a vast repertoire of skills in interpersonal processing, listening, observing, speaking, questioning, analyzing, gestures, and evaluating enables collaboration and cooperation.[26][full citation needed]

Communication models[edit]
Main article: Models of communication
  Shannon and Weaver Model of Communication
  Communication major dimensions scheme
  Interactional Model of Communication
  Berlo's Sender-Message-Channel-Receiver Model of Communication
  Transactional model of communication
  Communication code scheme
  Linear Communication Model
The first major model for communication was introduced by Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver for Bell Laboratories in 1949[27] The original model was designed to mirror the functioning of radio and telephone technologies. Their initial model consisted of three primary parts: sender, channel, and receiver. The sender was the part of a telephone a person spoke into, the channel was the telephone itself, and the receiver was the part of the phone where one could hear the other person. Shannon and Weaver also recognized that often there is static that interferes with one listening to a telephone conversation, which they deemed noise.
In a simple model, often referred to as the transmission model or standard view of communication, information or content (e.g. a message in natural language) is sent in some form (as spoken language) from an emitter (emisor in the picture)/sender/encoder to a destination/receiver/decoder. This common conception of communication simply views communication as a means of sending and receiving information. The strengths of this model are simplicity, generality, and quantifiability. Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver structured this model based on the following elements:

An information source, which produces a message.
A transmitter, which encodes the message into signals.
A channel, to which signals are adapted for transmission.
A noise source, which distorts the signal while it propagates through the channel.
A receiver, which 'decodes' (reconstructs) the message from the signal.
A destination, where the message arrives.
Shannon and Weaver argued that there were three levels of problems for communication within this theory.

The technical problem: how accurately can the message be transmitted?
The semantic problem: how precisely is the meaning conveyed?
The effectiveness problem: how effectively does the received meaning affect behavior?
Daniel Chandler[28] critiques the transmission model by stating:

It assumes communicators are isolated individuals.
No allowance for differing purposes.
No allowance for differing interpretations.
No allowance for unequal power relations.
No allowance for situational contexts.
In 1960, David Berlo expanded on Shannon and Weaver's (1949) linear model of communication and created the SMCR Model of Communication.[29] The Sender-Message-Channel-Receiver Model of communication separated the model into clear parts and has been expanded upon by other scholars.
Communication is usually described along a few major dimensions: message (what type of things are communicated), source/emisor/sender/encoder (from whom), form (in which form), channel (through which medium), destination/receiver/target/decoder (to whom). Wilbur Schram (1954) also indicated that we should also examine the impact that a message has (both desired and undesired) on the target of the message.[30] Between parties, communication includes acts that confer knowledge and experiences, give advice and commands, and ask questions. These acts may take many forms, in one of the various manners of communication. The form depends on the abilities of the group communicating. Together, communication content and form make messages that are sent towards a destination. The target can be oneself, another person or being, another entity (such as a corporation or group of beings).
Communication can be seen as processes of information transmission with three levels of semiotic rules:

Pragmatic (concerned with the relations between signs/expressions and their users).
Semantic (study of relationships between signs and symbols and what they represent).
Syntactic (formal properties of signs and symbols).
Therefore, communication is social interaction where at least two interacting agents share a common set of signs and a common set of semiotic rules. This commonly held rule in some sense ignores autocommunication, including intrapersonal communication via diaries or self-talk, both secondary phenomena that followed the primary acquisition of communicative competences within social interactions.
In light of these weaknesses, Barnlund (2008) proposed a transactional model of communication.[31] The basic premise of the transactional model of communication is that individuals are simultaneously engaging in the sending and receiving of messages.
In a slightly more complex form a sender and a receiver are linked reciprocally. This second attitude of communication, referred to as the constitutive model or constructionist view, focuses on how an individual communicates as the determining factor of the way the message will be interpreted. Communication is viewed as a conduit; a passage in which information travels from one individual to another and this information becomes separate from the communication itself. A particular instance of communication is called a speech act. The sender's personal filters and the receiver's personal filters may vary depending upon different regional traditions, cultures, or gender; which may alter the intended meaning of message contents. In the presence of "communication noise" on the transmission channel (air, in this case), reception and decoding of content may be faulty, and thus the speech act may not achieve the desired effect. One problem with this encode-transmit-receive-decode model is that the processes of encoding and decoding imply that the sender and receiver each possess something that functions as a codebook, and that these two code books are, at the very least, similar if not identical. Although something like code books is implied by the model, they are nowhere represented in the model, which creates many conceptual difficulties.
Theories of coregulation describe communication as a creative and dynamic continuous process, rather than a discrete exchange of information. Canadian media scholar Harold Innis had the theory that people use different types of media to communicate and which one they choose to use will offer different possibilities for the shape and durability of society.[32][page needed] His famous example of this is using ancient Egypt and looking at the ways they built themselves out of media with very different properties stone and papyrus. Papyrus is what he called 'Space Binding'. it made possible the transmission of written orders across space, empires and enables the waging of distant military campaigns and colonial administration. The other is stone and 'Time Binding', through the construction of temples and the pyramids can sustain their authority generation to generation, through this media they can change and shape communication in their society.[32][page needed]

As academic discipline with distinct fields of study[edit]
Main article: Communication studies
The academic discipline that deals with processes of human communication is communication studies. The discipline encompasses a range of topics, from face-to-face conversation to mass media outlets such as television broadcasting. Communication studies also examines how messages are interpreted through the political, cultural, economic, semiotic, hermeneutic, and social dimensions of their contexts. Statistics, as a quantitative approach to communication science, has also been incorporated into research on communication science in order to help substantiate claims.[33]

Organizational communication[edit]
Main article: Business communication
Business communication is used for a wide variety of activities including, but not limited to: strategic communications planning, media relations, internal communications, public relations (which can include social media, broadcast and written communications, and more), brand management, reputation management, speech-writing, customer-client relations, and internal/employee communications.
Companies with limited resources may choose to engage in only a few of these activities, while larger organizations may employ a full spectrum of communications. Since it is relatively difficult to develop such a broad range of skills, communications professionals often specialize in one or two of these areas but usually have at least a working knowledge of most of them. By far, the most important qualifications communications professionals must possess are excellent writing ability, good 'people' skills, and the capacity to think critically and strategically.
Business communication could also refer to the style of communication within a given corporate entity (i.e. email conversation styles, or internal communication styles).

Political communication[edit]
Communication is one of the most relevant tools in political strategies, including persuasion and propaganda. In mass media research and online media research, the effort of the strategist is that of getting a precise decoding, avoiding "message reactance", that is, message refusal. The reaction to a message is referred also in terms of approach to a message, as follows:

In "radical reading" the audience rejects the meanings, values, and viewpoints built into the text by its makers. Effect: message refusal.
In "dominant reading", the audience accepts the meanings, values, and viewpoints built into the text by its makers. Effect: message acceptance.
In "subordinate reading" the audience accepts, by and large, the meanings, values, and worldview built into the text by its makers. Effect: obey to the message.[34]
Holistic approaches are used by communication campaign leaders and communication strategists in order to examine all the options, "actors" and channels that can generate change in the semiotic landscape, that is, change in perceptions, change in credibility, change in the "memetic background", change in the image of movements, of candidates, players and managers as perceived by key influencers that can have a role in generating the desired "end-state".
The modern political communication field is highly influenced by the framework and practices of "information operations" doctrines that derive their nature from strategic and military studies. According to this view, what is really relevant is the concept of acting on the Information Environment. The information environment is the aggregate of individuals, organizations, and systems that collect, process, disseminate, or act on information. This environment consists of three interrelated dimensions, which continuously interact with individuals, organizations, and systems. These dimensions are known as physical, informational, and cognitive.[35]

Interpersonal communication[edit]
Main article: Interpersonal communication
In simple terms, interpersonal communication is the communication between one person and another (or others). It is often referred to as face-to-face communication between two (or more) people. Both verbal and nonverbal communication, or body language, play a part in how one person understands another, and attribute to one's own soft skills. In verbal interpersonal communication there are two types of messages being sent: a content message and a relational message. Content messages are messages about the topic at hand and relational messages are messages about the relationship itself.[36] This means that relational messages come across in how one says something and it demonstrates a person's feelings, whether positive or negative, towards the individual they are talking to, indicating not only how they feel about the topic at hand, but also how they feel about their relationship with the other individual.[36]
There are many different aspects of interpersonal communication including:

Audiovisual Perception of Communication Problems.[37] The concept follows the idea that our words change what form they take based on the stress level or urgency of the situation. It also explores the concept that stuttering during speech shows the audience that there is a problem or that the situation is more stressful.
The Attachment Theory.[38] This is the combined work of John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth (Ainsworth & Bowlby, 1991) This theory follows the relationships that builds between a mother and child, and the impact it has on their relationships with others.
Emotional Intelligence and Triggers.[39] Emotional Intelligence focuses on the ability to monitor ones own emotions as well as those of others. Emotional Triggers focus on events or people that tend to set off intense, emotional reactions within individuals.
Attribution Theory.[40] This is the study of how individuals explain what causes different events and behaviors.
The Power of Words (Verbal communications).[41] Verbal communication focuses heavily on the power of words, and how those words are said. It takes into consideration tone, volume, and choice of words.
Nonverbal Communication. It focuses heavily on the setting that the words are conveyed in, as well as the physical tone of the words.
Ethics in Personal Relations.[42] It is about a space of mutual responsibility between two individuals, it's about giving and receiving in a relationship. This theory is explored by Dawn J. Lipthrott in the article What IS Relationship? What is Ethical Partnership?
Deception in Communication.[43] This concept goes into that everyone lies, and how this can impact relationships. This theory is explored by James Hearn in his article Interpersonal Deception Theory: Ten Lessons for Negotiators.
Conflict in Couples.[44] This focuses on the impact that social media has on relationships, as well as how to communicate through conflict. This theory is explored by Amanda Lenhart and Maeve Duggan in their paper Couples, the Internet, and Social Media.
Family communication[edit]
Family communication is the study of the communication perspective in a broadly defined family, with intimacy and trusting relationship.[45] The main goal of family communication is to understand the interactions of family and the pattern of behaviors of family members in different circumstances. Open and honest communication creates an atmosphere that allows family members to express their differences as well as love and admiration for one another. It also helps to understand the feelings of one another.
Family communication study looks at topics such as family rules, family roles or family dialectics and how those factors could affect the communication between family members. Researchers develop theories to understand communication behaviors. Family communication study also digs deep into certain time periods of family life such as marriage, parenthood or divorce and how communication stands in those situations. It is important for family members to understand communication as a trusted way which leads to a well constructed family.
Rhetoric
According to scholar Anne Beaufort, communication is also interested in rhetoric as a method of investigating "oral and written communications, particularly with regard to the desired effect on an audience, and lately, with visual communications as well."[46]

Barriers to effectiveness[edit]
This article contains instructions, advice, or how-to content. The purpose of Wikipedia is to present facts, not to train. Please help improve this article either by rewriting the how-to content or by moving it to Wikiversity, Wikibooks or Wikivoyage.  (July 2021)
Barriers to effective communication can retard or distort the message or intention of the message being conveyed. This may result in failure of the communication process or cause an effect that is undesirable. These include filtering, selective perception, information overload, emotions, language, silence, communication apprehension, gender differences and political correctness.[47]
This also includes a lack of expressing "knowledge-appropriate" communication, which occurs when a person uses ambiguous or complex legal words, medical jargon, or descriptions of a situation or environment that is not understood by the recipient.

Physical barriers – Physical barriers are often due to the nature of the environment. An example of this is the natural barrier which exists when workers are located in different buildings or on different sites. Likewise, poor or outdated equipment, particularly the failure of management to introduce new technology, may also cause problems. Staff shortages are another factor which frequently causes communication difficulties for an organization.
System design – System design faults refer to problems with the structures or systems in place in an organization. Examples might include an organizational structure which is unclear and therefore makes it confusing to know whom to communicate with. Other examples could be inefficient or inappropriate information systems, a lack of supervision or training, and a lack of clarity in roles and responsibilities which can lead to staff being uncertain about what is expected of them.
Attitudinal barriers– Attitudinal barriers come about as a result of problems with staff in an organization. These may be brought about, for example, by such factors as poor management, lack of consultation with employees, personality conflicts which can result in people delaying or refusing to communicate, the personal attitudes of individual employees which may be due to lack of motivation or dissatisfaction at work, brought about by insufficient training to enable them to carry out particular tasks, or simply resistance to change due to entrenched attitudes and ideas.[citation needed]
Ambiguity of words/phrases – Words sounding the same but having different meaning can convey a different meaning altogether. Hence the communicator must ensure that the receiver receives the same meaning. It is better if such words are avoided by using alternatives whenever possible.
Individual linguistic ability – The use of jargon, difficult or inappropriate words in communication can prevent the recipients from understanding the message. Poorly explained or misunderstood messages can also result in confusion. However, research in communication has shown that confusion can lend legitimacy to research when persuasion fails.[48][49]
Physiological barriers – These may result from individuals' personal discomfort, caused—for example—by ill health, poor eyesight or hearing difficulties.
Bypassing – This happens when the communicators (the sender and the receiver) do not attach the same symbolic meanings to their words. It is when the sender is expressing a thought or a word but the receiver gives it a different meaning. For example- ASAP, Rest room.
Technological multi-tasking and absorbency – With a rapid increase in technologically-driven communication in the past several decades, individuals are increasingly faced with condensed communication in the form of e-mail, text, and social updates. This has, in turn, led to a notable change in the way younger generations communicate and perceive their own self-efficacy to communicate and connect with others. With the ever-constant presence of another "world" in one's pocket, individuals are multi-tasking both physically and cognitively as constant reminders of something else happening somewhere else bombard them. Though perhaps too new an advancement to yet see long-term effects, this is a notion currently explored by such figures as Sherry Turkle.[50]
Fear of being criticized – This is a major factor that prevents good communication. If we exercise simple practices to improve our communication skill, we can become effective communicators. For example, read an article from the newspaper or collect some news from the television and present it in front of the mirror. This will not only boost your confidence but also improve your language and vocabulary.
Gender barriers – Most communicators whether aware or not, often have a set agenda. This is very notable among the different genders. For example, many women are found to be more critical when addressing conflict. It's also been noted that men are more likely than women to withdraw from conflict.[51]
Noise[edit]
In any communication model, noise is interference with the decoding of messages sent over the channel by an encoder. There are many examples of noise:

Environmental noise. Noise that physically disrupts communication, such as standing next to loud speakers at a party, or the noise from a construction site next to a classroom making it difficult to hear the professor.
Physiological-impairment noise. Physical maladies that prevent effective communication, such as actual deafness or blindness preventing messages from being received as they were intended.
Semantic noise. Different interpretations of the meanings of certain words. For example, the word "weed" can be interpreted as an undesirable plant in a yard, or as a euphemism for marijuana.
Syntactical noise. Mistakes in grammar can disrupt communication, such as abrupt changes in verb tense during a sentence.
Organizational noise. Poorly structured communication can prevent the receiver from accurate interpretation. For example, unclear and badly stated directions can make the receiver even more lost.
Cultural noise. Stereotypical assumptions can cause misunderstandings, such as unintentionally offending a non-Christian person by wishing them a "Merry Christmas".
Psychological noise. Certain attitudes can also make communication difficult. For instance, great anger or sadness may cause someone to lose focus on the present moment. Disorders such as autism may also severely hamper effective communication.[52]
To face communication noise, redundancy and acknowledgement must often be used. Acknowledgements are messages from the addressee informing the originator that his/her communication has been received and is understood.[53] Message repetition and feedback about message received are necessary in the presence of noise to reduce the probability of misunderstanding.
The act of disambiguation regards the attempt of reducing noise and wrong interpretations, when the semantic value or meaning of a sign can be subject to noise, or in presence of multiple meanings, which makes the sense-making difficult. Disambiguation attempts to decrease the likelihood of misunderstanding. This is also a fundamental skill in communication processes activated by counselors, psychotherapists, interpreters, and in coaching sessions based on colloquium. In Information Technology, the disambiguation process and the automatic disambiguation of meanings of words and sentences has also been an interest and concern since the earliest days of computer treatment of language.[54]

Cultural aspects[edit]
Cultural differences exist within countries (tribal/regional differences, dialects and so on), between religious groups and in organisations or at an organisational level – where companies, teams and units may have different expectations, norms and idiolects. Families and family groups may also experience the effect of cultural barriers to communication within and between different family members or groups. For example: words, colours and symbols have different meanings in different cultures. In most parts of the world, nodding your head means agreement, shaking your head means "no", but this is not true everywhere.[55]
Communication to a great extent is influenced by culture and cultural variables.[56][57][58][59] Understanding cultural aspects of communication refers to having knowledge of different cultures in order to communicate effectively with cross culture people. Cultural aspects of communication are of great relevance in today's world which is now a global village, thanks to globalisation. Cultural aspects of communication are the cultural differences which influence communication across borders.

Verbal communication refers to a form of communication which uses spoken and written words for expressing and transferring views and ideas. Language is the most important tool of verbal communication. Countries have different languages. A knowledge of languages of different countries can improve cross-cultural understanding.
Non-verbal communication is a very wide concept and it includes all the other forms of communication which do not use written or spoken words. Non verbal communication takes the following forms:
Paralinguistics are the elements other than language where the voice is involved in communication and includes tones, pitch, vocal cues etc. It also includes sounds from throat and all these are greatly influenced by cultural differences across borders.
Proxemics deals with the concept of the space element in communication. Proxemics explains four zones of spaces, namely intimate, personal, social and public. This concept differs from culture to culture as the permissible space varies in different countries.
Artifactics studies the non verbal signals or communication which emerges from personal accessories such as the dress or fashion accessories worn and it varies with culture as people of different countries follow different dress codes.
Chronemics deals with the time aspects of communication and also includes the importance given to time. Some issues explaining this concept are pauses, silences and response lag during an interaction. This aspect of communication is also influenced by cultural differences as it is well known that there is a great difference in the value given by different cultures to time.
Kinesics mainly deals with body language such as postures, gestures, head nods, leg movements, etc. In different countries, the same gestures and postures are used to convey different messages. Sometimes even a particular kinesic indicating something good in a country may have a negative meaning in another culture.
So in order to have an effective communication across the world it is desirable to have a knowledge of cultural variables effecting communication.
According to Michael Walsh and Ghil'ad Zuckermann, Western conversational interaction is typically "dyadic", between two particular people, where eye contact is important and the speaker controls the interaction; and "contained" in a relatively short, defined time frame. However, traditional Aboriginal conversational interaction is "communal", broadcast to many people, eye contact is not important, the listener controls the interaction; and "continuous", spread over a longer, indefinite time frame.[60][61]

Nonhuman[edit]
See also: Biocommunication (science), Interspecies communication, and Biosemiotics
Every information exchange between living organisms — i.e. transmission of signals that involve a living sender and receiver can be considered a form of communication; and even primitive creatures such as corals are competent to communicate. Nonhuman communication also include cell signaling, cellular communication, and chemical transmissions between primitive organisms like bacteria and within the plant and fungal kingdoms.

Animals[edit]
The broad field of animal communication encompasses most of the issues in ethology. Animal communication can be defined as any behavior of one animal that affects the current or future behavior of another animal. The study of animal communication, called zoo semiotics (distinguishable from anthroposemiotics, the study of human communication) has played an important part in the development of ethology, sociobiology, and the study of animal cognition. Animal communication, and indeed the understanding of the animal world in general, is a rapidly growing field, and even in the 21st century so far, a great share of prior understanding related to diverse fields such as personal symbolic name use, animal emotions, animal culture and learning, and even sexual conduct, long thought to be well understood, has been revolutionized.

Plants and fungi[edit]
Communication is observed within the plant organism, i.e. within plant cells and between plant cells, between plants of the same or related species, and between plants and non-plant organisms, especially in the root zone. Plant roots communicate with rhizome bacteria, fungi, and insects within the soil. Recent research has shown that most of the microorganism plant communication processes are neuron-like.[62] Plants also communicate via volatiles when exposed to herbivory attack behavior, thus warning neighboring plants.[63] In parallel they produce other volatiles to attract parasites which attack these herbivores.
Fungi communicate to coordinate and organize their growth and development such as the formation of mycelia and fruiting bodies. Fungi communicate with their own and related species as well as with non fungal organisms in a great variety of symbiotic interactions, especially with bacteria, unicellular eukaryote, plants and insects through biochemicals of biotic origin. The biochemicals trigger the fungal organism to react in a specific manner, while if the same chemical molecules are not part of biotic messages, they do not trigger the fungal organism to react. This implies that fungal organisms can differentiate between molecules taking part in biotic messages and similar molecules being irrelevant in the situation. So far five different primary signalling molecules are known to coordinate different behavioral patterns such as filamentation, mating, growth, and pathogenicity. Behavioral coordination and production of signaling substances is achieved through interpretation processes that enables the organism to differ between self or non-self, a biotic indicator, biotic message from similar, related, or non-related species, and even filter out "noise", i.e. similar molecules without biotic content.

Bacteria quorum sensing[edit]
Communication is not a tool used only by humans, plants and animals, but it is also used by microorganisms like bacteria. The process is called quorum sensing. Through quorum sensing, bacteria can sense the density of cells, and regulate gene expression accordingly. This can be seen in both gram positive and gram negative bacteria.
This was first observed by Fuqua et al. in marine microorganisms like V. harveyi and V. fischeri.[64]

See also[edit]
.mw-parser-output .portalbox{float:right;border:solid #aaa 1px;padding:0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tleft{margin:0.5em 1em 0.5em 0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tright{margin:0.5em 0 0.5em 1em}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul{display:table;box-sizing:border-box;padding:0.1em;max-width:175px;background:#f9f9f9;font-size:85%;line-height:110%;font-style:italic;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li{display:table-row}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:first-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em;vertical-align:middle;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:last-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em 0.2em 0.2em 0.3em;vertical-align:middle}

Media portal
Society portal
Technology portal
.mw-parser-output .div-col{margin-top:0.3em;column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .div-col-small{font-size:90%}.mw-parser-output .div-col-rules{column-rule:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .div-col dl,.mw-parser-output .div-col ol,.mw-parser-output .div-col ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .div-col li,.mw-parser-output .div-col dd{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
21st century skills
Advice
Augmentative and alternative communication
Bias-free communication
Communication rights
Context as Other Minds
Cross-cultural communication
Data transmission
Error detection and correction
Human communication
Information engineering
Inter mirifica
Intercultural communication
Ishin-denshin
Group dynamics
Language
Mass communication
Proactive communications
Sign system
Signal
Small talk
SPEAKING
Telepathy
Understanding
Writing
References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}Cobley, Paul (2008-06-05), "Communication: Definitions and Concepts",  in Donsbach, Wolfgang (ed.), The International Encyclopedia of Communication, Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp. wbiecc071, doi:10.1002/9781405186407.wbiecc071, ISBN 978-1-4051-8640-7, retrieved 2021-07-20

^ Harper, Douglas. "communication". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2013-06-23.

^ "What Is Communication?". 2012books.lardbucket.org. Retrieved 2021-03-23.

^ Peters, John Durham (1999). Speaking into the air : a history of the idea of communication. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 2. ISBN 0-226-66276-4. OCLC 40452957.

^ Dance, Frank E. X. (1970-06-01). "The "Concept" of Communication". Journal of Communication. 20 (2): 201–210. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.1970.tb00877.x. ISSN 0021-9916.

^ Craig, Robert T. (1999). "Communication Theory as a Field". Communication Theory. 9 (2): 119–161. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2885.1999.tb00355.x.

^ Littlejohn, Stephen; Foss, Karen (2009), "Definitions of Communication", Encyclopedia of Communication Theory, Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, Inc., pp. 296–299, doi:10.4135/9781412959384, ISBN 9781412959377, retrieved 2021-07-20

^ Romas, John A.; Sharma, Manoj (2017). "Effective Communication". Practical Stress Management. Elsevier. pp. 69–89. doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-811295-3.00004-8. The term communication refers to “transfer of meaning” and depends on the important aspect that the message be understood.

^ Miller, Gerald R. (1966-06-01). "On Defining Communication: Another Stab". Journal of Communication. 16 (2): 88–98. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.1966.tb00020.x. ISSN 0021-9916. PMID 5941548.

^ Peters, John Durham (1986). "Institutional Sources of Intellectual Poverty in Communication Research". Communication Research. 13 (4): 527–559. doi:10.1177/009365086013004002. ISSN 0093-6502. S2CID 145639228.

^ Fiske, John (1982): Introduction to Communication Studies. London: Routledge

^ Chandler, Daniel (18 September 1995). "The Transmission Model of Communication".{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)

^ Shannon, Claude E. & Warren Weaver (1949). A Mathematical Model of Communication. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press

^ Reddy, Michael J. (1979). "The Conduit Metaphor -- A Case of Frame Conflict in our Language about Language." In Metaphor and Thought, Andrew Ortony, ed. Cambridge UP: 284-324.

^ Cooper, Marilyn M. (2019). The Animal Who Writes. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. pp. 127–156. ISBN 978-0-8229-6579-4.

^ Rommetveit, Ragnar (1974). On Message Structure: A Framework for the Study of Language and Communication. London: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-471-73295-8.

^ Witte, Stephen P. (1992). "Context, Text, Intertext: Toward a Constructivist Semiotic of Writing". Written Communication. 9 (2): 237–308. doi:10.1177/0741088392009002003. S2CID 143717668.

^ "Types of Body Language". Simplybodylanguage.com. Retrieved 2016-02-08.

^ Wazlawick, Paul (1970's) opus

^ (Burgoon, J., Guerrero, L., Floyd, K., (2010). Nonverbal Communication, Taylor & Francis. p. 3 )

^ Martin-Rubió, Xavier (2018-09-30). Contextualising English as a Lingua Franca: From Data to Insights. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 978-1-5275-1696-0.

^ a b (Burgoon et al., p. 4)

^ Ferguson, Sherry Devereaux; Lennox-Terrion, Jenepher; Ahmed, Rukhsana; Jaya, Peruvemba (2014). Communication in Everyday Life: Personal and Professional Contexts. Canada: Oxford University Press. p. 464. ISBN 9780195449280.

^ Xin Li. "Complexity Theory – the Holy Grail of 21st Century". Lane Dept of CSEE, West Virginia University. Archived from the original on 2013-08-15.

^ Bateson, Gregory (1960). Steps to an Ecology of Mind.

^ "communication". The office of superintendent of Public Instruction. Washington. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |url= (help)

^ Shannon, C.E., & Weaver, W. (1949). The mathematical theory of communication. Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press

^ Daniel Chandler, "The Transmission Model of Communication", Aber.ac.uk Archived January 6, 2010, at the Wayback Machine

^ Berlo, D.K. (1960). The process of communication. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

^ Schramm, W. (1954). How communication works. In W. Schramm (Ed.), The process and effects of communication (pp. 3–26). Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press.

^ Barnlund, D.C. (2008). A transactional model of communication. In. C.D. Mortensen (Eds.), Communication theory (2nd ed., pp. 47–57). New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction.

^ a b Wark, McKenzie (1997). The Virtual Republic. Allen & Unwin, St Leonards.

^ Hayes, Andrew F. (31 May 2005). Statistical Methods for Communication Science. Taylor & Francis. pp. 8–9. ISBN 9781410613707.

^ Danesi, Marcel (2009), Dictionary of Media and Communications. M.E.Sharpe, Armonk, New York.

^ "Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, U.S. Army (2012). Information Operations. Joint Publication 3-13. Joint Doctrine Support Division, 116 Lake View Parkway, Suffolk, VA" (PDF). Dtic.mil. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-05-04. Retrieved 2017-05-01.

^ a b Trenholm, Sarah; Jensen, Arthur (2013). Interpersonal Communication Seventh Edition. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 360–361.

^ Barkhuysen, P., Krahmer, E., Swerts, M., (2004) Audiovisual Perception of Communication Problems, ISCA Archive http://www.isca-speech.org/archive

^ Bretherton, I., (1992) The Origins of Attachment Theory: John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth, Developmental Psychology, 28, 759-775

^ Mazza, J., Emotional Triggers, MABC, CPC

^ Bertram, M., (2004) How the Mind Explains Behavior: Folk Explanations, Meaning, and Social Interaction, MIT Press, ISBN 978-0-262-13445-3

^ "Listening". 2012books.lardbucket.org. Retrieved 2017-05-01.

^ Lipthrott, D., What IS Relationship? What is Ethical Partnership?

^ Hearn, J., (2006) Interpersonal Deception Theory: Ten Lessons for Negotiators

^ Lenhart, A., Duggan, M., (2014) Couples, the Internet, and Social Media

^ Turner, L.H., & West, R.L. (2013). Perspectives on family communication. Boston: McGraw-Hill.

^ Beaufort, Anne. "Rhetorical Studies, Communications, and Composition Studies: Disparate or Overlapping Discourse Communities." The Realms of Rhetoric.

^ Robbins, S., Judge, T., Millett, B., & Boyle, M. (2011). Organisational Behaviour. 6th ed. Pearson, French's Forest, NSW pp. 315–317.

^ What Should Be Included in a Project Plan. Retrieved December 18, 2009

^ J. Scott Armstrong (1980). "Bafflegab Pays" (PDF). Psychology Today: 12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-08-28.

^ "Technology can sometimes hinder communication, TR staffers observe - The Collegian". The Collegian. 2012-10-09. Retrieved 2016-01-11.

^ Bailey, Sandra (2009). "Couple Relationships: Communication and Conflict Resolution" (PDF). MSU Extension. 17: 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-12-15. Retrieved 2016-12-05 – via George Mason University Libraries.

^ Roy M. Berko, et al., Communicating. 11th ed. (Boston, MA: Pearson Education, Inc., 2010) 9–12

^ North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Nato Standardization Agency AAP-6 – Glossary of terms and definitions, p. 43.

^ Nancy Ide, Jean Véronis. "Word Sense Disambiguation: The State of the Art", Computational Linguistics, 24(1), 1998, pp. 1–40.

^ Nageshwar Rao, Rajendra P. Das, Communication skills, Himalaya Publishing House, 9789350516669, p. 48

^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2013-07-18. Retrieved 2012-09-29.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "Incorrect Link to Beyond Intractability Essay". Beyond Intractability. 2017-04-18. Retrieved 2017-05-01.

^ "Important Components of Cross-Cultural Communication Essay". Studymode.com. Retrieved 2017-05-01.

^ "Portable Document Format (PDF)". Ijdesign.org. Archived from the original on 2017-05-14. Retrieved 2017-05-01.

^ Zuckermann, Ghil'ad;  et al. (2015), Engaging – A Guide to Interacting Respectfully and Reciprocally with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People, and their Arts Practices and Intellectual Property (PDF), Australian Government: Indigenous Culture Support, p. 12, archived from the original (PDF) on 30 March 2016, retrieved 25 June 2016

^ Walsh, Michael (1997), Cross cultural communication problems in Aboriginal Australia, Australian National University, North Australia Research Unit, pp. 7–9, ISBN 9780731528745, retrieved 25 June 2016

^ Baluska, F.; Marcuso, Stefano; Volkmann, Dieter (2006). Communication in plants: neuronal aspects of plant life. Taylor & Francis US. p. 19. ISBN 978-3-540-28475-8. ...the emergence of plant neurobiology as the most recent area of plant sciences.

^ Ian T. Baldwin; Jack C. Schultz (1983). "Rapid Changes in Tree Leaf Chemistry Induced by Damage: Evidence for Communication Between Plants". Science. 221 (4607): 277–279. Bibcode:1983Sci...221..277B. doi:10.1126/science.221.4607.277. PMID 17815197. S2CID 31818182.

^ Anand, Sandhya. Quorum Sensing- Communication Plan For Microbes. Article dated 2010-12-28, retrieved on 2012-04-03.


Further reading[edit]
Library resources about  communication 
Resources in your library

Innis, Harold; Innis, Mary Q. (1975) [1950]. Empire and Communications. Foreword by Marshall McLuhan (Revised ed.). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. ISBN 978-0-8020-6119-5. OCLC 19403451.
External links[edit]
 Quotations related to Communication at Wikiquote
 Media related to Communication at Wikimedia Commons
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vteCommunication studies
History
Outline
Topics and terminology
Biocommunication
Broadcasting
Communication
Computer-mediated communication
Conversation
History of communication
Information
Intercultural / Interpersonal / Intrapersonal communication
Journalism
Mass media
Meaning
Media ecology
Meta-communication
Models of communication
New media
Nonverbal communication
Propaganda
Reading
Speech
Symbol
Telecommunication
Text and conversation theory
Writing
Subfields
Communication design
Communication theory
Communicology
Crisis communication
Climate communication
Cross-cultural communication
Development communication
Discourse analysis
Environmental communication
Global communication
Health communication
International communication
Mass communication
Media studies
Mediated cross-border communication
Organizational communication
Political communication
Risk communication
Science communication
Technical communication
Visual communication
Closed-loop communication
Scholars
Adorno
Barthes
Bateson
Benjamin
Burke
Castells
Chomsky
Craig
Fisher
Flusser
Gasset
Gerbner
Goffman
Habermas
Horkheimer
Huxley
Innis
Jakobson
Janis
Johnson
Kincaid
Lippman
Luhmann
Marcuse
McLuhan
Mead
Morgan
Ong
Packard
Peirce
Postman
Quebral
Richards
Rogers
Schramm
Tankard
Tannen
Wertheimer

 Category

vteHuman intelligence topicsTypes
Collective
Emotional
Intellectual
Linguistic
Multiple
Social
Spatial (visuospatial)
Abilities, traits,and constructs
Cognition
Communication
Creativity
Fluid and crystallized intelligence
g factor
Intelligence quotient
Knowledge
Learning
Memory
Problem solving
Reasoning
Thought (abstraction)
Understanding
Visual processing
Models and theories
Cattell–Horn–Carroll theory
Fluid and crystallized intelligence
Multiple-intelligences theory
Three-stratum theory
Triarchic theory
PASS theory
Areas of research
Evolution of human intelligence
Heritability of IQ
Psychometrics
Intelligence and environment / fertility / height / health / longevity / neuroscience / personality / race / sex

 Outline of human intelligence / thought

vteTechnology and related conceptsMajor technologiesNecessities
Agriculture
Domestication
Grafting
Working animal
Clothing
Sewing machine
Cooking
Beer
Bread
Cheese
Milling
Wine
Food storage
Pottery
Sanitation
Plumbing
Toilet
Tool
Blade
Hammer
Plough
Wedge
Weapon
Gun
Social
Accounting
Calculation
Abacus
Calendar
Cryptography
Lock and key
Money
Banknote
Coin
Musical instrument
Phonograph
Toy
Game
Video game
Writing
Book
Map
Printing press
Typewriter
Construction
Aqueduct
Canal
Irrigation
Arch
Bridge
Building
Fortification
Foundation
Scaffolding
Tower
Dam
Caisson
Road
Tunnel
Transport
Aircraft
Aerostat
Airplane
Compass
Elevator
Horseback riding
Stirrup
Jet engine
Rocket
Motor vehicle
Railroad
Train
Scuba set
Spacecraft
Satellite
Space station
Space suit
Watercraft
Sailing
Ship
Submarine
Manufacturing
3D printing
Carpentry
Casting
Injection moulding
Lost-wax casting
Mass production
Assembly line
Interchangeable parts
Machine tool
Welding
Simple machine
Axle
Bearing
Ball bearing
Belt
Chain
Lever
Catapult
Crane
Shadoof
Linkage
Cam
Clutch
Four-bar linkage
Piston
Rack and pinion
Pendulum
Screw
Archimedes' screw
Propeller
Spring
Valve
Wheel
Block and tackle
Flywheel
Gear
Potter's wheel
Pulley
Wing
Machinery
Agricultural machinery
Appliance
Dishwasher
Washing machine
Engine
Electric motor
Internal combustion
Turbine
Waterwheel
Windmill
Heavy equipment
Hydraulics
Cylinder
Manifold
Pump
Mechanism
Clock
Differential
Epicyclic gearing
Gimbal
Gyroscope
Whippletree
MEMS
Pneumatics
Compressor
Jackhammer
Rivet gun
Vacuum pump
Robotics
Arm
Leg
Energy
Fire
Charcoal
Oven
Energy storage
Battery
Geothermal power
Heat exchanger
Heat pump
Nuclear power
Nuclear weapon
Oil drilling
Fracking
Refrigeration
Air conditioning
Refrigerator
Solar power
Photovoltaics
Material
Cement
Concrete
Ceramic
Brick
Chipped stone
Glass
Masonry
Metallurgy
Aluminum
Bronze
Ironworking
Steel
Nanomaterials
Paper
Plastic
Rammed earth
Recycling
Rubber
Vulcanization
Textile
Loom
Spinning wheel
Biotechnology
Birth control
Blood transfusion
Dentistry
Genetic engineering
CRISPR gene editing
Genetic testing
PCR
Hospital
Medical imaging
Medication
Anesthesia
Antibiotic
Prosthesis
Surgery
Vaccine
Chemical
Detergent
Soap
Dye
Explosive
Dynamite
Fireworks
Gunpowder
TNT
Fertilizer
Haber process
Laboratory glassware
Pesticide
Pigment
Separation
Chromatography
Distillation
Filtration
Spectrometer
Synthesis
Electromagnetism
Electromagnet
Laser
Optical disc
Lens
Eyeglasses
Magnetic storage
Microwave oven
Mirror
Optical fiber
Optical instrument
Microscope
Telescope
Photography
Camera
Motion picture
Radar
Telecommunications
Mobile phone
Radio
Telegraph
Telephone
Television
Electricity
Circuit
AC
Circuit breaker
DC
Electrical grid
Fuse
Generator
Switch
Transformer
Electric light
Fluorescent
Incandescent
LED
Neon
Electronics
Capacitor
Circuit board
Resistor
Inductor
Vacuum tube
Lightning rod
Multimeter
Oscilloscope
Semiconductor
Diode
Integrated circuit
Transistor
Superconductor
Computer
Artificial intelligence
Hardware
CPU
GPU
Modem
Motherboard
Mouse
RAM
Router
Storage
Touchscreen
Networking
Client–server model
Email
Internet
Peer-to-peer
Social media
World Wide Web
Programming language
Software
Compiler
Database
GUI
Graphics software
Operating system
Spreadsheet
Web browser
Word processor
PerspectivesCriticism
Appropriate technology
Low technology
Luddite
Neo-Luddism
Precautionary principle
Ecotechnology
Environmental technology
Clean technology
Sustainable design
Sustainable engineering
Policy & politics
Government by algorithm
Intellectual property
Patent
Trade secret
Persuasive technology
Science policy
Strategy of Technology
Technology assessment
Technorealism
Progressivism
Futures studies
Technology forecasting
Technological utopianism
Technocracy movement
Technological singularity
Transhumanism
Studies
Diffusion of innovations
Technology transfer
History
Timeline of historic inventions
Philosophy
Social construction of technology
Technological determinism
Technology acceptance model
Related conceptsApplied science
Agronomy
Architecture
Construction
Engineering
Forensics
Forestry
Logistics
Medicine
Mining
Navigation
Surveying
Innovation
Design
High tech
Invention
Mature technology
Research and development
Technological convergence
Technology lifecycle

 Category
 Commons
 Outline
 Portal
 WikiProject

Authority control General
Integrated Authority File (Germany)
National libraries
France (data)
United States
Japan
Other
National Archives (US)

vteNonverbal communicationModalitiesPhysical
Blushing
Body language / Kinesics
Facial expression
Facial Action Coding System
Microexpression
Subtle expression
Gesture
List
Speech-independent gestures
Haptic communication
Imitation
Interpersonal synchrony
Laughter
Oculesics
Eye contact
Pupil dilation
Posture
Proxemics
Speech
Affect
Emotional prosody
Paralanguage
Intonation
Loudness
Prosody
Rhythm
Stress
Tone
Voice quality
Social context
Chronemics
Conventions
Display rules
Habitus
High-context and low-context cultures
Interpersonal relationship
Social norm
Other
Emoticon / Smiley
One-bit message
Missed call
Yo
Punctuation
Silent service code
Unconscious
Microexpression
Non-verbal leakage
Multi-faceted
Affect display
Deception
Emotion recognition
First impression
Intimacy
Broader concepts
Basic interpersonal communicative skills
Communication
Emotional intelligence
Nunchi
People skills
Semiotics
Social behavior
Social cue
Social competence
Social skills
Unsaid
Further informationDisorders
Aprosodia
Autism spectrum
Asperger syndrome
Autism
Fragile X
Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified
Childhood disintegrative disorder
Rett syndrome
Dyssemia
Nonverbal learning disorder
Social (pragmatic) communication disorder
Neuroanatomy
Limbic system / Limbic lobe
Mirror neuron
Applications
Cold reading
Lie detection
Freudian slip
Poker tell
Targeted advertising
Technology
Computer processing of body language
Emotion recognition in conversation
Gesture recognition
List of facial expression databases
Sentiment analysis
Key people
Ray Birdwhistell
Charles Darwin
Paul Ekman
Related
Animal communication
Behavioral communication
Aggressive
Assertive
Passive
Passive-aggressive
Impression management
Meta-communication
Monastic sign lexicons
Verbal communication
Non-verbal language
Sign language
Tactile signing
Tadoma
Art and literature
Mime
Mimoplastic art
Subtext

