
Title:
Aesop's Fables
Text:


Collection of fables credited to Aesop
  A detail of the 13th-century Fontana Maggiore in Perugia, Italy, with the fables of The Wolf and the Crane and The Wolf and the Lamb
Aesop's Fables, or the Aesopica, is a collection of fables credited to Aesop, a slave and storyteller believed to have lived in ancient Greece between 620 and 564 BCE. Of diverse origins, the stories associated with his name have descended to modern times through a number of sources and continue to be reinterpreted in different verbal registers and in popular as well as artistic media.
The fables originally belonged to the oral tradition and were not collected for some three centuries after Aesop's death. By that time, a variety of other stories, jokes and proverbs were being ascribed to him, although some of that material was from sources earlier than him or came from beyond the Greek cultural sphere. The process of inclusion has continued until the present, with some of the fables unrecorded before the Late Middle Ages and others arriving from outside Europe. The process is continuous and new stories are still being added to the Aesop corpus, even when they are demonstrably more recent work and sometimes from known authors.
Manuscripts in Latin and Greek were important avenues of transmission, although poetical treatments in European vernaculars eventually formed another.  On the arrival of printing, collections of Aesop's fables were among the earliest books in a variety of languages. Through the means of later collections, and translations or adaptations of them, Aesop's reputation as a fabulist was transmitted throughout the world.
Initially the fables were addressed to adults and covered religious, social and political themes. They were also put to use as ethical guides and from the Renaissance onwards were particularly used for the education of children. Their ethical dimension was reinforced in the adult world through depiction in sculpture, painting and other illustrative means, as well as adaptation to drama and song. In addition, there have been reinterpretations of the meaning of fables and changes in emphasis over time.

Contents

1 Fictions that point to the truth

1.1 Fable as a genre
1.2 Origins


2 Translation and transmission

2.1 Greek versions
2.2 Latin versions


3 Aesop in other languages

3.1 Europe
3.2 Asia and America


4 Versions in regional languages

4.1 Minority expression
4.2 Creole
4.3 Slang


5 Children
6 Religious themes
7 Dramatised fables
8 Musical treatments
9 List of some fables by Aesop

9.1 Titles A–F
9.2 Titles G–O
9.3 Titles R–Z
9.4 Fables wrongly attributed to Aesop


10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



Fictions that point to the truth[edit]
  The beginning of 1485 Italian edition of Aesopus Moralisatus
Fable as a genre[edit]
Apollonius of Tyana, a 1st-century CE philosopher, is recorded as having said about Aesop:

like those who dine well off the plainest dishes, he made use of humble incidents to teach great truths, and after serving up a story he adds to it the advice to do a thing or not to do it. Then, too, he was really more attached to truth than the poets are; for the latter do violence to their own stories in order to make them probable; but he by announcing a story which everyone knows not to be true, told the truth by the very fact that he did not claim to be relating real events.[1]
Earlier still, the Greek historian Herodotus mentioned in passing that "Aesop the fable writer" was a slave who lived in Ancient Greece during the 5th century BCE.[2] Among references in other writers, Aristophanes, in his comedy The Wasps, represented the protagonist Philocleon as having learnt the "absurdities" of Aesop from conversation at banquets; Plato wrote in Phaedo that Socrates whiled away his time in prison turning some of Aesop's fables "which he knew" into verses. Nonetheless, for two main reasons – because numerous morals within Aesop's attributed fables contradict each other, and because ancient accounts of Aesop's life contradict each other – the modern view is that Aesop was not the originator of all those fables attributed to him.[3] Instead, any fable tended to be ascribed to the name of Aesop if there was no known alternative literary source.[4]
In Classical times there were various theorists who tried to differentiate these fables from other kinds of narration. They had to be short and unaffected;[5] in addition, they are fictitious, useful to life and true to nature.[6] In them could be found talking animals and plants, although humans interacting only with humans figure in a few. Typically they might begin with a contextual introduction, followed by the story, often with the moral underlined at the end. Setting the context was often necessary as a guide to the story's interpretation, as in the case of the political meaning of The Frogs Who Desired a King and The Frogs and the Sun.
Sometimes the titles given later to the fables have become proverbial, as in the case of killing the Goose that Laid the Golden Eggs or the Town Mouse and the Country Mouse. In fact some fables, such as The Young Man and the Swallow, appear to have been invented as illustrations of already existing proverbs. One theorist, indeed, went so far as to define fables as extended proverbs.[7] In this they have an aetiological function, the explaining of origins such as, in another context, why the ant is a mean, thieving creature or how the tortoise got its shell. Other fables, also verging on this function, are outright jokes, as in the case of The Old Woman and the Doctor, aimed at greedy practitioners of medicine.

Origins[edit]
The contradictions between fables already mentioned and alternative versions of much the same fable – as in the case of The Woodcutter and the Trees, are best explained by the ascription to Aesop of all examples of the genre. Some are demonstrably of West Asian origin, others have analogues further to the East. Modern scholarship reveals fables and proverbs of Aesopic form existing in both ancient Sumer and Akkad, as early as the third millennium BCE.[8] Aesop's fables and the Indian tradition, as represented by the Buddhist Jataka tales and the Hindu Panchatantra, share about a dozen tales in common, although often widely differing in detail. There is some debate over whether the Greeks learned these fables from Indian storytellers or the other way, or if the influences were mutual.
Loeb editor Ben E. Perry took the extreme position in his book Babrius and Phaedrus (1965) that

in the entire Greek tradition there is not, so far as I can see, a single fable that can be said to come either directly or indirectly from an Indian source; but many fables or fable-motifs that first appear in Greek or Near Eastern literature are found later in the Panchatantra and other Indian story-books, including the Buddhist Jatakas.[9]
Although Aesop and the Buddha were near contemporaries, the stories of neither were recorded in writing until some centuries after their death. Few disinterested scholars would now be prepared to make so absolute a stand as Perry about their origin in view of the conflicting and still emerging evidence.[10][page needed][11][page needed]

Translation and transmission[edit]
Greek versions[edit]
  A Greek manuscript of the fables of Babrius
When and how the fables arrived in and travelled from ancient Greece remains uncertain. Some cannot be dated any earlier than Babrius and Phaedrus, several centuries after Aesop, and yet others even later. The earliest mentioned collection was by Demetrius of Phalerum, an Athenian orator and statesman of the 4th century BCE, who compiled the fables into a set of ten books for the use of orators. A follower of Aristotle, he simply catalogued all the fables that earlier Greek writers had used in isolation as exempla, putting them into prose. At least it was evidence of what was attributed to Aesop by others; but this may have included any ascription to him from the oral tradition in the way of animal fables, fictitious anecdotes, etiological or satirical myths, possibly even any proverb or joke, that these writers transmitted. It is more a proof of the power of Aesop's name to attract such stories to it than evidence of his actual authorship. In any case, although the work of Demetrius was mentioned frequently for the next twelve centuries, and was considered the official Aesop, no copy now survives. Present day collections evolved from the later Greek version of Babrius, of which there now exists an incomplete manuscript of some 160 fables in choliambic verse. Current opinion is that he lived in the 1st century CE. The version of 55 fables in choliambic tetrameters by the 9th century Ignatius the Deacon is also worth mentioning for its early[clarification needed] inclusion of tales from Oriental sources.[12]
Further light is thrown on the entry of Oriental stories into the Aesopic canon by their appearance in Jewish sources such as the Talmud and in Midrashic literature. There is a comparative list of these on the Jewish Encyclopedia website[13] of which twelve resemble those that are common to both Greek and Indian sources, six are parallel to those only in Indian sources, and six others in Greek only. Where similar fables exist in Greece, India, and in the Talmud, the Talmudic form approaches more nearly the Indian. Thus, the fable "The Wolf and the Crane" is told in India of a lion and another bird. When Joshua ben Hananiah told that fable to the Jews, to prevent their rebelling against Rome and once more putting their heads into the lion's jaws (Gen. R. lxiv.), he shows familiarity with some form derived from India.

Latin versions[edit]
  12th-century pillar, cloister of the Collegiate church of Saint Ursus, Aosta: the Fox and the Stork
The first extensive translation of Aesop into Latin iambic trimeters was performed by Phaedrus, a freedman of Augustus in the 1st century CE, although at least one fable had already been translated by the poet Ennius two centuries before, and others are referred to in the work of Horace. The rhetorician Aphthonius of Antioch wrote a technical treatise on, and converted into Latin prose, some forty of these fables in 315. It is notable as illustrating contemporary and later usage of fables in rhetorical practice. Teachers of philosophy and rhetoric often set the fables of Aesop as an exercise for their scholars, inviting them not only to discuss the moral of the tale, but also to practise style and the rules of grammar by making new versions of their own. A little later the poet Ausonius handed down some of these fables in verse, which the writer Julianus Titianus translated into prose, and in the early 5th century Avianus put 42 of these fables into Latin elegiacs.[14]
The largest, oldest known and most influential of the prose versions of Phaedrus bears the name of an otherwise unknown fabulist named Romulus. It contains 83 fables, dates from the 10th century and seems to have been based on an earlier prose version which, under the name of "Aesop" and addressed to one Rufus, may have been written in the Carolingian period or even earlier. The collection became the source from which, during the second half of the Middle Ages, almost all the collections of Latin fables in prose and verse were wholly or partially drawn. A version of the first three books of Romulus in elegiac verse, possibly made around the 12th century, was one of the most highly influential texts in medieval Europe. Referred to variously (among other titles) as the verse Romulus or elegiac Romulus, and ascribed to Gualterus Anglicus, it was a common Latin teaching text and was popular well into the Renaissance. Another version of Romulus in Latin elegiacs was made by Alexander Neckam, born at St Albans in 1157.[15]
Interpretive "translations" of the elegiac Romulus were very common in Europe in the Middle Ages. Among the earliest was one in the 11th century by Ademar of Chabannes, which includes some new material. This was followed by a prose collection of parables by the Cistercian preacher Odo of Cheriton around 1200 where the fables (many of which are not Aesopic) are given a strong medieval and clerical tinge. This interpretive tendency, and the inclusion of yet more non-Aesopic material, was to grow as versions in the various European vernaculars began to appear in the following centuries.

  Aesopus constructus etc., 1495 edition with metrical version of Fabulae Lib. I–IV by Anonymus Neveleti
With the revival of literary Latin during the Renaissance, authors began compiling collections of fables in which those traditionally by Aesop and those from other sources appeared side by side. One of the earliest was by Lorenzo Bevilaqua, also known as Laurentius Abstemius, who wrote 197 fables,[16] the first hundred of which were published as Hecatomythium in 1495. Little by Aesop was included. At the most, some traditional fables are adapted and reinterpreted: The Lion and the Mouse is continued and given a new ending (fable 52); The Oak and the Reed becomes "The Elm and the Willow" (53); The Ant and the Grasshopper is adapted as "The Gnat and the Bee" (94) with the difference that the gnat offers to teach music to the bee's children. There are also Mediaeval tales such as The Mice in Council (195) and stories created to support popular proverbs such as 'Still Waters Run Deep' (5) and 'A woman, an ass and a walnut tree' (65), where the latter refers back to Aesop's fable of The Walnut Tree. Most of the fables in Hecatomythium were later translated in the second half of Roger L'Estrange's Fables of Aesop and other eminent mythologists (1692);[17] some also appeared among the 102 in H. Clarke's Latin reader, Select fables of Aesop: with an English translation (1787), of which there were both English and American editions.[18]
There were later three notable collections of fables in verse, among which the most influential was Gabriele Faerno's Centum Fabulae (1564). The majority of the hundred fables there are Aesop's but there are also humorous tales such as The drowned woman and her husband (41) and The miller, his son and the donkey (100). In the same year that Faerno was published in Italy, Hieronymus Osius brought out a collection of 294 fables titled Fabulae Aesopi carmine elegiaco redditae in Germany.[19] This too contained some from elsewhere, such as The Dog in the Manger (67). Then in 1604 the Austrian Pantaleon Weiss, known as Pantaleon Candidus, published Centum et Quinquaginta Fabulae.[20] The 152 poems there were grouped by subject, with sometimes more than one devoted to the same fable, although presenting alternative versions of it, as in the case of The Hawk and the Nightingale (133–5). It also includes the earliest instance of The Lion, the Bear and the Fox (60) in a language other than Greek.
Another voluminous collection of fables in Latin verse was Anthony Alsop's Fabularum Aesopicarum Delectus (Oxford 1698).[21] The bulk of the 237 fables there are prefaced by the text in Greek, while there are also a handful in Hebrew and in Arabic; the final fables, only attested from Latin sources, are without other versions. For the most part the poems are confined to a lean telling of the fable without drawing a moral.

Aesop in other languages[edit]
Europe[edit]
For many centuries the main transmission of Aesop's fables across Europe remained in Latin or else orally in various vernaculars, where they mixed with folk tales derived from other sources. This mixing is often apparent in early vernacular collections of fables in mediaeval times.

Ysopet, an adaptation of some of the fables into Old French octosyllabic couplets, was written by Marie de France in the 12th century.[22] The morals with which she closes each fable reflect the feudal situation of her time.
In the 13th century the Jewish author Berechiah ha-Nakdan wrote Mishlei Shualim, a collection of 103 'Fox Fables' in Hebrew rhymed prose. This included many animal tales passing under the name of Aesop, as well as several more derived from Marie de France and others. Berechiah's work adds a layer of Biblical quotations and allusions to the tales, adapting them as a way to teach Jewish ethics.  The first printed edition appeared in Mantua in 1557.[23]
Äsop, an adaptation into Middle Low German verse of 125 Romulus fables, was written by Gerhard von Minden around 1370.[24]
Chwedlau Odo ("Odo's Tales") is a 14th-century Welsh version of the animal fables in Odo of Cheriton's Parabolae, not all of which are of Aesopic origin. Many show sympathy for the poor and oppressed, with often sharp criticisms of high-ranking church officials.[25]
Eustache Deschamps included several of Aesop's fables among his moral ballades, written in Mediaeval French towards the end of the 14th century,[26] in one of which there is mention of what 'Aesop tells in his book' (Ysoppe dit en son livre et raconte).  In most, the telling of the fable precedes the drawing of a moral in terms of contemporary behaviour, but two comment on this with only contextual reference to fables not recounted in the text.
Isopes Fabules was written in Middle English rhyme royal stanzas by the monk John Lydgate towards the start of the 15th century.[27] Seven tales are included and heavy emphasis is laid on the moral lessons to be learned from them.
The Morall Fabillis of Esope the Phrygian was written in Middle Scots iambic pentameters by Robert Henryson about 1480.[28]  In the accepted text it consists of thirteen versions of fables, seven modelled on stories from "Aesop" expanded from the Latin Romulus manuscripts.
  The fable of the farmer and his sons from Caxton's edition, 1484
The main impetus behind the translation of large collections of fables attributed to Aesop and translated into European languages came from an early printed publication in Germany. There had been many small selections in various languages during the Middle Ages but the first attempt at an exhaustive edition was made by Heinrich Steinhőwel in his Esopus, published c. 1476. This contained both Latin versions and German translations and also included a translation of Rinuccio da Castiglione (or d'Arezzo)'s version from the Greek of a life of Aesop (1448).[29] Some 156 fables appear, collected from Romulus, Avianus and other sources, accompanied by a commentarial preface and moralising conclusion, and 205 woodcuts.[30] Translations or versions based on Steinhöwel's book followed shortly in Italian (1479), French (1480), Czech (1480) and English (the Caxton edition of 1484) and were many times reprinted before the start of the 16th century. The Spanish version of 1489, La vida del Ysopet con sus fabulas hystoriadas was equally successful and often reprinted in both the Old and New World through three centuries.[31]
Some fables were later treated creatively in collections of their own by authors in such a way that they became associated with their names rather than Aesop's. The most celebrated were La Fontaine's Fables, published in French during the later 17th century. Inspired by the brevity and simplicity of Aesop's,[32] those in the first six books were heavily dependent on traditional Aesopic material; fables in the next six were more diffuse and diverse in origin.[33]
At the start of the 19th century, some of the fables were adapted into Russian, and often reinterpreted, by the fabulist Ivan Krylov.[34] In most cases, but not all, these were dependent on La Fontaine's versions.

Asia and America[edit]
Translations into Asian languages at a very early date derive originally from Greek sources. These include the so-called Fables of Syntipas, a compilation of Aesopic fables in Syriac, dating from the 9/11th centuries. Included there were several other tales of possibly West Asian origin.[35] In Central Asia there was a 10th-century collection of the fables in Uighur.[36]
After the Middle Ages, fables largely deriving from Latin sources were passed on by Europeans as part of their colonial or missionary enterprises. 47 fables were translated into the Nahuatl language in the late 16th century under the title In zazanilli in Esopo. The work of a native translator, it adapted the stories to fit the Mexican environment, incorporating Aztec concepts and rituals and making them rhetorically more subtle than their Latin source.[37]
Portuguese missionaries arriving in Japan at the end of the 16th century introduced Japan to the fables when a Latin edition was translated into romanized Japanese. The title was Esopo no Fabulas and dates to 1593. It was soon followed by a fuller translation into a three-volume kanazōshi entitled Isopo Monogatari (伊曾保 物語).[38] This was the sole Western work to survive in later publication after the expulsion of Westerners from Japan, since by that time the figure of Aesop had been acculturated and presented as if he were Japanese.[39] Coloured woodblock editions of individual fables were made by Kawanabe Kyosai in the 19th century.[40]
The first translations of Aesop's Fables into the Chinese languages were made at the start of the 17th century, the first substantial collection being of 38 conveyed orally by a Jesuit missionary named Nicolas Trigault and written down by a Chinese academic named Zhang Geng (Chinese: 張賡; pinyin: Zhāng Gēng) in 1625. This was followed two centuries later by Yishi Yuyan 《意拾喻言》 (Esop's Fables: written in Chinese by the Learned Mun Mooy Seen-Shang, and compiled in their present form with a free and a literal translation) in 1840 by Robert Thom[41] and apparently based on the version by Roger L'Estrange.[42] This work was initially very popular until someone realised the fables were anti-authoritarian and the book was banned for a while.[43] A little later, however, in the foreign concession in Shanghai, A.B. Cabaniss brought out a transliterated translation in Shanghai dialect, Yisuopu yu yan (伊娑菩喻言, 1856). There have also been 20th century translations by Zhou Zuoren and others.[44]

  The Nepalese Aesopan Dayekatahgu Bakhan
Translations into the languages of South Asia began at the very start of the 19th century. The Oriental Fabulist (1803) contained roman script versions in Bengali, Hindi and Urdu. Adaptations followed in Marathi (1806) and Bengali (1816), and then complete collections in Hindi (1837), Kannada (1840), Urdu (1850), Tamil (1853) and Sindhi (1854).[45] 
In Burma, which had its own ethical folk tradition based on the Buddhist Jataka Tales, the joint Pali and Burmese language translation of Aesop's fables was published in 1880 from Rangoon by the American Missionary Press.[46] Outside the British Raj, Jagat Sundar Malla's translation into the Newar language of Nepal was published in 1915. Further to the west, the Afghani academic Hafiz Sahar's translation of some 250 of Aesop's Fables into Persian was first published in 1972 under the name Luqman Hakim.[47]

Versions in regional languages[edit]
Minority expression[edit]
The 18th to 19th centuries saw a vast amount of fables in verse being written in all European languages. Regional languages and dialects in the Romance area made use of versions adapted particularly from La Fontaine's recreations of ancient material. One of the earliest publications in France was the anonymous Fables Causides en Bers Gascouns (Selected fables in Gascon verse, Bayonne, 1776), which contained 106.[48] Also in the vanguard was fr:Jean-Baptiste Foucaud's Quelques fables choisies de La Fontaine en patois limousin (109) in the Occitan Limousin dialect, originally with 39 fables,[49] and Fables et contes en vers patois by oc:August Tandon, also published in the first decade of the 19th century in the neighbouring dialect of Montpellier.[50] The last of these were very free recreations, with the occasional appeal directly to the original Maistre Ézôpa. A later commentator noted that while the author could sometimes embroider his theme, at others he concentrated the sense to an Aesopean brevity.[51]
Many translations were made into languages contiguous to or within the French borders. Ipui onak (1805) was the first translation of 50 fables of Aesop by the writer Bizenta Mogel Elgezabal into the Basque language spoken on the Spanish side of the Pyrenees. It was followed in mid-century by two translations on the French side: 50 fables in J-B. Archu's Choix de Fables de La Fontaine, traduites en vers basques (1848) and 150 in Fableac edo aleguiac Lafontenetaric berechiz hartuac (Bayonne, 1852) by Abbé Martin Goyhetche (1791–1859).[52] Versions in Breton were written by Pierre Désiré de Goësbriand (1784–1853) in 1836 and Yves Louis Marie Combeau (1799–1870) between 1836 and 1838. The turn of Provençal came in 1859 with Li Boutoun de guèto, poésies patoises by Antoine Bigot (1825–1897), followed by several other collections of fables in the Nîmes dialect between 1881 and 1891.  Alsatian dialect versions of La Fontaine appeared in 1879 after the region was ceded away following the Franco-Prussian War. At the end of the following century, Brother Denis-Joseph Sibler (1920–2002) published a collection of adaptations (first recorded in 1983) that has gone through several impressions since 1995.[53] The use of Corsican came later. Natale Rochicchioli (1911-2002) was particularly well known for his very free adaptations of La Fontaine, of which he made recordings[54] as well as publishing his Favule di Natale in the 1970s.[55]
During the 19th century renaissance of Belgian dialect literature in Walloon, several authors adapted versions of the fables to the racy speech (and subject matter) of Liège.[56] They included Charles Duvivier [wa] (in 1842); Joseph Lamaye (1845); and the team of Jean-Joseph Dehin [wa] and François Bailleux, who between them covered all of La Fontaine’s books I-VI, (Fåves da Lafontaine mettowes è ligeois, 1850–56). Adaptations into other regional dialects were made by Charles Letellier (Mons, 1842) and Charles Wérotte (Namur, 1844); much later, Léon Bernus published some hundred imitations of La Fontaine in the dialect of Charleroi (1872);[57] he was followed during the 1880s by Joseph Dufrane [fr], writing in the Borinage dialect under the pen-name Bosquètia. In the 20th century there has been a selection of fifty fables in the Condroz dialect by Joseph Houziaux (1946),[58] to mention only the most prolific in an ongoing surge of adaptation.
The motive behind the later activity across these areas was to assert regional specificity against a growing centralism and the encroachment of the language of the capital on what had until then been predominantly monoglot areas. Surveying its literary manifestations, commentators have noted that the point of departure of the individual tales is not as important as what they become in the process. Even in the hands of less skilled dialect adaptations, La Fontaine's polished versions of the fables are returned to the folkloristic roots by which they often came to him in the first places. But many of the gifted regional authors were well aware of what they were doing in their work. In fitting the narration of the story to their local idiom, in appealing to the folk proverbs derived from such tales, and in adapting the story to local conditions and circumstances, the fables were so transposed as to go beyond bare equivalence, becoming independent works in their own right. Thus Emile Ruben claimed of the linguistic transmutations in Jean Foucaud's collection of fables that, "not content with translating, he has created a new work".[59] In a similar way, the critic Maurice Piron described the Walloon versions of François Bailleux as "masterpieces of original imitation",[60] and this is echoed in the claim that in Natale Rocchiccioli’s free Corsican versions too there is "more creation than adaptation".[61]
In the 20th century there were also translations into regional dialects of English. These include the few examples in Addison Hibbard's Aesop in Negro Dialect (American Speech, 1926)[62] and the 26 in Robert Stephen's Fables of Aesop in Scots Verse (Peterhead, Scotland, 1987), translated into the Aberdeenshire dialect.[63] Glasgow University has also been responsible for R.W. Smith's modernised dialect translation of Robert Henryson's The Morall Fabillis of Esope the Phrygian (1999, see above).[64] The University of Illinois likewise included dialect translations by Norman Shapiro in its Creole echoes: the francophone poetry of nineteenth-century Louisiana (2004, see below).

Creole[edit]
  Cover of the 1885 French edition of Les Bambous
Caribbean creole also saw a flowering of such adaptations from the middle of the 19th century onwards – initially as part of the colonialist project but later as an assertion of love for and pride in the dialect. A version of La Fontaine's fables in the dialect of Martinique was made by François-Achille Marbot (1817–1866) in Les Bambous, Fables de la Fontaine travesties en patois (Port Royal, 1846)[65] which had lasting success. As well as two later editions in Martinique, there were two more published in France in 1870 and 1885 and others in the 20th century.[66] Later dialect fables by Paul Baudot (1801–1870) from neighbouring Guadeloupe owed nothing to La Fontaine, but in 1869 some translated examples did appear in a grammar of Trinidadian French creole written by John Jacob Thomas. Then the start of the new century saw the publication of Georges Sylvain's Cric? Crac! Fables de la Fontaine racontées par un montagnard haïtien et transcrites en vers créoles (La Fontaine's fables told by a Haiti highlander and written in creole verse, 1901).[67]
On the South American mainland, Alfred de Saint-Quentin published a selection of fables freely adapted from La Fontaine into Guyanese creole in 1872. This was among a collection of poems and stories (with facing translations) in a book that also included a short history of the territory and an essay on creole grammar.[68] On the other side of the Caribbean, Jules Choppin (1830–1914) was adapting La Fontaine to the Louisiana slave creole at the end of the 19th century in versions that are still appreciated.[69] The New Orleans author Edgar Grima (1847–1939) also adapted La Fontaine into both standard French and into dialect.[70]
Versions in the French creole of the islands in the Indian Ocean began somewhat earlier than in the Caribbean. Louis Héry [fr] (1801–1856) emigrated from Brittany to Réunion in 1820. Having become a schoolmaster, he adapted some of La Fontaine's fables into the local dialect in Fables créoles dédiées aux dames de l'île Bourbon (Creole fables for island women). This was published in 1829 and went through three editions.[71] In addition 49 fables of La Fontaine were adapted to the Seychelles dialect around 1900 by Rodolphine Young (1860–1932) but these remained unpublished until 1983.[72] Jean-Louis Robert's recent translation of Babrius into Réunion creole (2007)[73] adds a further motive for such adaptation. Fables began as an expression of the slave culture and their background is in the simplicity of agrarian life. Creole transmits this experience with greater purity than the urbane language of the slave-owner.


Slang[edit]
Fables belong essentially to the oral tradition; they survive by being remembered and then retold in one's own words. When they are written down, particularly in the dominant language of instruction, they lose something of their essence. A strategy for reclaiming them is therefore to exploit the gap between the written and the spoken language. One of those who did this in English was Sir Roger L'Estrange, who translated the fables into the racy urban slang of his day and further underlined their purpose by including in his collection many of the subversive Latin fables of Laurentius Abstemius.[74] In France the fable tradition had already been renewed in the 17th century by La Fontaine's influential reinterpretations of Aesop and others. In the centuries that followed there were further reinterpretations through the medium of regional languages, which to those at the centre were regarded as little better than slang. Eventually, however, the demotic tongue of the cities themselves began to be appreciated as a literary medium.
One of the earliest examples of these urban slang translations was the series of individual fables contained in a single folded sheet, appearing under the title of Les Fables de Gibbs in 1929. Others written during the period were eventually anthologised as Fables de La Fontaine en argot (Étoile sur Rhône 1989). This followed the genre's growth in popularity after World War II. Two short selections of fables by Bernard Gelval about 1945 were succeeded by two selections of 15 fables each by 'Marcus' (Paris 1947, reprinted in 1958 and 2006), Api Condret's Recueil des fables en argot (Paris, 1951) and Géo Sandry (1897–1975) and Jean Kolb's Fables en argot (Paris 1950/60). The majority of such printings were privately produced leaflets and pamphlets, often sold by entertainers at their performances, and are difficult to date.[75] Some of these poems then entered the repertoire of noted performers such as Boby Forest and Yves Deniaud, of which recordings were made.[76] In the south of France, Georges Goudon published numerous folded sheets of fables in the post-war period. Described as monologues, they use Lyon slang and the Mediterranean Lingua Franca known as Sabir.[77]
Slang versions by others continue to be produced in various parts of France, both in printed and recorded form.

Children[edit]
  Walter Crane title page, 1887
The first printed version of Aesop's Fables in English was published on 26 March 1484, by William Caxton.[78] Many others, in prose and verse, followed over the centuries. In the 20th century Ben E. Perry edited the Aesopic fables of Babrius and Phaedrus for the Loeb Classical Library and compiled a numbered index by type in 1952.[79] Olivia and Robert Temple's Penguin edition is titled The Complete Fables by Aesop (1998) but in fact many from Babrius, Phaedrus and other major ancient sources have been omitted. More recently, in 2002 a translation by Laura Gibbs titled Aesop's Fables was published by Oxford World's Classics. This book includes 359 and has selections from all the major Greek and Latin sources.
Until the 18th century the fables were largely put to adult use by teachers, preachers, speech-makers and moralists. It was the philosopher John Locke who first seems to have advocated targeting children as a special audience in Some Thoughts Concerning Education (1693). Aesop's fables, in his opinion are

.mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}apt to delight and entertain a child. . . yet afford useful reflection to a grown man. And if his memory retain them all his life after, he will not repent to find them there, amongst his manly thoughts and serious business. If his Aesop has pictures in it, it will entertain him much better, and encourage him to read when it carries the increase of knowledge with it For such visible objects children hear talked of in vain, and without any satisfaction, whilst they have no ideas of them; those ideas being not to be had from sounds, but from the things themselves, or their pictures.— [80]
That young people are a special target for the fables was not a particularly new idea and a number of ingenious schemes for catering to that audience had already been put into practice in Europe. The Centum Fabulae of Gabriele Faerno was commissioned by Pope Pius IV in the 16th century 'so that children might learn, at the same time and from the same book, both moral and linguistic purity'. When King Louis XIV of France wanted to instruct his six-year-old son, he incorporated the series of hydraulic statues representing 38 chosen fables in the labyrinth of Versailles in the 1670s. In this he had been advised by Charles Perrault, who was later to translate Faerno's widely published Latin poems into French verse and so bring them to a wider audience.[81] Then in the 1730s appeared the eight volumes of Nouvelles Poésies Spirituelles et Morales sur les plus beaux airs, the first six of which incorporated a section of fables specifically aimed at children. In this the fables of La Fontaine were rewritten to fit popular airs of the day and arranged for simple performance. The preface to this work comments that 'we consider ourselves happy if, in giving them an attraction to useful lessons which are suited to their age, we have given them an aversion to the profane songs which are often put into their mouths and which only serve to corrupt their innocence.'[82] The work was popular and reprinted into the following century.
In Great Britain various authors began to develop this new market in the 18th century, giving a brief outline of the story and what was usually a longer commentary on its moral and practical meaning. The first of such works is Reverend Samuel Croxall's Fables of Aesop and Others, newly done into English with an Application to each Fable. First published in 1722, with engravings for each fable by Elisha Kirkall, it was continually reprinted into the second half of the 19th century.[83] Another popular collection was John Newbery's Fables in Verse for the Improvement of the Young and the Old, facetiously attributed to Abraham Aesop Esquire, which was to see ten editions after its first publication in 1757.[84] Robert Dodsley's three-volume Select Fables of Esop and other Fabulists is distinguished for several reasons. First that it was printed in Birmingham by John Baskerville in 1761; second that it appealed to children by having the animals speak in character, the Lion in regal style, the Owl with 'pomp of phrase';[85] thirdly because it gathers into three sections fables from ancient sources, those that are more recent (including some borrowed from Jean de la Fontaine), and new stories of his own invention.
Thomas Bewick's editions from Newcastle upon Tyne are equally distinguished for the quality of his woodcuts. The first of those under his name was the Select Fables in Three Parts published in 1784.[86] This was followed in 1818 by The Fables of Aesop and Others. The work is divided into three sections: the first has some of Dodsley's fables prefaced by a short prose moral; the second has 'Fables with Reflections', in which each story is followed by a prose and a verse moral and then a lengthy prose reflection; the third, 'Fables in Verse', includes fables from other sources in poems by several unnamed authors; in these the moral is incorporated into the body of the poem.[87]
In the early 19th century authors turned to writing verse specifically for children and included fables in their output. One of the most popular was the writer of nonsense verse, Richard Scrafton Sharpe (died 1852), whose Old Friends in a New Dress: familiar fables in verse first appeared in 1807 and went through five steadily augmented editions until 1837.[88] Jefferys Taylor's Aesop in Rhyme, with some originals, first published in 1820, was as popular and also went through several editions. The versions are lively but Taylor takes considerable liberties with the story line. Both authors were alive to the over serious nature of the 18th century collections and tried to remedy this. Sharpe in particular discussed the dilemma they presented and recommended a way round it, tilting at the same time at the format in Croxall's fable collection:

It has been the accustomed method in printing fables to divide the moral from the subject; and children, whose minds are alive to the entertainment of an amusing story, too often turn from one fable to another, rather than peruse the less interesting lines that come under the term "Application". It is with this conviction that the author of the present selection has endeavoured to interweave the moral with the subject, that the story shall not be obtained without the benefit arising from it; and that amusement and instruction may go hand in hand.— [89]
  Brownhills alphabet plate, Aesop's Fables series, The Fox and the Grapes c.1880
Sharpe was also the originator of the limerick, but his versions of Aesop are in popular song measures and it was not until 1887 that the limerick form was ingeniously applied to the fables. This was in a magnificently hand-produced Arts and Crafts Movement edition, The Baby's Own Aesop: being the fables condensed in rhyme with portable morals pictorially pointed by Walter Crane.[90]
Some later prose editions were particularly notable for their illustrations. Among these was Aesop's fables: a new version, chiefly from original sources (1848) by Thomas James, 'with more than one hundred illustrations designed by John Tenniel'.[91] Tenniel himself did not think highly of his work there and took the opportunity to redraw some in the revised edition of 1884, which also used pictures by Ernest Griset and Harrison Weir.[92]  Once the technology was in place for coloured reproductions, illustrations became ever more attractive. Notable early 20th century editions include V.S. Vernon Jones' new translation of the fables accompanied by the pictures of Arthur Rackham (London, 1912)[93] and in the USA Aesop for Children (Chicago, 1919), illustrated by Milo Winter.[94]
The illustrations from Croxall's editions were an early inspiration for other artefacts aimed at children. In the 18th century they appear on tableware from the Chelsea, Wedgwood and Fenton potteries, for example.[95] 19th century examples with a definitely educational aim include the fable series used on the alphabet plates issued in great numbers from the Brownhills Pottery in Staffordshire. Fables were used equally early in the design of tiles to surround the nursery fireplace. The latter were even more popular in the 19th century when there were specially designed series from Mintons,[96] Minton-Hollins and Maw & Co. In France too, well-known illustrations of La Fontaine's fables were often used on china.[97]


Religious themes[edit]
In Classical times there was an overlap between fable and myth, especially where they had an aetiological function.[98] Among those are two which deal with the difference between humans and animals. According to the first, humans are distinguished by their rationality.[99] But in those cases where they have a bestial mentality, the explanation is that at creation animals were found to outnumber humans and some were therefore modified in shape but retained their animal souls.[100]
Such early philosophical speculation was also extended to the ethical problems connected with divine justice. For example, it was perceived as disproportionate for an evil man to be punished by dying in a shipwreck when it involved many other innocent people. The god Hermes explained this to an objector by the human analogy of a man bitten by an ant and in consequence stamping on all those about his feet.[101] Again, it was asked why the consequences of an evil deed did not follow immediately it was committed. Hermes was involved here too, since he records men's acts on potsherds and takes them to Zeus piled in a box. The god of justice, however, goes through them in reverse order and the penalty may therefore be delayed.[102] However, where the fault is perceived as an act of defiance, as happens in the fable of Horkos, retribution arrives swiftly.[103]

  A Japanese woodblock print illustrates the moral of Hercules and the Wagoner
Some fables may express open scepticism, as in the story of the man marketing a statue of Hermes who boasted of its effectiveness. Asked why he was disposing of such an asset, the huckster explains that the god takes his time in granting favours while he himself needs immediate cash. In another example, a farmer whose mattock has been stolen goes to a temple to see if the culprit can be found by divination. On his arrival he hears an announcement asking for information about a robbery at the temple and concludes that a god who cannot look after his own must be useless.[104] But the contrary position, against reliance on religious ritual, was taken in fables like Hercules and the Wagoner that illustrate the proverb "god helps those who help themselves". The story was also to become a favourite centuries later in Protestant England, where one commentator took the extreme position that to neglect the necessity of self-help is "blasphemy" and that it is "a great sin for a man to fail in his trade or occupation by running often to prayers".[105]
As the fables moved out of the Greek-speaking world and were adapted to different times and religions, it is notable how radically some fables were reinterpreted. Thus one of the fables collected under the title of the Lion's share and originally directed against tyranny became in the hands of Rumi a parable of oneness with the God of Islam and obedience to divine authority.[106] In the Jewish 'fox fables' of Berechiah ha-Nakdan, the humorous account of the hares and the frogs was made the occasion to recommend trust in God,[107] while Christian reinterpretation of animal symbolism in Mediaeval times turned The Wolf and the Crane into a parable of the rescue of the sinner's soul from Hell.[108]
In Mediaeval times too, fables were collected for use in sermons, of which Odo of Cheriton's Parobolae is just one example. At the start of the Reformation, Martin Luther followed his example in the work now known as the Coburg Fables.[109] Another source of Christianized fables was in the emblem books of the 16th–17th centuries. In Georgette de Montenay's Emblemes ou devises chrestiennes (1571), for example, the fable of The Oak and the Reed was depicted in the context of the lines from the Magnificat, "He hath put down the mighty from their seats and exalted them of low degree" (Luke 1.52, AV).[110]
Once the fables were perceived as primarily for the instruction of children, a new generation of Christian writers began putting their own construction on them, often at odds with their original interpretation. An extreme example occurs in a compilation called Christian Fables from the Victorian era, where The North Wind and the Sun is referred to Biblical passages in which religion is compared to a cloak. Therefore, says the author, one should beware of abandoning one's beliefs under the sun of prosperity.[111] Demonstrably, the essence of fables is their adaptability. Beginning two and a half millennia ago with aetiological solutions to philosophical problems, fresh religious applications were continuing into the present.

Dramatised fables[edit]
The success of La Fontaine's fables in France started a European fashion for creating plays around them. The originator was Edmé Boursault, with his five-act verse drama Les Fables d'Esope (1690), later retitled Esope à la ville (Aesop in town). Such was its popularity that a rival theatre produced Eustache Le Noble's Arlaquin-Esope in the following year. Boursault then wrote a sequel, Esope à la cour (Aesop at court), a heroic comedy that was held up by the censors and not produced until after his death in 1701.[112] Other 18th-century imitations included Jean-Antoine du Cerceau's Esope au collège (1715),[113] where being put in charge of a school gives the fabulist ample opportunity to tell his stories, and Charles-Étienne Pesselier's Esope au Parnasse (1739), a one-act piece in verse.[114]
Esope à la ville was written in French alexandrine couplets and depicted a physically ugly Aesop acting as adviser to Learchus, governor of Cyzicus under King Croesus, and using his fables as satirical comments on those seeking his favour or to solve romantic problems. One of the problems is personal to Aesop, since he is betrothed to the governor's daughter, who detests him and has a young admirer with whom she is in love. There is very little action, the play serving as a platform for the recitation of free verse fables at frequent intervals. These include The Fox and the Weasel, The Fox and the Mask, The Belly and the Other Members, the Town Mouse and the Country Mouse, the Fox and the Crow, the Crab and her Daughter, The Frog and the Ox, the Cook and the Swan, The Wolf and the Lamb, The Mountain in Labour, and The Man with two Mistresses. Two others – The Nightingale, The Lark and the Butterfly – appear original to the author, while a third, The Doves and the Vulture, is in fact an adapted version of The Frogs and the Sun.[115]

  Dramatisation of a different sort: the former statues of "The Fox and the Crane" in the labyrinth of Versailles
Esope à la cour is more of a moral satire, most scenes being set pieces for the application of fables to moral problems, but to supply romantic interest Aesop's mistress Rhodope is introduced.[116] Among the sixteen fables included, only four derive from La Fontaine – The Heron and the Fish, the Lion and the Mouse, the Dove and the Ant, the Sick Lion – while a fifth borrows a moral from another of his but alters the details, and a sixth has as apologue a maxim of Antoine de La Rochefoucauld. After a modest few performances, the piece later grew in popularity and remained in the repertory until 1817.[117] Boursault's play was also influential in Italy and twice translated. It appeared from Bologna in 1719 under the title L'Esopo in Corte, translated by Antonio Zaniboni, and as Le Favole di Esopa alla Corte  from Venice in 1747, translated by Gasparo Gozzi. The same translator was responsible for a version of Esope à la ville (Esopo in città, Venice, 1748); then in 1798 there was an anonymous Venetian three-act adaptation, Le Favole di Esopa, ossia Esopo in città.[118] In England the play was adapted under the title Aesop by John Vanbrugh and first performed at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane in London in 1697, remaining popular for the next twenty years.[119]
In the 20th century individual fables by Aesop began to be adapted to animated cartoons, most notably in France and the United States. Cartoonist Paul Terry began his own series, called Aesop's Film Fables, in 1921 but by the time this was taken over by Van Beuren Studios in 1928 the story lines had little connection with any fable of Aesop's. In the early 1960s, animator Jay Ward created a television series of short cartoons called Aesop and Son which were first aired as part of The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show. Actual fables were spoofed to result in a pun based on the original moral. Two fables are also featured in the 1971 TV movie Aesop's Fables in the US. Here Aesop is a black story teller who relates two turtle fables, The Tortoise and the Eagle and the Tortoise and the Hare to a couple of children who wander into an enchanted grove. The fables themselves are shown as cartoons.[120]
Between 1989 and 1991, fifty Aesop-based fables were reinterpreted on French television as Les Fables géométriques [fr] and later issued on DVD. These featured a cartoon in which the characters appeared as an assembly of animated geometric shapes, accompanied by Pierre Perret's slang versions of La Fontaine's original poem.[121] In 1983 there was an extended manga version of the fables made in Japan, Isoppu monogatari,[122] and there has also been a Chinese television series for children based on the stories.[123]
There have also been several dramatic productions for children based on elements of Aesop's life and including the telling of some fables, although most were written as purely local entertainments. Among these was Canadian writer Robertson Davies' A Masque of Aesop (1952), which was set at his trial in Delphi and allows the defendant to tell the fables The Belly and the Members, The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse and The Cock and the Jewel while challenging prevailing social attitudes.[124]

Musical treatments[edit]
While musical settings of La Fontaine's Fables began appearing in France within a few decades of their publication, it was not until the 19th century that composers began to take their inspiration directly from Aesop. One of the earliest was Charles Valentin Alkan's Le festin d'Ésope ("Aesop's Feast", 1857), a set of piano variations in which each is said to depict a different animal or scene from Aesop's fables. In Victorian England there were several piano arrangements of fables versified (with no particular skill) by their composers. 1847 saw the anonymous Selection of Aesop's Fables Versified and Set to Music with Symphonies and Accompaniments for the Piano Forte, which contained 28 fables.[125] It was followed in that same year by Olivia Buckley Dussek's selection, illustrated by Thomas Onwhyn.[126] Twelve were also set by W. Langton Williams (c.1832-1896) in his Aesop’s Fables, versified & arranged for the piano forte (London, 1870s),[127] the jocular wording of which was strongly deprecated by The Musical Times.[128]
More were to follow in the 20th century, with seven settings in Mabel Wood Hill's Aesop's Fables Interpreted Through Music (New York, 1920), with the fable's moral at the head of each piece.[129] Many of these works were specifically aimed at young people. They also included Edward Hughes’ Songs from Aesop's fables for children's voices and piano (1965)[130] and Arwel Hughes's similarly titled work for unison voices. More recently, the American composer Robert J. Bradshaw (b.1970) dedicated his 3rd Symphony (2005) to the fables with a programme note explaining that the work's purpose "is to excite young musicians and audiences to take an interest in art music".[131] Five more fables set for choir are featured in Bob Chilcott's Aesop's Fables (2008).[132]
Werner Egk's early settings in Germany were aimed at children too. His Der Löwe und die Maus (The Lion and the Mouse 1931) was a singspiel drama for small orchestra and children's choir; aimed at 12- to 14-year-olds, it was built on an improvisation by the composer's own children.[133] He followed this with Der Fuchs und der Rabe  (The Fox and the Crow) in 1932. Hans Poser's Die Fabeln des Äsop (Op. 28, 1956) was set for accompanied men's chorus and uses Martin Luther's translation of six.[134] Others who have set German texts for choir include Herbert Callhoff (1963) and Andre Asriel (1972).
The commonest approach in building a musical bridge to children has involved using a narrator with musical backing. Following the example of Sergei Prokoviev in "Peter and the Wolf" (1936), Vincent Persichetti set six for narrator and orchestra in his Fables (Op. 23 1943).[135]  Richard Maltz also composed his Aesop's Fables (1993) to introduce the instruments of the orchestra to elementary students and to teach them about the elements of music,[136] and Daniel Dorff's widely performed 3 Fun Fables (1996) has contrasting instruments interpreting characters: in "The Fox and the Crow" it is trumpet and contrabass;  in "The Dog and Its Reflection" it is trombone and violin, harp and percussion; in "The Tortoise and the Hare" it is contrabassoon and clarinet.[137] Others simply adapt the narrator's voice to a musical backing. They include Scott Watson's Aesop's Fables[138] and Anthony Plog's set of five for narrator, horn and piano (1989).[139]

  Finale of an American performance of "Aesop's Fables"
A different strategy is to adapt the telling to popular musical genres. Australian musician David P Shortland chose ten fables for his recording Aesop Go HipHop (2012), where the stories are given a hip hop narration and the moral is underlined in a lyrical chorus.[140] The American William Russo's approach to popularising his Aesop's Fables (1971) was to make of it a rock opera.[141] This incorporates nine, each only introduced by the narrator before the music and characters take over. Instead of following the wording of one of the more standard fable collections, as other composers do, the performer speaks in character. Thus in "The Crow and the Fox" the bird introduces himself with, "Ahm not as pretty as mah friends and I can’t sing so good, but, uh, I can steal food pretty goddam good!"[142] Other composers who have created operas for children have been Martin Kalmanoff in Aesop the fabulous fabulist (1969),[143] David Ahlstom in his one-act Aesop's Fables (1986),[144] and David Edgar Walther with his set of four "short operatic dramas", some of which were performed in 2009 and 2010.[145] There have also been local ballet treatments of the fables for children in the US by such companies as Berkshire Ballet[146] and Nashville Ballet.[147]
Another musical, Aesop's Fables by British playwright Peter Terson, first produced in 1983,[148] was lifted into another class by Mark Dornford-May's adaptation for the Isango Portobello company at the Fugard Theatre in Cape Town, South Africa, in 2010.[149] The play tells the story of the black slave Aesop, who learns that freedom is earned and kept through being responsible. His teachers are the animal characters he meets on his journeys. The fables they suggest include the Tortoise and the Hare, the Lion and the Goat, the Wolf and the Crane, the Frogs Who Desired a King and three others, brought to life through a musical score featuring mostly marimbas, vocals and percussion.[150] Another colourful treatment was Brian Seward's Aesop's Fabulous Fables (2009) in Singapore, which mixes a typical musical with Chinese dramatic techniques.[151]
Use of other languages elsewhere in the world have included a setting of four Latin texts in the Czech composer Ilja Hurník's Ezop for mixed choir and orchestra (1964) and the setting of two as a Greek opera by Giorgos Sioras (b. 1952) in 1998.[152] And in 2010 Lefteris Kordis launched his 'Aesop Project', a setting of seven fables which mixed traditional East Mediterranean and Western Classical musical textures, combined with elements of jazz. After an English recitation by male narrator, a female singer's rendition of the Greek wording was accompanied by an octet.[153]

List of some fables by Aesop[edit]
Titles A–F[edit]
.mw-parser-output .div-col{margin-top:0.3em;column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .div-col-small{font-size:90%}.mw-parser-output .div-col-rules{column-rule:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .div-col dl,.mw-parser-output .div-col ol,.mw-parser-output .div-col ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .div-col li,.mw-parser-output .div-col dd{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
Aesop and the Ferryman
The Ant and the Grasshopper
The Ape and the Fox
The Ass and his Masters
The Ass and the Pig
The Ass Carrying an Image
The Ass in the Lion's Skin
The Astrologer who Fell into a Well
The Bald Man and the Fly
The Bear and the Travelers
The Beaver
The Belly and the Other Members
The Bird-catcher and the Blackbird
The Bird in Borrowed Feathers
The Boy Who Cried Wolf
The Bulls and the Lion
The Cat and the Mice
The Crab and the Fox
The Cock and the Jewel
The Cock, the Dog and the Fox
The Crow and the Pitcher
The Crow and the Sheep
The Crow and the Snake
The Deer without a Heart
The Dog and Its Reflection
The Dog and the Sheep
The Dog and the Wolf
The dogs and the lion's skin
The Dove and the Ant
The Eagle and the Beetle
The Eagle and the Fox
The Eagle Wounded by an Arrow
The Farmer and his Sons
The Farmer and the Sea
The Farmer and the Stork
The Farmer and the Viper
The Fir and the Bramble
The Fisherman and his Flute
The Fisherman and the Little Fish
The Fly and the Ant
The Fly in the Soup
The Fowler and the Snake
The Fox and the Crow
The Fox and the Grapes
The Fox and the Lion
The Fox and the Mask
The Fox and the Sick Lion
The Fox and the Stork
The Fox and the Weasel
The Fox and the Woodman
The Fox, the Flies and the Hedgehog
The Frightened Hares
The Frog and the Fox
The Frog and the Mouse
The Frog and the Ox
The Frogs and the Sun
The Frogs Who Desired a King

Titles G–O[edit]

The Goat and the Vine
The Goose that Laid the Golden Eggs
The Hare in flight
Hercules and the Wagoner
The Honest Woodcutter
Horkos, the god of oaths
The Horse and the Donkey
The Horse that Lost its Liberty
The Impertinent Insect
The Jar of Blessings
The Kite and the Doves
The Lion and the Mouse
The Lion Grown Old
The Lion in Love
The Lion's Share
The Lion, the Bear and the Fox
The lion, the boar and the vultures
The Man and the Lion
The Man with two Mistresses
The Mischievous Dog
The Miser and his Gold
Momus criticizes the creations of the gods
The Mountain in Labour
The Mouse and the Oyster
The North Wind and the Sun
The Oak and the Reed
The Old Man and Death
The Old Man and his Sons
The Old Man and the Ass
The Old Woman and the Doctor
The Old Woman and the Wine-jar
The Oxen and the Creaking Cart

Titles R–Z[edit]

The Rivers and the Sea
The Rose and the Amaranth
The Satyr and the Traveller
The Shipwrecked Man and the Sea
The Sick Kite
The Snake and the Crab
The Snake and the Farmer
The Snake in the Thorn Bush
The Statue of Hermes
The Swan and the Goose
The Tortoise and the Birds
The Tortoise and the Hare
The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse
The Travellers and the Plane Tree
The Trees and the Bramble
The Trumpeter Taken Captive
The Two Pots
Venus and the Cat
The Walnut Tree
War and his Bride
Washing the Ethiopian white
The Wolf and the Crane
The Wolf and the Lamb
The Wolf and the Shepherds
The Woodcutter and the Trees
The Young Man and the Swallow
Zeus and the Tortoise

Fables wrongly attributed to Aesop[edit]

An ass eating thistles
The Bear and the Bees
The Bear and the Gardener
Belling the cat (also known as The Mice in Council)
The Blind Man and the Lame
The Boy and the Filberts
Chanticleer and the Fox
The Dog in the Manger
The drowned woman and her husband
The Eel and the Snake
The Elm and the Vine
The Fox and the Cat
The Gourd and the Palm-tree
The Hawk and the Nightingale
The Hare and many friends
The Hedgehog and the Snake
The Heron and the Fish
Jumping from the frying pan into the fire
The milkmaid and her pail
The miller, his son and the donkey
The Monkey and the Cat
The Priest and the Wolf
The Scorpion and the Frog
The Shepherd and the Lion
Still waters run deep
The Vultures and the Pigeons
The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing

References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ Philostratus, Life of Apollonius of Tyana, Book V.14

^ The Histories of Herodotus of Halicarnassus. trans. George Rawlinson, Book I, p. 132 Archived 19 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine

^ Aesop's Fables, ed. D.L. Ashliman, New York 2005, pp. xiii–xv, xxv–xxvi

^ Christos A. Zafiropoulos (2001). Ethics in Aesop's Fables, Leiden, pp. 10–12

^ Zafiropoulos, Ethics in Aesop's Fables, p. 4

^ G. J. Van Dijk (1997). Ainoi, Logoi, Mythoi, Leiden, p. 57

^ Francisco Rodríguez Adrados (1999). History of the Graeco-Latin Fable vol. 1, Leiden. p. 7

^ John F. Priest, "The Dog in the Manger: In Quest of a Fable", in The Classical Journal, Vol. 81, No. 1, (October–November 1985), pp. 49–58.

^ Perry, Ben E. (1965). "Introduction", Babrius and Phaedrus, p. xix.

^ van Dijk, Gert-Jan (1997). Ainoi, Logoi, Mythoi: Fables in Archaic, Classical, and Hellenistic Greek Literature, Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.

^ Adrados, Francisco Rodríguez; van Dijk, Gert-Jan. (1999). History of the Graeco-Latin Fable, 3 Volumes, Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.

^ Ashliman, D.L. "Introduction", Aesop's Fables, 2003, p. xxii.

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}"Æsop's Fables Among the Jews". JewishEncyclopedia.com. Retrieved 4 October 2014.

^ Progymnasmata: Greek Textbooks of Prose Composition and Rhetoric, Brill 2003

^ Postgate, John Percival (1911). "Phaedrus" .  In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 21 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 341.

^ "Accessible online". Aesopus.pbworks.com. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "Accessible online". Mythfolklore.net. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ Archived online. Boston : Printed by Samuel Hall, in State-Street. 1787. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "Accessible online". Aesopus.pbworks.com. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "Pantaleon". Aesopus.pbworks.com. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ Aesopus (1698). "Fabularum Aesopicarum Delectus". google.co.uk.

^ The Fables of Marie de France translated by Mary Lou Martin, Birmingham AL, 1979; limited preview to p. 51 at Google Books

^ An English translation by Moses Hadas, titled Fables of a Jewish Aesop, first appeared in 1967. ben Natronai (Ha-Nakdan), Berechiah (2001). Fables of a Jewish Aesop. ISBN 978-1567921311. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ There is a discussion of this work in French in Épopée animale, fable, fabliau, Paris, 1984, pp. 423–432; limited preview at Google Books

^ There is a translation by John C. Jacobs: The Fables of Odo of Cheriton, New York, 1985; a limited preview on Google Books

^ Poésies morales et historiques d'Eustache Deschamps, Paris 1832, Fables en ballades pp. 187–202

^ "The text is available here". Xtf.lib.virginia.edu. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "A modernised version is available here". Arts.gla.ac.uk. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ A reproduction of a much later edition is available at Archive.org

^ Several versions of the woodcuts can be viewed at PBworks.com

^ Keller, John Esten (1993). A translation is available at Google Books. ISBN 978-0813132457. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "Préface aux Fables de La Fontaine". Memodata.com. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ An English translation of all the fables can be accessed online

^ Kriloff's Fables, translated into the original metres by C. Fillingham Coxwell, London 1920; the book is archived online

^ Francisco Rodríguez Adrados, History of the Graeco-Latin Fable 1, Leiden NL 1999, pp. 132–135

^ Susan Whitfield, Life Along the Silk Road, University of California 1999, p. 218

^ Gordon Brotherston, Book of the Fourth World: Reading the Native Americas Through Their Literature, Cambridge University Press 1992, pp. 315–319

^ Yuichi Midzunoe, "Aesop's arrival in Japan in the 1590s", Online version Archived 14 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine

^ Lawrence Marceau, From Aesop to Esopo to Isopo: Adapting the Fables in Late Medieval Japan (2009); an abstract of this paper appears on p. 277 Archived 22 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine

^ A print of the fable of the two pots appears on artelino.com

^ Kaske, Elisabeth (2007). The Politics of Language in Chinese Education, 1895–1919. Brill. ISBN 978-9004163676. p. 68

^ Chinese Repository, Vol. 7 (October 1838), p. 335. Thom was based in Canton and his work was issued in three octavo tracts of seven, seventeen, and twenty-three pages respectively

^ Tao Ching Sin, "A critical study of Yishi Yuyan", M.Phil thesis, University of Hong Kong, 2007  Available online[permanent dead link]

^ "A comparative study of translated children's literature by Lu Xun and Zhou Zuoren", Journal of Macao Polytechnic Institute, 2009 available online Archived 8 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine

^ Sisir Kumar Das, A History of Indian Literature 1800–1910: Western impact, Indian response, Sahitya Akademi, 1991.

^ "Cha rā Candrī Gritʻ Pāḷi mha Mranʻ mā bhāsā ʼa phraṅʻʹ ʼa nakʻ pranʻ thāʺ so Īcupʻ e* daṇḍārī cā [microform] = The fables of Aesop / translated into the Burmese by W. Shway Too Sandays. – Version details". 239.158.

^ "Aesop's Fables in Persian: Luqman Hakim". hafizsahar.com.

^ The original edition is available on Google Books

^ The entire text with the French originals is available as an e-book at Archive.org

^ The augmented second edition of 1813 is available on Google Books]

^ Rudel 1866, pp.cxviii-cxxi

^ The sources for this are discussed at lapurdum.revues.org

^ "Anciens élèves du collège St Joseph de Matzenheim". www.anciens-matzenheim.fr.

^ "FABLES DE LA FONTAINE dites en corse / le Chansonnier corse Noël ROCHICCIOLI ; A la guitare Antoine BONELLI". 2 August 1957 – via gallica.bnf.fr.

^ There are texts and comparisons available online

^ Anthologie de la littérature wallonne (ed. Maurice Piron), Liège, 1979; limited preview at Google Books Google Books

^ The text of four can be found at Walon.org

^ "Lulucom.com". Lulucom.com. Archived from the original on 8 April 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ Ruben 1866, pp.xxvi-xxvii

^ Anthologie de la Littérature Wallonne, Pierre Mardaga 1979, p.142

^ "Rochiccioli-natale" at Isula, Foru in lingua Corsa

^ Annotated Bibliography of Southern American English, University of Alabama 1989, p.38

^ "Peterhead author Robert Stephen, About Aberdeen

^ R.W. Smith. "The thirteen moral fables of Robert Henryson (a modernised edition)". Retrieved 4 October 2014.

^ The complete text is at BNF.fr

^ Jean Pierre Jardel, Notes et remarques complémentaires sur "Les Fables Créoles" de F. A. Marbot, Potomitan

^ Examples of all these can be found in Marie-Christine Hazaël-Massieux: Textes anciens en créole français de la Caraïbe, Paris, 2008, pp. 259–272. Partial preview at Google Books

^ Available on pp. 50–82 at Archive.org

^ Three of these appear in the anthology Creole echoes: the francophone poetry of nineteenth-century Louisiana (University of Illinois, 2004) with dialect translations by Norman Shapiro. All of Choppin's poetry was collected in Fables et Rêveries Archived 28 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine (Centenary College of Louisiana, 2004).

^ Creole echoes, pp 88–9; Écrits Louisianais du 19e siècle, Louisiana State University 1979, pp. 213–215

^ Georges Gauvin (5 August 2008). "Temoignages.re". Temoignages.re. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ Fables de La Fontaine traduites en créole seychellois, Hamburg, 1983; limited preview at Google Books; there is also a selection at Potomitan.info

^ "Potomitan.info". Potomitan.info. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "His Aesop. Fables (1692)". Mythfolklore.net. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ A bibliography is available on the Langue Française site

^ "Three fables are available on YouTube". YouTube.com. 13 November 2010. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "A bibliography of his work". Pleade.bm-lyon.fr. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ Painter, George Duncan (1977). William Caxton: a biography. Putnam. p. 180. ISBN 978-0399118883.

^ See the list at mythfolklore.net

^ "Paragraph 156". Bartleby.com. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ The 1753 London reprint of this and Faerno's original Latin is available online

^ John Metz, The Fables of La Fontaine, a critical edition of the 18th century settings, New York 1986, pp. 3–10; available on Google Books

^ Aesop (1835). The 1835 edition is available on Google Books. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ There is a description of the 5th edition, now in the Douce Collection at Oxford University's Bodleian Library, online

^ See the introductory "An Essay on Fable"p.lxx

^ Bewick, Thomas; Brockett, John Trotter (1820). The 1820 edition of this is available on Internet Archive. Printed by S. Hodgson, for E. Charnley. Retrieved 22 March 2012. Thomas Bewick.

^ Beckwith's Select Fables. London: Bickers. 1871. Retrieved 22 March 2012 – via Google Books.

^ The 1820 3rd edition. London : Harvey and Darton, and William Darton. 1820. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ See the preface on p. 4

^ "Children's Library reproduction". Childrenslibrary.org. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ James, Thomas (1852). Aesop's fables: A new version, chiefly from original sources. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "Mythfolklore.net". Mythfolklore.net. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "The Project Gutenberg eBook of AESOP'S FABLES, by V. S. VERNON JONES". www.gutenberg.org.

^ "Mainlesson.com". Mainlesson.com. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "The Victoria & Albert Museum has many examples". Collections.vam.ac.uk. 25 August 2009. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "Creighton.edu". Creighton.edu. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ See several examples at creighton.edu

^ H.J.Blackham, The Fable as Literature, Bloomsbury Academic 1985, p.186

^ "Zeus and Prometheus". mythfolklore.net.

^ "Zeus and Man". mythfolklore.net.

^ "Hermes, the Man and the Ants". mythfolklore.net.

^ "Zeus and the Potsherds". mythfolklore.net.

^ "The Oath's Punishment". mythfolklore.net.

^ "The Farmer and his Mattock". mythfolklore.net.

^ Samuel Croxall, Fables of Aesop, Fable 56

^ Laura Gibbs, "Rumi's fable of the Lion's Share", Journey to the Sea, October 1, 2008

^ Fables of a Jewish Aesop, Columbia University 1967,Fable 38

^ Evans, E. P. Animal Symbolism in Ecclesiastical Architecture,  London, 1896, p. 107

^ Jason D. Lane, review of Luther's Aesop, Logia, December 30, 2013

^ "French Emblems: Emblem: Deposuit Potent et Exaltavit". gla.ac.uk.

^ Rev. Samuel Lysons, Christian Fables, or the fables of Aesop, and other writers, Christianized and adapted with Christian morals for the use of young people, London 1850, p.6

^ Honoré Champion, Répertoire Chronologique des Spectacles à Paris, 1680–1715, (2002); georgetown.edu Archived 19 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine

^ Du Cerceau, Jean Antoine (2 August 1828). "Oeuvres de Du Cerceau, contenant son théâtre et ses poésies. Nouv. éd., avec des notes, precédée d'un essai sur la vie et les ecrits de l'auteur". Paris P. Beuf – via Internet Archive.

^ Fievre, Paul. "Ésope Au Parnasse, Comédie". www.theatre-classique.fr.

^ The text is available on books.google.co.uk

^ The text is available on books.google.co.uk

^ Lancaster, H.C. "Boursault, Baron, Brueys, and Campistron" (PDF). A history of French Dramatic Literature in the 17th Century. pp. 185–188. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2011.

^ Giovanni Saverio Santangelo, Claudio Vinti, Le traduzioni italiane del teatro comico francese dei secoli XVII e XVIII, Rome 1981, p.97, available on books.google.co.uk

^ The play is archived online. London: J. Rivington ... [& 8 others]. 1776. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ The 24-minute feature is divided into three parts on YouTube

^ Le corbeau et le renard is available on YouTube

^ "imdb.com". IMDb. Retrieved 4 October 2014.

^ "Aesop's Theater". V.youku.com. 22 January 2010. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ Susan Stone-Blackburn, Robertson Davies, playwright, University of British Columbia 1985, pp. 92–96

^ Joachim Draheim, Vertonungen antiker Texte vom Barock bis zur Gegenwart, Amsterdam 1981, Bibliography, p. 111

^ Bell’s Life in London and Sporting Chronicle, 21 March 1847 p3, reproduced in "Thomas Onwhyn: a Life in Illustration", Plymouth University, p.64

^ PDF in Toronto Public Library

^ The Musical Times, 1 December 1879, p.659

^ The score can be downloaded here

^ World Cat fable list

^ Jason Scott Ladd, An Annotated Bibliography of Contemporary Works, Florida State Uni 2009  p.113 Archived 12 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine

^ A performance on YouTube

^ Joachim Draheim, p.10

^ The piano score is available online

^ Archivegrid fable list

^ Composer’s site Archived 16 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine with recordings and fable list

^ Excerpts on the composer’s website

^ There is a performance at Alfred Music

^ Included are The Tortoise and the Hare; The Lion and the Mouse; The Wind and the Sun; The Dove and the Ant; and The Mule, in a YouTube recital

^ Jon Coghill, "Blindness fails to stop producer's creative passion", ABC Sunshine Coast, 12 March, 2015

^ Margaret Ross Griffel, Operas in English: A Dictionary, Scarecrow Press 2013, p.5

^ Chaney, Frank (16 August 2012). "Aesop's Fables – Part 9 – The Crow and the Fox". Archived from the original on 4 November 2021 – via YouTube.

^ Operas in English, p.5

^ Operas in English, p.5

^ "Operatic Drama". David Edgar Walther, Composer. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014.

^ "Bershire Ballet site". Archived from the original on 13 April 2012.

^ "The Nashville Scene". Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 4 October 2014.

^ "Playwrights and Their Stage Works: Peter Terson". 4-wall.com. 24 February 1932. Retrieved 22 March 2012.

^ "whatsonsa.co.za".[permanent dead link]

^ There is a brief excerpt on YouTube

^ "Brian Seward – Playwright". doollee.com.

^ "Sioras, Aesop's fables". nationalopera.gr. Greek National Opera.

^ There is a YouTube version of four fables; the whole work is now available on CD under the title "Oh Raven, If You Only Had Brains!...songs for Aesop's Fables"


Further reading[edit]
Anthony, Mayvis, 2006. The Legendary Life and Fables of Aesop
Caxton, William, 1484. The history and fables of Aesop, Westminster. Modern reprint edited by Robert T. Lenaghan (Harvard University Press: Cambridge, 1967)
Clayton, Edward. "Aesop, Aristotle, and Animals: The Role of Fables in Human Life". Humanitas, Volume XXI, Nos. 1 and 2, 2008, pp. 179–200. Bowie, Maryland: National Humanities Institute.
Gibbs, Laura (translator), 2002, reissued 2008. Aesop's Fables. Oxford University Press
Gibbs, Laura, "Aesop Illustrations: Telling the Story in Images"
Rev. Thomas James M.A., Aesop's Fables: A New Version, Chiefly from Original Sources, 1848. John Murray (includes many pictures by John Tenniel)
McKendry, John, ed. (1964). Aesop, Five Centuries of Illustrated Fables. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. – online version
Perry, Ben Edwin (editor), 1952, 2nd edition 2007. Aesopica: A Series of Texts Relating to Aesop or Ascribed to Him. Urbana: University of Illinois Press
Perry, Ben E. (editor), 1965. Babrius and Phaedrus, (Loeb Classical Library) Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1965. English translations of 143 Greek verse fables by Babrius, 126 Latin verse fables by Phaedrus, 328 Greek fables not extant in Babrius, and 128 Latin fables not extant in Phaedrus (including some medieval materials) for a total of 725 fables
Ruben, Emile, Poésies en patois limousine, Paris 1866
Temple, Olivia; Temple, Robert (translators), 1998. Aesop, The Complete Fables,  New York: Penguin Classics. (ISBN 0140446494)
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aesop's Fables.




Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Aesop's Fables




Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Μῦθοι 

Aesop's Fables at Standard Ebooks
 Aesop's Fables public domain audiobook at LibriVox
Aesopica: over 600 English fables, plus Caxton's Aesop, Latin and Greek texts, Content Index, and Site Search.
Children's Library, a site with many reproductions of illustrated English editions of Aesop
Fables of Aesop, English versions
Carlson Fable Collection at Creighton University Includes online catalogue of fable-related objects
Vita et Aesopus moralisatus [Aesop's Fables, Italian and Latin.] Naples: [Germani fidelissimi for] Francesco del Tuppo, 13 February 1485. From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Esopus [Moralisatus]. Venice, Manfredus de Bonellis, de Monteferrato, 17 August 1493. From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Fabulae. Naples, Cristannus Preller, c. 1495. From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Esopo con la uita sua historiale euulgare. Milan, Guillermi Le Signerre fratres, 15 September 1498. From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Fabule et vita Esopi, cum fabulis Auiani, Alfonsij, Pogij Florentini, et aliorum, cum optimo commento, bene diligenterque correcte et emendate. Antwerp, Gerardus Leeu, 26 September 1486. From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Esopus constructus moralicatus Uenetijs, Impressum per B. Benalium, 1517. From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Esopus cõnstructus moralizat. Taurini, B. Sylva, 1534 From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Aesopi Fabvlae cvm vvlgari interpretatione: Brixiae, Apud Loduicum Britannicum, 1537. From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Aesop's fables. Latin. Esopi Appologi siue Mythologi cum quibusdam carminum et fabularum additionibus 1501. From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Aesop's fables. Spanish Libro del sabio [et] clarissimo fabulador Ysopu hystoriado et annotado. Sevilla, J. Cronberger, 1521 From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Aesop's fables. German. Vita et Fabulae. Augsburg, Anton Sorg, {{circa|1479. From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vteAesopAesop'sFables
The Ant and the Grasshopper
The Ass and his Masters
The Ass and the Pig
The Ass Carrying an Image
The Ass in the Lion's Skin
The Astrologer who Fell into a Well
The Bear and the Travelers
The Belly and the Members
The Bird-catcher and the Blackbird
The Bird in Borrowed Feathers
The Boy Who Cried Wolf
The Cat and the Mice
The Cock and the Jewel
The Cock, the Dog and the Fox
The Crow and the Pitcher
The Crow and the Snake
The Deer without a Heart
The Dog and Its Reflection
The Dog and the Wolf
The Dove and the Ant
The Farmer and the Stork
The Farmer and the Viper
The Fir and the Bramble
The Fisherman and the Little Fish
The Fowler and the Snake
The Fox and the Crow
The Fox and the Grapes
The Fox and the Lion
The Fox and the Mask
The Fox and the Sick Lion
The Fox and the Stork
The Fox and the Weasel
The Fox and the Woodman
The Frog and the Ox
The Frogs Who Desired a King
The Goat and the Vine
The Goose that Laid the Golden Eggs
The Honest Woodcutter
The Horse and the Donkey
The Horse that Lost its Liberty
The Lion and the Mouse
The Lion, the Bear and the Fox
The Man with Two Mistresses
The Mischievous Dog
The Miser and his Gold
The Mountain in Labour
The Mouse and the Oyster
The North Wind and the Sun
The Oak and the Reed
The Old Man and Death
The Old Woman and the Doctor
The Rose and the Amaranth
The Satyr and the Traveller
The Sick Kite
The Snake and the Crab
The Snake in the Thorn Bush
The Tortoise and the Hare
Town Mouse and Country Mouse
The Travellers and the Plane Tree
The Trees and the Bramble
The Two Pots
The Walnut Tree
Washing the Ethiopian White
The Wolf and the Crane
The Wolf and the Lamb
The Woodcutter and the Trees
The Young Man and the Swallow
Apocryphal
An ass eating thistles
The Bear and the Gardener
Belling the Cat (also known as The Mice in Council)
The Blindman and the Lame
The Boy and the Filberts
Chanticleer and the Fox
The Dog in the Manger
The drowned woman and her husband
The Elm and the Vine
The Fox and the Cat
The Gourd and the Palm-tree
The Hawk and the Nightingale
Jumping from the frying pan into the fire
The Milkmaid and Her Pail
The miller, his son and the donkey
The Monkey and the Cat
The Priest and the Wolf
The Scorpion and the Frog
The Shepherd and the Lion
Still Waters Run Deep
The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing
Related
Jataka tales
Panchatantra
Perry Index
The labyrinth of Versailles
The Lion's Share
Aesop's Fables (album)
Screenadaptations
Aesop's Film Fables
The Grasshopper and the Ants
Printadaptations
Ysopet
The Morall Fabillis of Esope the Phrygian
"The Cock and the Jasp"
"The Taill of how this forsaid Tod maid his Confessioun to Freir Wolf Waitskaith"
"The Taill of Schir Chanticleir and the Foxe"
"The Taill of the Uponlandis Mous and the Burges Mous"
La Fontaine's Fables
Translators
Demetrius of Phalerum
Phaedrus
Babrius
Avianus
Dositheus Magister
Alexander Neckam
Adémar de Chabannes
Odo of Cheriton
John Lydgate
Kawanabe Kyōsai
Laurentius Abstemius
Roger L'Estrange
Gabriele Faerno
Hieronymus Osius
Marie de France
Robert Henryson
Jean de La Fontaine
Ivan Krylov
Nicolas Trigault
Zhang Geng
Robert Thom
Zhou Zuoren

Links to related articles
vteThe Ant and the Grasshopper from Aesop's Fables by AesopFilm
The Grasshopper and the Ants (1934)
Porky's Bear Facts (1941)
Encore (1951)
A Bug's Life (1998)
Literature
The Grasshopper & the Ants (2015)
Music
Cigale
The Grasshoppers
TV
Warm and Cozy
Related
Symphony No. 1 (Shostakovich)

vteThe Boy Who Cried Wolf from Aesop's Fables by AesopSongs
"Boy Who Cried Wolf" (1985)
"Cry Wolf" (1986)
"Cry Wolf" (1987)
Other
"Marge Gets a Job"
"Westward Whoa"

vteThe Goose that Laid the Golden Eggs from Aesop's Fables by AesopFilm
Golden Yeggs (1950)
The Million Dollar Duck (1971)
Assia and the Hen with the Golden Eggs (1994)
Song
"The Goose"
Related
The Librarian: Quest for the Spear
Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory
Pâté de Foie Gras (short story)

vteThe Tortoise and the Hare from Aesop's Fables by AesopFilm
The Tortoise and the Hare (1935)
Toby Tortoise Returns (1936)
Tortoise Beats Hare (1941)
Tortoise Wins by a Hare (1943)
Rabbit Transit (1947)
The Story of The Tortoise & the Hare (2002)
Unstable Fables (2008)
Games
Jazz Jackrabbit
Jazz Jackrabbit
Hare and Tortoise
Literature
The Tortoise & The Hare (2013)
Other
Cecil Turtle
The Tortoise and the Hare (sculpture)
"Who Could Win a Rabbit"

vteThe Town Mouse and the Country Mouse from Aesop's Fables by AesopFilm
The Country Cousin (1936)
Sniffles Takes a Trip (1940)
Mouse in Manhattan (1945)
 The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse (1980)
The Country Mouse and the City Mouse: A Christmas Tale (1993)
TV
The Country Mouse and the City Mouse Adventures (1997—1998)
Literature
The Tale of Johnny Town-Mouse
The Taill of the Uponlandis Mous and the Burges Mous
Other
Big Business
Lischen et Fritzchen

vtePanchatantraaka: Tantrakhyayika — Panchakhyana — Kalila wa Dimna — Calila e Dimna - The Lights of Canopus — The Fables of Bidpai/Pilpay — The Moral Philosophy of Doni — Tantri Kamandaka — Nandaka-prakaranaStories
The Blue Jackal
The Tortoise and the Birds
The Bear and the Gardener
The Lion and the Mouse
The Mouse Turned into a Maid
The Deer without a Heart
The Ass in the Lion's Skin
The Brahmin and the Mongoose
The Fox and the Cat
The milkmaid and her pail
Related works
Aesop's Fables
Calila e Dimna
La Fontaine's Fables
Hikayat Panca Tanderan
Hitopadesha
Jataka tales
Kalīla wa-Dimna
Kathasaritsagara
One Thousand and One Nights
Śukasaptati
Other media
The Tall Tales of Vishnu Sharma
Jungle Tales
Editors,translators,adaptersEarly
Vishnu Sharma (putative author)
Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak
Borzuya
Durgasimha
Jean de La Fontaine
Antoine Galland
John of Capua
Kshemendra
Ibn al-Muqaffa'
Narayana
Abu'l-Ma'ali Nasrallah
Thomas North
Rudaki
Simeon Seth
Modern
Theodor Benfey
Gustav Bickell
Hermann Brockhaus
Edward Backhouse Eastwick
Franklin Edgerton
A. N. D. Haksar
Johannes Hertel
Joseph Jacobs
Ion Keith-Falconer
Patrick Olivelle
N. M. Penzer
Arthur W. Ryder
Silvestre de Sacy
C. H. Tawney
Charles Wilkins
Ramsay Wood
Topics
Beast fable
Frame story
Katha

Authority control General
Integrated Authority File (Germany)
VIAF
1
WorldCat (via VIAF)
National libraries
Spain
France (data)
United States
Japan
Greece
Vatican
Other
SUDOC (France)
1






