
Title:
Genre
Text:
Category of creative works based on stylistic and/or thematic criteria
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}This article is about the concept of genres. For a list of genres, see List of genres. For genre studies or genre theory, see Genre studies. For other uses, see Genre (disambiguation).
This article includes a list of general references, but it remains largely unverified because it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.  (May 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Genre (from French  genre 'kind, sort') is any form or type of communication in any mode (written, spoken, digital, artistic, etc.) with socially-agreed-upon conventions developed over time.[1] In popular usage, it normally describes a category of literature, music, or other forms of art or entertainment, whether written or spoken, audio or visual, based on some set of stylistic criteria, yet genres can be aesthetic, rhetorical, communicative, or functional. Genres form by conventions that change over time as cultures invent new genres and discontinue the use of old ones.[2] Often, works fit into multiple genres by way of borrowing and recombining these conventions. Stand-alone texts, works, or pieces of communication may have individual styles, but genres are amalgams of these texts based on agreed-upon or socially inferred conventions. Some genres may have rigid, strictly adhered-to guidelines, while others may show great flexibility.
Genre began as an absolute classification system for ancient Greek literature, as set out in Aristotle's Poetics.[3] For Aristotle, poetry (odes, epics, etc.), prose, and performance each had specific design features that supported appropriate content of each genre. Speech patterns for comedy would not be appropriate for tragedy, for example, and even actors were restricted to their genre under the assumption that a type of person could tell one type of story best.
Genres proliferate and develop beyond Aristotle’s classifications in response to changes in audiences and creators.[4] Genre has become a dynamic tool to help the public make sense out of unpredictability through artistic expression. Given that art is often a response to a social state, in that people write, paint, sing, dance, and otherwise produce art about what they know about, the use of genre as a tool must be able to adapt to changing meanings.
Genre suffers from the ills of any classification system. Musician Ezra LaFleur argues that discussion of genre should draw from Ludwig Wittgenstein's idea of family resemblance.[5] Genres are helpful labels for communicating but do not necessarily have a single attribute that is the essence of the genre.

Contents

1 Visual arts
2 Literature
3 Film
4 Music
5 Popular culture and other media
6 Linguistics
7 Rhetoric
8 History

8.1 Classical and Romance genre theory


9 Audiences
10 Subgenre
11 Microgenre
12 See also
13 References

13.1 Citations
13.2 Sources


14 Further reading
15 External links



Visual arts[edit]
  A genre painting (Peasant Dance, c. 1568, by Pieter Brueghel the Elder)
The term genre is much used in the history and criticism of visual art, but in art history has meanings that overlap rather confusingly. Genre painting is a term for paintings where the main subject features human figures to whom no specific identity attaches – in other words, figures are not portraits, characters from a story, or allegorical personifications. These are distinguished from staffage: incidental figures in what is primarily a landscape or architectural painting. Genre painting may also be used as a wider term covering genre painting proper, and other specialized types of paintings such as still-life, landscapes, marine paintings and animal paintings.
The concept of the "hierarchy of genres" was a powerful one in artistic theory, especially between the 17th and 19th centuries. It was strongest in France, where it was associated with the Académie française which held a central role in academic art. The genres in hierarchical order are:

History painting, including narrative, religious, mythological and allegorical subjects
Portrait painting
Genre painting or scenes of everyday life
Landscape (landscapists were the "common footmen in the Army of Art" according to the Dutch theorist Samuel van Hoogstraten) and cityscape
Animal painting
Still life
Literature[edit]
.mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:22em;float:right;clear:right;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em;background:#f8f9fa;border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.2em;text-align:center;line-height:1.4em;font-size:88%;border-collapse:collapse;display:table}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .sidebar{display:table!important;float:right!important;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em!important}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-subgroup{width:100%;margin:0;border-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-left{float:left;clear:left;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-none{float:none;clear:both;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-outer-title{padding:0 0.4em 0.2em;font-size:125%;line-height:1.2em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-image{padding:0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-caption,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle-with-top-image,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-caption{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle{padding:0.4em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.2em 0.8em;font-size:145%;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-image{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-heading{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content{padding:0 0.5em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content-with-subgroup{padding:0.1em 0.4em 0.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-below{padding:0.3em 0.8em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-below{border-top:1px solid #aaa;border-bottom:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-navbar{text-align:right;font-size:115%;padding:0 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:left;font-weight:bold;line-height:1.6em;font-size:105%}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title-c{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:center;margin:0 3.3em}@media(max-width:720px){body.mediawiki .mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:100%!important;clear:both;float:none!important;margin-left:0!important;margin-right:0!important}}Literature
Major forms
Drama
Closet drama
Performance
Folklore
Fable
Legend
Myth
Oral literature
Proverb
Poetry
Lyric
Narrative
Nonsense
Prose
Novel
Novella
Short story

Prose genres
Fiction
Coming-of-age novel
Erotic
Historical
Romance
Speculative
Fantasy
Horror
Science fiction
Nonfiction
Autobiography
Biography
Diary
Documentary
Epistle
Essay
History
Journalism
Letters
Memoir
Nature
Philosophy
Speech
Travel

Poetry genres
Narrative poetry
Epic
Dramatic
Verse novel
Lyric
Ballad
Elegy
Epigram
Ghazal
Haiku
Limerick
Ode
Qasidah
Satire
Sonnet
Villanelle

Dramatic genres
Morality play
History play
Tragedy
Comedy
Tragicomedy
Satire

History and lists
History
Outline
Glossary of terms
Books
Writers
Literary awards
poetry

Discussion
Criticism
Theory
Sociology
Magazines

 Literature portal.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vte
Main articles: Literary genre and List of literary genres
A literary genre is a category of literary composition. Genres may be determined by literary technique, tone, content, or even (as in the case of fiction) length. Genre should not be confused with age category, by which literature may be classified as either adult, young adult, or children's. They also must not be confused with format, such as graphic novel or picture book. The distinctions between genres and categories are flexible and loosely defined, often with subgroups.
The most general genres in literature are (in loose chronological order) epic, tragedy,[6] comedy, novel, and short story. They can all be in the genres prose or poetry, which shows best how loosely genres are defined. Additionally, a genre such as satire might appear in any of the above, not only as a subgenre but as a mixture of genres. Finally, they are defined by the general cultural movement of the historical period in which they were composed. In popular fiction, which is especially divided by genres, genre fiction is the more usual term.
In literature, genre has been known as an intangible taxonomy. This taxonomy implies a concept of containment or that an idea will be stable forever. The earliest recorded systems of genre in Western history can be traced back to Plato and Aristotle. Gérard Genette, a French literary theorist and author of The Architext, describes Plato as creating three Imitational genres: dramatic dialogue, pure narrative, and epic (a mixture of dialogue and narrative). Lyric poetry, the fourth and final type of Greek literature, was excluded by Plato as a non-mimetic mode. Aristotle later revised Plato's system by eliminating the pure narrative as a viable mode and distinguishing by two additional criteria: the object to be imitated, as objects could be either superior or inferior, and the medium of presentation such as words, gestures or verse.  Essentially, the three categories of mode, object, and medium can be visualized along an XYZ axis.
Excluding the criteria of medium, Aristotle's system distinguished four types of classical genres: tragedy (superior-dramatic dialogue), epic (superior-mixed narrative), comedy (inferior-dramatic dialogue), and parody (inferior-mixed narrative). Genette continues by explaining the later integration of lyric poetry into the classical system during the romantic period, replacing the now removed pure narrative mode. Lyric poetry, once considered non-mimetic, was deemed to imitate feelings, becoming the third leg of a new tripartite system: lyrical, epical, and dramatic dialogue. This system, which came to "dominate all the literary theory of German romanticism (and therefore well beyond)…" (38), has seen numerous attempts at expansion or revision. However, more ambitious efforts to expand the tripartite system resulted in new taxonomic systems of increasing scope and complexity.
Genette reflects upon these various systems, comparing them to the original tripartite arrangement: "its structure is somewhat superior to…those that have come after, fundamentally flawed as they are by their inclusive and hierarchical taxonomy, which each time immediately brings the whole game to a standstill and produces an impasse" (74). Taxonomy allows for a structured classification system of genre, as opposed to a more contemporary rhetorical model of genre.

Film[edit]
Main article: Film genre
The basic genres of film can be regarded as drama, in the feature film and most cartoons, and documentary.  Most dramatic feature films, especially from Hollywood fall fairly comfortably into one of a long list of film genres such as the Western, war film, horror film, romantic comedy film, musical, crime film, and many others. Many of these genres have a number of subgenres, for example by setting or subject, or a distinctive national style, for example in the Indian Bollywood musical.

Music[edit]
Main article: Music genre
A music genre is a conventional category that identifies pieces of music as belonging to a shared tradition or set of conventions.[7] It is to be distinguished from musical form and musical style, although in practice these terms are sometimes used interchangeably.[citation needed] There are numerous genres in Western classical music and popular music, as well as musical theatre and the music of non-Western cultures. The term is now perhaps over-used to describe relatively small differences in musical style in modern rock music, that also may reflect sociological differences in their audiences.[citation needed] Timothy Laurie suggests that in the context of rock and pop music studies, the "appeal of genre criticism is that it makes narratives out of musical worlds that often seem to lack them".[8]
Music can be divided into different genres in several ways. The artistic nature of music means that these classifications are often arbitrary and controversial, and some genres may overlap. There are several academic approaches to genres. In his book Form in Tonal Music, Douglass M. Green lists madrigal, motet, canzona, ricercar, and dance as examples of genres from the Renaissance period. According to Green, "Beethoven's Op. 61 and Mendelssohn's Op. 64 are identical in genre – both are violin concertos – but different in form. However, Mozart's Rondo for Piano, K. 511, and the Agnus Dei from his Mass, K. 317 are quite different in genre but happen to be similar in form."[9] Some, like Peter van der Merwe, treat the terms genre and style as the same, saying that genre should be defined as pieces of music that share a certain style or "basic musical language".[10]
Others, such as Allan F. Moore, state that genre and style are two separate terms, and that secondary characteristics such as subject matter can also differentiate between genres.[11] A music genre or subgenre may be defined by the musical techniques, the styles, the context, and content and spirit of the themes. Geographical origin is sometimes used to identify a music genre, though a single geographical category will often include a wide variety of subgenres.
Several music scholars have criticised the priority accorded to genre-based communities and listening practices. For example, Laurie argues that "music genres do not belong to isolated, self-sufficient communities. People constantly move between environments where diverse forms of music are heard, advertised and accessorised with distinctive iconographies, narratives and celebrity identities that also touch on non-musical worlds."[8]

Popular culture and other media[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (May 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The concept of genre is often applied, sometimes rather loosely, to other media with an artistic element, such as video game genres. Genre, and numerous minutely divided subgenres, affect popular culture very significantly, not least as they are used to classify it for publicity purposes.  The vastly increased output of popular culture in the age of electronic media encourages dividing cultural products by genre to simplify the search for products by consumers, a trend the Internet has only intensified.

Linguistics[edit]
In philosophy of language, genre figures prominently in the works of philosopher and literary scholar Mikhail Bakhtin. Bakhtin's basic observations were of "speech genres" (the idea of heteroglossia), modes of speaking or writing that people learn to mimic, weave together, and manipulate (such as "formal letter" and "grocery list", or "university lecture" and "personal anecdote"). In this sense, genres are socially specified: recognized and defined (often informally) by a particular culture or community. The work of Georg Lukács also touches on the nature of literary genres, appearing separately but around the same time (1920s–1930s) as Bakhtin. Norman Fairclough has a similar concept of genre that emphasizes the social context of the text: Genres are "different ways of (inter)acting discoursally" (Fairclough, 2003: 26).
A text's genre may be determined by its:

Linguistic function.
Formal traits.
Textual organization.
Relation of communicative situation to formal and organizational traits of the text (Charaudeau and Maingueneau, 2002:278–280).
Rhetoric[edit]
In the field of rhetoric, genre theorists usually understand genres as types of actions rather than types or forms of texts.[12] On this perspective, texts are channels through which genres are enacted. Carolyn Miller's[13] work has been especially important for this perspective. Drawing on Lloyd Bitzer's concept of rhetorical situation,[14] Miller reasons that recurring rhetorical problems tend to elicit recurring responses; drawing on Alfred Schütz,[15] she reasons that these recurring responses become "typified" – that is, socially constructed as recognizable types. Miller argues that these "typified rhetorical actions" (p. 151) are properly understood as genres.
Building off of Miller, Charles Bazerman and Clay Spinuzzi have argued that genres understood as actions derive their meaning from other genres – that is, other actions. Bazerman therefore proposes that we analyze genres in terms of "genre systems",[16] while Spinuzzi prefers the closely related concept of "genre ecologies".[17]
This tradition has had implications for the teaching of writing in American colleges and universities. Combining rhetorical genre theory with activity theory, David Russell has proposed that standard English composition courses are ill-suited to teach the genres that students will write in other contexts across the university and beyond.[18] Elizabeth Wardle contends that standard composition courses do teach genres, but that these are inauthentic "mutt genres" that are often of little use outside of composition courses.[19]

History[edit]
This concept of genre originated from the classification systems created by Plato. Plato divided literature into the three classic genres accepted in Ancient Greece: poetry, drama, and prose. Poetry is further subdivided into epic, lyric, and drama. The divisions are recognized as being set by Aristotle and Plato; however, they were not the only ones. Many genre theorists added to these accepted forms of poetry.

Classical and Romance genre theory[edit]
The earliest recorded systems of genre in Western history can be traced back to Plato and Aristotle. Gérard Genette explains his interpretation of the history of genre in "The Architext". He described Plato as the creator of three imitational, mimetic genres distinguished by mode of imitation rather than content. These three imitational genres include dramatic dialogue, the drama; pure narrative, the dithyramb; and a mixture of the two, the epic. Plato excluded lyric poetry as a non-mimetic, imitational mode. Genette further discussed how Aristotle revised Plato's system by first eliminating the pure narrative as a viable mode. He then uses two additional criteria to distinguish the system. The first of the criteria is the object to be imitated, whether superior or inferior. The second criterion is the medium of presentation: words, gestures, or verse. Essentially, the three categories of mode, object, and medium can be visualized along an XYZ axis. Excluding the criteria of medium, Aristotle's system distinguished four types of classical genres: tragedy, epic, comedy, and parody.
Genette explained the integration of lyric poetry into the classical system by replacing the removed pure narrative mode. Lyric poetry, once considered non-mimetic, was deemed to imitate feelings, becoming the third "Architext", a term coined by Gennette, of a new long-enduring tripartite system: lyrical; epical, the mixed narrative; and dramatic, the dialogue. This new system that came to "dominate all the literary theory of German romanticism" (Genette 38) has seen numerous attempts at expansion and revision. Such attempts include Friedrich Schlegel's triad of subjective form, the lyric; objective form, the dramatic; and subjective-objective form, the epic. However, more ambitious efforts to expand the tripartite system resulted in new taxonomic systems of increasing complexity. Gennette reflected upon these various systems, comparing them to the original tripartite arrangement: "its structure is somewhat superior to most of those that have come after, fundamentally flawed as they are by their inclusive and hierarchical taxonomy, which each time immediately brings the whole game to a standstill and produces an impasse".

Audiences[edit]
Although genres are not always precisely definable, genre considerations are one of the most important factors in determining what a person will see or read. The classification properties of genre can attract or repel potential users depending on the individual's understanding of a genre.
Genre creates an expectation in that expectation is met or not. Many genres have built-in audiences and corresponding publications that support them, such as magazines and websites. Inversely, audiences may call out for change in an antecedent genre and create an entirely new genre.
The term may be used in categorizing web pages, like "news page" and "fan page", with both very different layout, audience, and intention (Rosso, 2008). Some search engines like Vivísimo try to group found web pages into automated categories in an attempt to show various genres the search hits might fit.

Subgenre[edit]
A subgenre is a subordinate within a genre.[20][21] Two stories being the same genre can still sometimes differ in subgenre. For example, if a fantasy story has darker and more frightening elements of fantasy, it would belong in the subgenre of dark fantasy; whereas another fantasy story that features magic swords and wizards would belong to the subgenre of sword and sorcery.

Microgenre[edit]
Main article: Microgenre
A microgenre is a highly specialized, narrow classification of a cultural practice. The term has come into usage in the 21st century, and most commonly refers to music.[22] It is also associated with the hyper-specific categories used in recommendations for television shows and movies on digital streaming platforms such as Netflix, and is sometimes used more broadly by scholars analyzing niche forms in other periods and other media.[23]

See also[edit]
List of genres
References[edit]
Citations[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}Devitt, Amy J. (2015),  Heilker, Paul; Vandenberg, Peter (eds.), "Genre", Keywords in Writing Studies, Utah State University Press, pp. 82–87, doi:10.7330/9780874219746.c017, ISBN 978-0-87421-974-6, retrieved 2021-02-04

^ Miller, Carolyn R. (1984). ""Genre as Social Action"". Quarterly Journal of Speech. 70.2: 151–167.

^ Aristotle (2000),  Butcher, S. H. (ed.), "Poetics", Poetics, Internet Classics Archive, retrieved 2021-04-27

^ Todorov, Tzvetan (1976), ""The Origins of Genre"", New Literary History, 8.1: 159–170

^ Ezra LaFleur. "What is Classical Music? A Family Resemblance".

^ Bakhtin 1983, p. 3.

^ Samson, Jim. "Genre". In Grove Music Online. Oxford Music Online. Accessed March 4, 2012.

^ a b Laurie, Timothy (2014). "Music Genre as Method". Cultural Studies Review. 20 (2). doi:10.5130/csr.v20i2.4149.

^ Green, Douglass M. (1965). Form in Tonal Music. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, Inc. p. 1. ISBN 0-03-020286-8.

^ van der Merwe, Peter (1989). Origins of the Popular Style: The Antecedents of Twentieth-Century Popular Music. Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 3. ISBN 0-19-316121-4.

^ Moore, Allan F.
"Categorical Conventions in Music Discourse: Style and Genre". Music & Letters, Vol. 82, No. 3 (Aug. 2001), pp. 432–442.

^ Bawarshi, A. S., & Mary Jo Reiff. (2010). Genre: An Introduction to History, Theory, Research, and Pedagogy. chs. 5 and 6

^ Miller, C. R. (1984). Genre as social action. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70(2), 151–167.

^ Bitzer, L. F. (1968). The Rhetorical Situation. Philosophy and Rhetoric, 1(1), 1–14.

^ Schutz, A., & Luckmann, T. (1973). The Structures of the Life-World. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.

^ Bazerman, C. (1994). Systems of Genre and the Enactment of Social Intentions. In Genre and the New Rhetoric (pp. 79–101). London/Bristol: Taylor & Francis.

^ Spinuzzi, C., & Zachry, M. (2000). Genre Ecologies : An Open-System Approach to Understanding and Constructing Documentation. ACM Journal of Computer Documentation, 24(3), 169–181.

^ Russell, D. R. (1995). Activity theory and its implications for writing instruction. In J. Petraglia (Ed.), Reconceiving writing, rethinking writing instruction (pp. 51–78). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

^ Wardle, E. (2009). "Mutt Genres" and the Goal of FYC: Can we Help Students Write the Genres of the University? College Composition and Communication, 60(4), 765–789.

^ "subgenre". dictionary.com.

^ "Subgenre". The Free Dictionary. Farlex.

^ "A Recent History of Microgenres". The FADER. Retrieved 2020-02-21.

^ The microgenre: a quick look at small culture. O'Donnell, Molly C.,, Stevens, Anne H., 1971-. New York. 2020. ISBN 978-1-5013-4584-5. OCLC 1139150914.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)


Sources[edit]
.mw-parser-output .refbegin{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul{margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li{margin-left:0;padding-left:3.2em;text-indent:-3.2em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents ul,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents ul li{list-style:none}@media(max-width:720px){.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li{padding-left:1.6em;text-indent:-1.6em}}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-columns ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
Aristotle (2000). Poetics. Translated by Butcher, S. H. Cambridge, MA: The Internet Classics Archive.
Bakhtin, Mikhail M. (1983). "Epic and Novel".  In Holquist, Michael (ed.). The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. ISBN 0-292-71527-7.
Charaudeau, P.; Maingueneau, D. and Adam, J. Dictionnaire d'analyse du discours. Seuil, 2002.
Devitt, Amy J. "A Theory of Genre". Writing Genres. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2004. 1–32.
Fairclough, Norman. Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research. Routledge, 2003.
Genette, Gérard. The Architext: An Introduction. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992. [1979]
Jamieson, Kathleen M. "Antecedent Genre as Rhetorical Constraint". Quarterly Journal of Speech 61 (1975): 406–415.
Killoran, John B. "The Gnome In The Front Yard and Other Public Figurations: Genres of Self-Presentation on Personal Home Pages". Biography 26.1 (2003): 66–83.
LaCapra, Dominick. "History and Genre: Comment". New Literary History 17.2 (1986): 219–221.
Miller, Carolyn. "Genre as Social Action". Quarterly Journal of Speech. 70 (1984): 151–67.
Rosso, Mark. "User-based Identification of Web Genres". Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 59 (2008): 1053–1072.
Todorov, Tzvetan. "The Origins of Genre". New Literary History 8.1 (1976): 159-170.

Further reading[edit]
Pare, Anthony. "Genre and Identity". The Rhetoric and Ideology of Genre: Strategies for Stability and Change. Eds. Richard M. Coe, Lorelei Lingard, and Tatiana Teslenko. Creskill, N.J.:  Hampton Press, 2002.[ISBN missing]
Sullivan, Ceri (2007) "Disposable elements? Indications of genre in early modern titles", Modern Language Review 102.3, pp. 641–653
External links[edit]



Look up genre in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Wikidata has the property: 
 genre (P136) (see uses)

Library resources about  Genre 
Resources in your library

Genres of film at the Internet Movie Database
Helping Children Understand Literary Genres
Rhetorica Genre
Museum of Broadcast Communications Archived 2013-05-14 at the Wayback Machine
Dictionary.com
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vteFilm genresBy style
Action
Arthouse
Heroic bloodshed
Hong Kong action
Adventure
Survival
Art
Biographical
Christian
Comedy
Black
Commedia all'italiana
Sexy
Bromantic
Dramedy
Gross out
Horror
Parody
Mo lei tau
Thriller
Remarriage
Romantic
Sex
Screwball
Silent
Slapstick
Cyberpunk
Japanese
Documentary
Animated
Docudrama
Mockumentary
Mondo
Pseudo
Semi
Travel
Drama
Calligrafismo
Dramedy
Historical
Legal
Melodrama
Korean
Erotic
Commedia sexy all'italiana
Pink
Sexploitation
Thriller
Educational
Social guidance
Epic
Sword-and-sandal
Experimental
Exploitation
see Exploitation film template
Fantasy
Comedy
Contemporary
Fairy tale
Fantastique
High
Historical
Magic realism
Science
Film noir
Neo-noir
Pulp noir
Tech noir
Gothic
Romance
Southern
Space
Suburban
Urban
Horror
Arthouse
Body
Cannibal
Chinese horror
Comedy
Eco
Fantastique
Found footage
German underground
Ghost
Giallo
Holiday
Japanese horror
Korean horror
Lovecraftian
Mumblegore
Natural
New French Extremity
Psycho-biddy
Psychological
Religious
Science fiction
Slasher
Splatter
Satanic
Maximalist film
Minimalist film
Mumblecore
Mumblegore
Musical
Backstage
Jukebox
Musicarello
Operetta
Sceneggiata
Mystery
Detective
Occult detective
Whodunit
Giallo
Pop culture fiction
Pornographic
Hardcore pornography
Softcore pornography
Propaganda
Reality
Romantic
Comedy
Bromantic
Fantasy
Gothic
Paranormal
Thriller
Science fiction
Art
Comedy
Fantastique
Fantasy
Gothic
Horror
Military
New Wave
Parallel universe
Planetary romance
Space opera
Steampunk
Tokusatsu
Western
Slice of life
Slow cinema
Thriller
Comedy
Conspiracy
Erotic
Financial
Giallo
Legal
New French Extremity
Political
Psychological
Romantic
Techno
Transgressive
Cinema of Transgression
Extreme cinema
New French Extremity
Trick
By theme
Animals
Beach party
Body swap
Buddy
Buddy cop
Female
Cannibal
Chicano
Colonial
Coming-of-age
Concert
Crime
Detective
Gangster
Gentleman thief
Gokudō
Gong'an
Heist
Heroic bloodshed
Hood
Mafia
Mafia comedy
Mumbai underworld
Poliziotteschi
Yakuza
Dance
Disaster
Apocalyptic
Drug
Psychedelic
Stoner
Dystopian
Ecchi
Economic
Ethnographic
Exploitation
Blaxploitation
Mexploitation
Turksploitation
Extraterrestrial
Food and drink
Gendai-geki
Ghost
Goona-goona epic
Gothic
Romance
Southern
Space
Suburban
Urban
Girls with guns
Harem
Hentai
Lolicon
Shotacon
Tentacle erotica
Homeland
Isekai
Jidaigeki
Samurai
Kaitō
LGBT
Yaoi
Yuri
Luchador
Magical girl
Martial arts
Bruceploitation
Chopsocky
Gun fu
Kung fu
Ninja
Wuxia
Mecha
Anime
Monster
Giant monster
Jiangshi
Kaiju
Mummy
Vampire
Werewolf
Zombie
Zombie comedy
Mountain
Mouth of Garbage
Muslim social
Nature
Environmental issues
Opera
Outlaw biker
Ozploitation
Partisan film
Pirate
Prison
Women
Race
Rape and revenge
Road
Rubble
Rumberas
Sexploitation
Bavarian porn
Commedia sexy all'italiana
Mexican sex comedy
Nazi exploitation
Pornochanchada
Nunsploitation
Sex report
Shomin-geki
Slavery
Slice of life
Snuff
South Seas
Sports
Spy
Eurospy
Superhero
Surfing
Swashbuckler
Sword-and-sandal
Sword and sorcery
Travel
Trial
Vigilante
War
Anti-war
Euro War
Submarine
Western
Acid
Fantasy
Florida
Horror
Meat pie
Northern
Ostern
Revisionist
Science fiction
Space
Spaghetti
By movement  or period
Absolute
American Eccentric Cinema
New Objectivity
Australian New Wave
Auteur films
Berlin School
Bourekas
Brighton School
British New Wave
Kitchen sink realism
Budapest school
Calligrafismo
Cannibal boom
Cinéma du look
Cinema Novo
Cinema of Transgression
Cinéma pur
Commedia all'italiana
Czechoslovak New Wave
Documentary Film Movement
Dogme 95
Erra Cinema
European art cinema
Film gris
Free Cinema
French New Wave
German Expressionist
German underground horror
Nigerian Golden Age
Grupo Cine Liberación
Heimatfilm
Hollywood on the Tiber
Hong Kong New Wave
Iranian New Wave
Italian futurist
Italian neorealist
Japanese New Wave
Kammerspielfilm
L.A. Rebellion
Lettrist
Modernist film
Mumblecore
Neorealist
New French Extremity
New German
New Generation
New Hollywood
New Nollywood
New Queer
No wave
Nuevo Cine Mexicano
Pan-Indian film
Parallel cinema
Persian Film
Poetic realist
Polish Film School
Poliziotteschi
Praška filmska škola
Prussian film
Pure Film Movement
Remodernist
Romanian New Wave
Slow cinema
Spaghetti Western
Socialist realist
Social realist
Kitchen sink realism
Soviet Parallel
Structural
Surrealist
Sword-and-sandal
Telefoni Bianchi
Third Cinema
Toronto New Wave
Vulgar auteurism
Yugoslav Black Wave
By demographic
Adult
Black
Children and family
Anime
Men
Seinen
Stag
Teen
Shōnen
Shōjo
Women
Chick flick
Josei
By format, technique, approach, or production
3D
Actuality
Animation
Anime
Art
Cartoon
Computer
Stop-motion
Traditional
Anthology
Art
B movie
Black-and-white
Blockbuster
Cinéma vérité
Classical Hollywood cinema
Collage
Color
Compilation
Composite
Computer screen
Cult
midnight movie
Database cinema
Docufiction
Ethnofiction
Experimental
Abstract
Feature
Featurette
Film à clef
Film-poem
Found footage
Grindhouse
Hyperlink cinema
Independent
Guerrilla filmmaking
Interstitial art
Live action
animation
Low-budget
Major studio
Making-of
Masala
Maximalist film
Message picture
Meta-film
Minimalist film
Mockbuster
Modernist film
Musical short
Mythopoeia
Neorealist
No-budget
One-shot
Paracinema
Participatory
Poetry
Postmodernist
Reverse motion
Satire
Sceneggiata
Semidocumentary
Serial
Shinpa
Short
Silent
Slow cinema
Socialist realist
Sound
Underground
Video nasty
Vulgar auteurism
Z movie
 Film portal
vteLists of music genres and stylesGeneral lists
Music genres and styles
A–F
G–M
N–R
S–Z
Microgenres
Uses accordion
Genres
Classical and art music traditions
Electronic
Ambient
Breakbeat
EDM
Hardstyle
House
Industrial
Techno
Trance
Jazz
Popular
Country
Hip hop
Reggae
Rock
Heavy metal
Punk rock
Hardcore punk
Themes and movements
Martial
Progressive
Psychedelic
Cultural and regional genres
Caribbean
Folk traditions
American
Central
North
South
Asian
Caribbean
European
Middle Eastern and North African
Oceanic and Australian
Sub-Saharan African
Gamelan






