
Title:
List of fictional countries
Text:
Wikimedia list article


.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources.
This is a list of fictional countries from published works of fiction (books, films, television series, games, etc.).  Fictional works describe all the countries in the following list as located somewhere on the surface of the Earth as we know it – as opposed to underground, inside the planet, on another world, or during a different "age" of the planet with a different physical geography.


Contents
             
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z 
           


A[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Absurdistan



Numerous

Absurdistan is a term sometimes used to satirically describe a country in which absurdity is the norm. See Absurdistan (disambiguation).


Abuddin



Tyrant

A Middle Eastern parliamentary republic which is in fact a totalitarian dictatorship struggling to free itself.


Aburĩria, Free Republic of



Wizard of the Crow

An African country ruled by a totalitarian dictator known only as the "Ruler" in the novel by Kenyan author, Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o.[1]


Adjikistan



SOCOM U.S. Navy SEALs: Fireteam Bravo 2

Central Asian country, located between Afghanistan and Pakistan and devastated by a civil war. Post-Soviet Republic


Achu, Atchoo, Kingdom of



Miraculous: Tales of Ladybug and Cat Noir

A fictional monarchic country where its whereabouts are unknown, but based on the complexion of its inhabitants, it could possibly be in The Middle East/Horn of Africa. Not much of it is known outside of "Princess Fragrance". Its climate is mainly tropical and the only known person of the monarchy is Prince Ali.


Al Quolanudar



What We Do in the Shadows

A kingdom formerly ruled by the vampire Nandor the Relentless. Located in southern Iran where he was born, it was dissolved in 1401, although Nandor did not learn of this fact until 2019, prompting an unsuccessful attempt to become an American citizen.


Aldorria



Scorpion

A South American nation of Spanish-speaking people engaged in a long term border war.


Aldovia



A Christmas Prince

A monarchical European nation ruled by the family of the movie's titular character.


Alvonia



My Pal, the King

A small European kingdom ruled by a child king.


Almaigne



The Alteration

During the state funeral of the late King Stephen III of England, a brother of the Emperor of Almaigne is mentioned as being in attendance. Almaigne is a unified German nation-state, however, its national boundaries do not match those of the real-life Germany.


Altis and Stratis, Republic of



ARMA 3

A Mediterranean island nation located to the south of Italy and formerly a territory of the British Empire; its geography (and culture) are based on the Greek islands of Lemnos and Agios Efstratios. By the events of the game's timeline in the 2030s, the country has been ravaged by a brutal civil war and is being led by a military junta. Its capital is Pyrgos.


Ambrosia



Billy Liar

A presumably European country over which the protagonist rules in a quasi-military dictatorship.


Americas, Federation of the



Call of Duty: Ghosts

Fascistic superstate comprising Latin America, with militarily-occupied territories in North America stretching from Panama to South Texas and Southern California in the United States.


America, Pacific States of



The Man in the High Castle

A puppet state governed by the Empire of Japan, consisting of the West Coast of the United States along with Alaska and Hawaii. Its capital is Sacramento. In the television series, it is depicted as an occupied province called the Japanese Pacific States, also occupying parts of British Columbia.


America, People's Republic of



East of West

A nation formed by Mao Zedong and his followers fleeing China located in the Western United States. It is a dynastic state operating in name as a single party socialist state.


Amestris



Fullmetal Alchemist

A country ruled by a military dictatorship that used the powers of the Alchemists, in the story the country has many parallels with fascist regimes of Europe.


Anchuria, Republic of



Cabbages and Kings

American writer O. Henry coined "banana republic" to describe the Republic of Anchuria. Central American banana republic.


Anchuria, Republic of



Sunset

A fictional South American republic ruled by a military dictator and in the middle of a civil war.


Angosia, Kingdom of



Royal Hearts

A European kingdom. The Kingdom of Angosia and the Kingdom of Meravia were once united as the Kingdom of Ambrosia. The King at the time had twin sons and couldn't decide who would be king. So, he divided the Kingdom into two separate kingdoms. If there was ever a time with no male heir on the throne, the two kingdoms would be united again.


Angrezi Raj



The Peshawar Lancers

After 'The Fall' of 1878, a meteor shower which rendered the Northern Hemisphere inhospitable, millions of British refugees as well as the British Government relocated to the peripheries. By 2025, the Angrezi Raj has become the successor to the British Empire with its capital based in Delhi. It consists of the Indian subcontinent; Australasia; Southern Africa; colonial outposts in the British Isles, Northern Europe and North America; and protectorates over Madagascar and the Batavian Republic (a post-Fall Dutch state).


Annexia



Naked Lunch

European country, inspired by Soviet Russia.


Republic of Anura



The Janson Directive.

An island country in the Indian Ocean located 402,25 km east of Sri Lanka and former Dutch colony. A dhravidic language is spoken. An ethnic Muslim minority called Kagama is trying to secede with the Kagama Liberation Front. Inspired by Sri Lanka.


Arendelle, Kingdom of



Frozen (2013 film)

A monarchy in Scandinavia ruled by Queen Elsa, inspired by Norway.


Arstotzka



Papers, Please

A totalitarian, possibly communist nation that faces large-scale immigration at its border after a six-year war with neighboring Kolechia.


Arulco



Jagged Alliance 2

Governed by a Queen, but after a coup is transformed in a police state.


Arvee



Lucky Loser

A small Southeast Asian state bordering Thailand in the 2006 Thai film. It has a fledgling national soccer team that is coached by Thai soccer player Pong after he is passed over as the coach of the Thai national team. Originally the country in this comedy was intended to be Thailand's real life neighbor Laos and involving its national team but Laotian diplomats saw the trailer and felt that the film's depiction of the team might be seen as offensive by Laotians and could trigger anti-Thai violence in Laos.[2] The film's release was delayed so it could re-edited and re-shot to replace Laos with the fictional country "Arvee". All prints of the original version of the film were burned at an event in the presence of the film's producers.[3][4]


Aslerfan



The Abominables

A poorly treated country between Turkey and Iran.


Atlantis



Timaeus, and Critias

A fictional island mentioned within an allegory on the hubris of nations in Plato's works Timaeus and Critias.[5] It represents the antagonist naval power that besieges "Ancient Athens", the pseudo-historic embodiment of Plato's ideal state.[6] Atlantis falling out of favor with the deities and submerging into the Atlantic Ocean. In many other works Atlantis has become an advanced prehistoric civilization in contemporary fiction, from comic books to films.[7]


Attica



United States Army

A fictional unstable country in the Middle East used for training exercises by the United States Army.


Attolia



The Thief (Turner novel)

Situated in the minor peninsula, sharing it with the countries of Sounis and Eddis, in the fictional world of the book series The Queen's Thief, by Megan Whalen Turner.


Auradon, United States of



Descendants

A peaceful country in the Southern Hemisphere inhabited by fairy-tale "good guys".


Aurelia



Ace Combat

A country on the southeastern South Osean continent in Strangereal. Despite being a small nation, Aurelia is very wealthy and developed. It contains the Gaiuss Tower, the tallest skyscraper on Earth. Its capital is Griswall.


Auroa Archipelago



Ghost Recon Breakpoint

An archipelago-based nation, owned by multimillionaire Jake Skell. Taken over by the "Wolves" and "Sentinel PMC".


Azmenistan



The Expendables 3, The Onion Movie

Post Soviet country, whose army is hired by the main antagonist in The Expendables 3.  Also involved in a conflict with their neighbor, Sloravia, who needs to listen to their women more in The Onion Movie.[8]


Axphain



Graustark

Neighbor of Graustark in several novels.


Azakstan[9]



Spooks

A fictional country in series 9 episode 3 of the series Spooks. MI5 is forced to work with FSB Officer to track down Aibek, a rogue nationalist from the ex-Soviet state of Azakstan.



B[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Babar's Kingdom



Babar the Elephant series

A country, supposedly in Northern Africa, inhabited by intelligent elephants that are usually bipedal and civilized.


Bacteria



The Great Dictator

A satire of Fascist Italy, the country is ruled by 'Il Diggedy' Benzino Napaloni, a satire of Benito Mussolini.


Bahari



Scorpion

A North African country that at one time was occupied by the Third Reich; circa early 2016, they uncovered a prototype "Sun Gun".


Bahavia



Cory In The House

A country from the Disney Channel show Cory In The House.


Bakalakistan



Rucka Rucka Ali

Joke country made by satirist Rucka Rucka Ali.[10]


Baltish



Baltish

Country from a Lithuanian TV show of the same name.


Bandara



Abdullah the Great

Fictional version of King Farouk's Egypt.


Bandiaterra



Geography Now

A Danish-speaking archipelago nation with Bantu influences, located in the Indian Ocean. Created by YouTube channel Geography Now as an April Fool's Day prank.


Bandrika



The Lady Vanishes

A Western European country based on Nazi Germany.


Bangalla/Bengalla



The Phantom

A central African nation (located in Asia in the 1996 film of the same name).


Bangistan



Bangistan

Country featured in the Bollywood film by the same name.


Banoi Archipelago



Dead Island

An archipelago devastated by crime, poverty and a kuru epidemic. Despite this is home to magnificent resort. The capital is Moretsby. Its local forces are being trained by Australian Defence Force and SAS-R.


Baracas



CSI: Miami

Pro-American South American country which supports the torture teams of the U.S. force in the region.


Barama



The Beasts of Clawstone Castle

A beautiful country made rich by oil reserves.


Barou Island



Neo Ranga

Tiny island kingdom near Indonesia in the 1998 comic anime, protected by an enormous statue of its god.


Bartovia



The Simpsons

Appearing in "The Italian Bob", Bartovia is an Eastern European country shaped like Bart Simpson's face. When Sideshow Bob decided to leave Springfield after trying unsuccessfully to kill Bart, he chose a destination at random by spinning a globe but got undesirable locations including Bartovia, North Korea and Florida.


Basenji



I Dream of Jeannie

A Middle Eastern country of which Jeannie's great-uncle Suleiman was Maharaja until his abdication. It is the sworn enemy of the bordering country Qasha.


Bashkortostan



Largo Winch 2

Post-Soviet Republic, with access to the Black Sea. Not to be confused with the real Bashkortostan, which is a federal subject of Russia.


Basran



Roy of the Rovers

Middle Eastern country where 8 members of the Melchester Rovers were killed by terrorists.


Bekkastan



Relic Hunter

Central Asian country that resembles Afghanistan.


Belavia (Велавия)



The Prince and Me 3: A Royal Honeymoon

Denmark's dependent Slavic country somewhere in the Balkans or Eastern Europe.


Belgravia



NCIS

European country with a monarchy. The episode "Defiance" involves the Defence Minister and his daughter.


Belka



Ace Combat

A country on the northeastern Osean continent in Strangereal. Known for its advanced technology, it was a federation at the time of the Belkan War, but was reduced to a principality following the Belkan War. Many Belkans seek vengeance against other world powers for fighting them in the Belkan War; this vengeance is usually done by pitting world powers against each other. Its capital is Dinsmark.


Beninia



Stand on Zanzibar

African nation that aspires to become a first world country.


Bernai Island



Watch Dogs

A micro-nation located in a lake between Chicago and Pawnee in the State of Illinois. Its sovereignty comes from a legal loophole, however isn't recognized by any entity, even at local level. Is designated as a constitutional monarchy and has imposed trade sanctions to North Korea.


Berzerkistan



Doonesbury

Located between Iran and Russia.[11] Its capital is either called Bmzklfrpz City[11] or Trff City.[12]


Besźel



The City & the City

City state in Eastern Europe, occupying the same geographical space as the rival city of Ul Qoma


Bialya



DC Comics

A Persian Gulf country in the DC Comics Universe.


Blefuscu



Gulliver's Travels

A land where all the people are tiny from the book by Jonathan Swift.


Bolumbia



The Shadow of a Titan

A South American dictatorship, from Felix Wedgwood's novel.[13]


Boñigolandia



Mort & Phil

African country that aims to enter a nationally sponsored team into the Formula One World Championship.


Borduria



The Adventures of Tintin

A totalitarian state from the comics series, located in the Balkans.


Borostyria



Arsène Lupin, Gentleman Burglar

A Balkan principality modeled on Montenegro.[14]


Borginia



Ace Attorney

A Northern European republic that is stated to be very small in size, and is best known in the series for being home to the world-famous singer Lamiroir.


Bouazizi Empire



American War

Empire made up of a multitude of failed Middle Eastern and North African states in the late 21st century; influences the Second American Civil War by trying to prolong it


Bowser's Kingdom



Super Mario

An absolute monarchy ruled by Bowser, King of the Koopas.


Bozatta



Scorpion

A nation in Sub-Saharan Africa, where poachers are a threat to wildlife conservation.


Braganza, Dominion of



The Peshawar Lancers

A shadowy post-Fall nation based around Rio de Janeiro ruled by a caudillo of the month.


British States of America



Sliders

In the episode Prince of Wails, set in a reality where the American Revolution was suppressed, the BSA is a heavily taxed and dictatorially-run section of the British Empire (albeit due to the ambitions of the Sheriff of San Francisco).


Brobdingnag



Gulliver's Travels

A land occupied by giants from the book by Jonathan Swift.


Brungaria



Tom Swift, Jr.

An Eastern European dictatorship similar to the Soviet Union, in the Tom Swift, Jr. series.


Bruzundanga



Os Bruzundangas

An ignorant, corrupt and impoverished country satirizing Brazil.


Buchistan



I Dream of Jeannie

A Middle Eastern country where Jeannie lived before she became trapped in her bottle for 2,000 years.


Bufferia



Marionettes

Eastern European anti-Bolshevik monarchy from the 1933 Soviet comedy.


Bultan



Designated Survivor

A Southeast Asian country with a harsh legal system governed by a Prime Minister.


Buenaventura



Air America

A small Latin American nation which served as the setting for the TV series.


Buranda



Yes Minister

A developing African country, formerly known as British Equatorial Africa.

C[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Cagliostro



The Castle of Cagliostro

A tiny, mountainous European duchy in the Lupin III film.


Calbia



The King Maker

A tiny Balkan republic in the Doc Savage adventure.


Caledonia[15]



Scandal

A European monarchy featured in the season 5 premiere episode which bears strong similarities to the United Kingdom.


Cambrai



Guiding Light

War torn European country on the long-running U.S. soap opera.


Carbombya, Socialist Democratic Federated Republic of



Transformers

An oil-rich coastal desert kingdom in North Africa ruled by Abdul Fakkadi, intended to be a thinly-veiled jab at 1980's Libya under Muammar Gaddafi.


Carjackistan



Tank McNamara

Backward country in the sports-themed comic strip.


Carovia



Trouble for Two

A country in Europe.


Carpania



The Great Race

Setting for the great pie fight and the film's spoof of Prisoner of Zenda.


Carpathia



The Sleeping Prince

Balkan kingdom in the play by Terence Rattigan and the subsequent film The Prince and the Showgirl.


Carphatian Republic



Tom Clancy's Net Force : The Great Race

A Balkan authoritarian and militaristic country under an embargo. Its political ideologies are a mix between Nazism, communism, and racism. It uses the Cyrillic alphabet.


Cascadia



Mirror's Edge Catalyst

Corporocratic country, located in South-East Australia. Border the countries of OmniStat and Sabaeus.


Central Usea, Federation of



Ace Combat

A large country located on the Usean continent in Strangereal. Despite apparently being a major country, the location and capital of Central Usea is never shown, though the Skully Islands are part of it. It was the first country depicted in the Ace Combat series, being the setting of Air Combat.


Chernarus



Arma 2 and DayZ

A former Soviet state in Eastern Europe. Located on the coast of the fictional Green Sea, Chernarus shares its northern border with Russia. Its capital is Novigrad. The country's native population, language and much of its geography are modelled respectively after the Czech Republic; however, Chernarus also has a sizeable ethnic-Russian population, especially in the northern border regions. One such region in the north east, called South Zagoria, is the primary focus of game's campaign. An expanded, post-apocalyptic depiction of Chernarus is the setting for the DayZ standalone game.


Chinese Federation



Code Geass

A monarchy comprising the entirety of East (except Japan), South, and Central Asia. Its capital is located in Luoyang, and is controlled by an emperor (who serves more as a symbolic head of state) and a council of eight eunuchs.


Chula, Republic of



Mort & Phil

Parody of Chile. South American country ruled by dictator Antofagasto Panocho (a parody of Augusto Pinochet), whom Mort and Phil are sent to kill.


Cobra Island



G.I. Joe

The terrorist organization Cobra Command caused the formation of the island in the Gulf of Mexico, claimed the island and declared sovereignty. They used it as a base and as a front that gave Cobra agents around the world diplomatic immunity.


Commonwealth of American States (CAS)



The Hammer of God

The CAS is located in the territory of what was once the United States. Its capital is located in Washington, its legislature is called the General Assembly, whose members are referred to as senators, and West America is one of its constituent regions.[16][17]


Congaree Socialist Republic



Southern Victory

One of a few African-American Communist states established during the Red Rebellion (1915-1916) during the First Great War (an analogue of the First World War in a reality where the Confederacy became independent).


Country of the Blind



"The Country of the Blind"

A country where all the population are blind, situated in a hidden valley near Ecuador, from a short story by H. G. Wells.


Coalition States



Rifts

A fascist empire founded upon the post-apocalyptic ruins of the American Midwest.[18]


Concordia



Romanoff and Juliet

Unstable European country, where every day is Independence Day. Is considered a joke by the United Nations.


Cobrastan



Papers, Please

Cobrastan is a fake country likely made up by Jorji Costava, in his fake passport, presented on day 4. According to the passport, Cobrastan has at least one city, Bestburg, which Jorji also likely made up.


Confederate States



Numerous

Numerous works of alternate history detail the workings of the Confederate States as an independent regime after defeating the U.S. in the American Civil War. Such works include Bring the Jubilee, the Southern Victory Series, East of West, C.S.A.: The Confederate States of America, and The Guns of the South.


Cordinia



A Royal Christmas

A small sovereign country – kingdom – from a 2014 American holiday romance television film called Cordinia, which is loosely based on Monaco (but amalgamates the place names, Corsica and Sardinia).


Corona



Tangled

Small European kingdom with German and Polish influences.


Cortina, Republic of



United States Army

An unstable U.S. ally located on the Island of Aragon, used for training exercises by the United States Army.


Corto Maltese



DC Comics

A small island nation off the coast of South America. In The Dark Knight Returns, Corto Maltese was the location of the Corto Maltese Revolution and a military standoff between the United States, the Soviet Union, and Superman which resulted in a Soviet nuclear EMP attack on the United States. In Batman, photojournalist Vicki Vale's photos of the revolution were featured in Time Magazine.


Socialist Democratic Republic of Corteguay



Tom Clancy's Net Force: The Ultimate Escape

A South American country located in an island in the Pacific Ocean. Totalitarian state. Capital city is named "Adello". Obtained independence in 2005.


Cortuguay



The Adventurers

Civil war ravaged Latin American country, based on the Harold Robbins novel of the same name.


Costaguana



Nostromo

South American country under a dictatorship. Based on pre-Castro Cuba.


Costa Luna



Princess Protection Program

A small island kingdom where Rosie Gonzales comes from.


Costa Gravas



 Chuck

A Latin American Communist country that eventually became democratic after an unsuccessful coup d'état. Its name is a reference to film director Costa-Gavras.


Crashbania



The Bad Barons of Crashbaniaand other books byNorman Hunter




Czervenia



America's Army 3

Eastern European country, in war with the United States. The language is based on Spanish, Slovenian and Czech.[19]

D[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Danu



The Redundancy of Courage

Based on East Timor, the setting of the novel by Timothy Mo.


Dahomalia



Stand on Zanzibar

African nation created by merging of Dahomey, Upper Volta and Mali.


Darrar, Federal Republic of



Borderlines

African nation in the Horn of Africa based on Ethiopia in the legal thriller novel, Borderlines by Michela Wrong.[20][21]


North Darrar



Borderlines

African nation in the Horn of Africa-based on Eritrea in the legal thriller novel, Borderlines by Michela Wrong. The capital city is called Lira. North Darrar neighbours the Federal Republic of Darrar and has fought a war against it over a border dispute based on the Eritrean–Ethiopian War.[20][21]


Datlof



The Yogscast

Nation created originally by Lewis Brindley in a game of Civilization V, the nation was later published in the Yogscast's book, described as a communist dystopia with a pig-centered culture and economy.


Dawsbergen



Novels by George Barr McCutcheon

Country in Eastern Europe mentioned in several novels by author George Barr McCutcheon.


Deltora



Deltora Quest

Land created by Emily Rodda, divided into 7 tribes and lands and ruled over by the southern state of Del.


Democratic Republic of Dahum



James Bond novel Solo

Western African breakaway state, in a war with Zanzarim.


Diamantara, Republica de



Michiko e Hatchin

South American nation inspired by Brazil.


Dictionopolis



The Phantom Tollbooth

One of two capital cities of the divided Kingdom of Wisdom in the book by Norton Juster, and home to King Azaz the Unabridged.


Digitopolis



The Phantom Tollbooth

One of two capital cities of the divided Kingdom of Wisdom in the book by Norton Juster, and home to the Mathemagician, brother of King Azaz.


Dinotopia



Dinotopia

A hidden, utopian island from James Gurney's illustrated books and featured in several other related works.


Djebana



Superlópez

Arabic country ruled by the Bey of Djebana, which Superlópez visits to investigate incidents related to nuclear radiation, and later to inquire about the Bey's connections with a Mafia family.


Draka, The Domination of



The Domination

Originating from the Crown Colony of Drakia (the Cape Colony having been transferred from the Netherlands to Great Britain after the American Revolutionary War) which had been settled by Boers, American Loyalists, Hessian mercenaries, French royalists and former Confederates, the Domination became an expansionist slavocratic empire.


Drusselstein



Phineas and Ferb

An Eastern European country that is the birthplace of Dr. Heinz Doofenshmirtz.


Druznia



Regular Show (International version only)

Anti-American country in Europe. Based on Russia.


Durhan



Archer

A kingdom that is the birthplace of the Prince of Durhan.


Derkaderkastan



Team America: World Police

An Islamic republic overrun by terrorists. The team fails to stop their attack on the Panama Canal and their aircraft get shot down trying to invade the country.


Dreamland



Disenchantment



E[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Eastasia



Nineteen Eighty-Four

A totalitarian dictatorship encompassing much of Asia. It follows an ideology described as "Death-worship", and is the smallest and youngest of the three super-states in George Orwell's novel.


East Hun Chiu



Designated Survivor

A totalitarian country in East Asia located on the fictional Hun Chiu Peninsula off the coast of China. Ruled by Chairman Kyung Kim, is in constant rivalry with its democratic neighbour West Hun Chiu. Its capital city is Lu'Tan. It bears similarities to the real life nation of North Korea.


Ecotopia



Ecotopia

An ecological utopia appearing in the novels Ecotopia and Ecotopia Emerging by Ernest Callenbach.


Eddis



The Thief (Turner novel)

Situated in the minor peninsula, sharing it with the countries of Sounis and Attolia, in the fictional world of the book series The Queen's Thief, by Megan Whalen Turner.


Edonia



Resident Evil 6

East European-themed country featured in Resident Evil 6 embroiled in a civil war.


Elbonia



Dilbert

A fourth-world post-communist Eastern European country, whose economy is based on mud.


El Ohtar



Protocol

Middle Eastern nation. Its name is 'Rathole' spelled backwards.


Elfia



Elfia (festival)

Elfia is a realm that is only visible and accessible to humans once in a while. ‘Gateways’ appear as a way for us humans to enter this in-between area and come into contact with other Elfian citizens.


Eldia



Attack on Titan

In the past Eldia was an empire that controlled much of the world for centuries thanks to the power of the giants known as the Titans. It disappeared when the nine houses of the families that controlled the empire went into civil war. After this the last remnant of the Eldian empire takes refuge on Paradis Island and become a hermit kingdom. Its population lives surrounded by three walls to protect themselves from the Titans.


Emmeria



Ace Combat

A country encompassing most of the central and western Anean continent in Strangereal. It was once a group of small warring states until King Aurelius II ended their conflicts in the 1400s. It is said to have one of the most effective and capable militaries in the world. Its capital is Gracemeria.


Empire Of Negon



Neko[disambiguation needed]

A country in the Far East that is made up of several Nekonian Tribes. The country was formed by First Emperor Neko in 500 BC. The country consists of three states, Koneko the capital, Rissche and Naon.


Enclave



Fallout

The remnants of the United States government after a nuclear war.


Endostan



Relic Hunter

Middle Eastern kingdom. The military attempt a coup d'état, while trying to recover the Star of Nadir.


The Environment



Nineteen Ninety-Four, Nineteen Ninety-Eight

A country defined by mass consumerism, unlimited credit, the pursuit of leisure, ‘lifestyle packages’ and recreational employment formerly known as the United Kingdom. It was created in the aftermath of 'The Difficulties' of the 1980s and governed by the Department of the Environment, a combined governmental and corporate entity which in 1994 was abolished in favour of mega-markets. In 1998, the Environment was annexed by the AmJap Corporation and converted into a power station, its citizens enslaved to generate electricity via treadmills.


Equatorial Kundu



The West Wing, The Newsroom, IZombie (TV series)

A West African republic.


Erewhon



Erewhon

A country satirizing aspects of Victorian society.


Erusea



Ace Combat

A large country encompassing much of the western coast of the Usean continent in Strangereal. It was a federal republic at the time of the Continental War, and was reverted to a monarchy in 2011, remaining as such eight years later during the Lighthouse War. Its capital is Farbanti.


Estoccia



Scarecrow and Mrs. King

The country where Joe King is based with the Emergency Aid Organisation.


Estovakia



Ace Combat

A country on the eastern coast of the Anean continent in Strangereal. A thriving nation in the 20th century, it declined rapidly after the Ulysses impact heavily damaged it but left neighboring Emmeria practically untouched. A military regime took power in a civil war in 2013.


Etchechuria



The Stolen March

Lost Pyrenean country lying between France and Spain where nursery rhyme characters come to life.


Eurasia



Nineteen Eighty-Four

A totalitarian Communist super-state from the George Orwell novel, consisting of Europe, except the British Isles, and Russia. It was created when the USSR annexed Europe. It follows a political ideology called "Neo-Bolshevism".

F[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Farfelu



The Kingdom of Farfel

A surrealistic place in the novel by André Malraux.[22]


Fe'ausi



Diplomatic Immunity

South Pacific island from the New Zealand television series.


Federated Commonwealths of America



A Different Flesh

In an alternate reality where Homo erectus populate the New World instead of Native Americans, the Federated Commonwealths is analogous with the United States. However, the former British colonies which formed the FCA broke away in 1738, the government of the FCA is based on the Roman Republic even more so (having two equally powerful chief executives called Censors and lifelong-serving Senators) and, due to the existence of 'sims', westward expansion began much sooner and human slavery was abolished by 1804.


Feldenberg



The Abominables

A beautiful Alpine country now famed for its well-beloved but useless Rescue Dogs.


Flausenthurm



The Smiling Lieutenant

Kingdom in Eastern Europe.


Florin



The Princess Bride

The setting of the 1973 fantasy romance novel and 1987 film.


Fook Island





An imagined island created by the South African artist Walter Battiss.


France-outre-mer



The Peshawar Lancers

After 'The Fall' of 1878, a meteor shower which rendered the Northern Hemisphere inhospitable, many European fled to the imperial peripheries of their respective empires. By 2025, France-outre-mer, with its capital based in Algiers, is beginning to recolonise Metropolitan France.


Franchia



Welcome to Night Vale

A country filled with nothing but natural arches and a monster that doesn't stop hunting. It is also known for not needing to learn another language to be able to talk to someone else.


Freedonia



Duck Soup

European country from the 1933 Marx Brothers film.


Freedonia



Despicable Me 3

Mediterranean European Anglophone country. Is shaped like a pig's head. The name was inspired by the 1933's film Duck Soup.

G[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Gafir



Instagram

A fictional nation situated at the cross roads of the Red Sea, littered with desert, once under British rule until the year 1950, was created as an April Fools' Day joke as Instagram's country of the day in 2018.


Garnia, Republic of



Black Jack

A small Eastern European republic, been through 25 years of civil war. A known city is San Mérida.


Genosha



Marvel Comics

An island nation that has been home to a mutant sanctuary and concentration camp at various points.


Genovia



The Princess Diaries

European principality from novels and film adaptations. Borders France and Spain.


Gérolstein



La Grande-Duchesse de Gérolstein

18th-century German principality in the opéra bouffe.


Gilead, Republic of



The Handmaid's Tale

A theocratic country occupying the territory of the former United States in the novel by Margaret Atwood and its associated adaptations.


Gindra



Metal Gear: Ghost Babel

A war-torn country in East Africa. Is mentioned to be landlocked and a former French colony.


Glovania



Gasoline Alley

Home country of the biological parents of the character Skeezix in the comic strip. Skeezix's father Col. Henri Coda was the ruling Grand Duke prior to a revolution. Glovania's capital and major seaport is Ragpo, located on the Mediterranean to the east of Italy.[23]


Glubbdubdrib



Gulliver's Travels

A small island nation (about one-third the size of the Isle of Wight) governed by a tribe of magicians; from the novel by Jonathan Swift.


Gondal





An imaginary world created by Emily Brontë and Anne Brontë.


Gondor



"The Lord of the Rings"

The greatest realm of Men, kingdom in the west of Middle-earth during the Third age.


Gondour



"The Curious Republic of Gondour"

An ideal republic imagined by Mark Twain in his short story.


Grinlandia



Novels by Alexander Grin

The name of the country is never mentioned by the author himself, and the name Grinlandia was suggested in 1934 by literary critic Korneliy Zelinsky.


Guilder



The Princess Bride

"The sworn enemy of Florin".


Grand Fenwick



The Mouse That Roared

A duchy in The Mouse That Roared (1955) and sequels by Leonard Wibberley.


Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere



Various Works

In some fictions based on a hypothetical Axis victory in World War II, alongside depictions of the Greater German Reich are mentions or equally detailed depictions of a farther-expanded Co-Prosperity Sphere, such as In The Presence of Mine Enemies (encompassing all of Oceania) or The Man in the High Castle (including the Pacific States of America and Western South America).


Graustark



Various Works

Eastern European country in several novels by George Barr McCutcheon.


Gramovian Federation



This War of Mine

Neighbour country of Graznavia. Sends peacekeepers to end the civil war in Graznavia. Called "Confederation of the North" in Romance languages like French or Brazilian Portughese.


Graznavia



This War of Mine

An Eastern European republic ravaged by civil war in This War of Mine, a video game by 11 bit studios.


Great Britain, Republic of



Doctor Who

In a parallel universe visited by the Third Doctor in Inferno, Great Britain is a republic with a fascist government. In the later episodes Rise of the Cybermen and The Age of Steel, a different Republic of Great Britain is depicted as a democratic and more technologically advanced nation, the origin place of a new race of Cybermen.


Grenyarnia



30 Rock

"A country only known by the richest people on earth," from NBC's 30 Rock.


Groland



Canal+

Country featured in various humorous programs on French television channel Canal+.


Gruzinia



The Caucasian Chalk Circle

The setting of Bertolt Brecht's play The Caucasian Chalk Circle, first performed in 1948. Though the extent of Gruzinia's sovereignty and international recognition is unclear, it is a heavily capitalist society ruled by autocratic monarch Georgi Abashvili. The country is likely inspired by Georgia. Alternative spellings include "Grusinia".

H[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Halla



Goopy Gyne Bagha Byne

A kingdom from the 1969 Satyajit Ray film.


Hallownest



Hollow Knight

A ruined, subterranean kingdom populated by intelligent insects in the 2017 video game Hollow Knight.


Hatch Islands



Michael Vey: Storm of Lightning

Formerly the country of Tuvalu, the country was renamed after the series antagonist following a coup against the prime minister and subsequently used as the temporary headquarters of Elgen Inc, a company that builds and operates power plants powered by genetically modified rats.


Hav



Last Letters from Hav

An independent country in the Eastern Mediterranean, described in an epistolary novel by Jan Morris.


Herland



Herland

A nation populated entirely by women who gained the ability to reproduce asexually following a volcanic eruption two-thousand years prior which both swiped out the nation's men and isolated it from the outside world. With the name 'Herland' being attributed to the country by an all-male expedition party, they chose to conceal its exact location to prevent further intrusions.


Hidalgo



Doc Savage: The Man of Bronze

South American country, not to be confused with a similarly named state of Mexico.


Holy Alliance



The Two Georges

A dynastic union between France and Spain whose overseas empire includes most of Latin America (territories named include Nueva España and New Granada) and North Africa. The Holy Alliance is one of the British Empire's greatest rivals.


Holy Britannian Empire



Code Geass

A nation born from the defeated remnants of the British Empire that is the world's dominant military superpower. It occupies the entirety of the Americas and much of Eurasia, including Japan.


Horizon Islands



ARMA 3

A Francophone federative state comprising an archipelago located in the Pacific Ocean, between Vanuatu and Fiji. Its capital is La Roche. The Federation is split into four Divisions; the Northern Division, sometimes synonymous with its largest province, Tanoa, is the setting for ARMA 3's "Apex" expansion.

I[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Idris



The Shadowhunter Chronicles, Shadowhunters

The Shadowhunter home country.


Illéa



The Selection

North American state comprising the former territories of the entire continent, composed of 35 states. Formed after the events of a Chinese-American war. Its capital is located in California.


Illyria



Dirty Hands

An Eastern European country that surrounds the plot of Les Mains Sales.


Impor



Papers, Please

Impor is a coastal country to the southwest of Arstotzka. It is bordered by Kolechia to the east, Republia to the north, the United Federation to the west, and is one of the four countries that do not border Arstotzka directly.


Indocarr



Mile 22

Southeast Asian country, based on Indonesia.


Irania



Trouble for Two

A country in Europe.


Ishtar



Ishtar

Middle Eastern country with a low intensity war.


Islandia



Islandia

Self-isolated country in Austin Tappan Wright's novel of the same name.


Isla Island



American Dad!

Dictatorial Caribbean island featured in the episode "Moon Over Isla Island".


Isla Trueno



Sniper: Ghost Warrior

Latin American country, whose democratic government was overthrown in a coup.


Islamic States of America



Prayers for the Assassin

The Islamic half of the United States after much of the country's populace undergoes mass conversions to Islam.


Isle of Fogg



San Sombrèro

The only one of the 23 (fictional) Outcropp Islands off the west coast of Scotland to be inhabited, mentioned in a parody travel guidebook.


Isthmus Republic



Licence to Kill

A Central American country, based on Panama. Hideout of Franz Sanchez.

J[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Jark Empire



Zettai Muteki Raijin-Oh


Jalil Empire



Съдби на кръстопът (Sadbi na krastopat)

A fictional empire established in Namibia by the titan Jalil. Within a few days, it manages to conquer half the world, and dies a month later after the defeat of Jalil.

K[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Kadir



Jewel of the Nile

A North African country, ruled by a dictator dealing with an insurgency. Based on Libya.


Kahndaq



DC Comics

An ancient Middle-Eastern country in located on the Sinai Peninsula, between Egypt, Israel and Jordan.


Kallipolis



Republic




Kamaria



Australian Army

A fictional country used for military training purposes.  Appears on maps as an upside-down Tasmania.


Kambezi



MacGyver

Southern African country, located near Zimbabwe. It is home of a huge population of black rhinos which is approaching extinction due to poachers. It is also a military dictatorship and relies heavily on dagga exports.


Kambezi



Blindspot

Central African nation in war with its neighbour for the control of a pipeline.


Kamistan, Islamic Republic of



24

A Middle Eastern Islamic republic reminiscent of Iran.


Kangan



Anthills of the Savannah

A West African country ruled by the dictator Sam in the novel by Chinua Achebe.


Karifistan



Ernest in the Army

Middle Eastern country.


Karistan



Legend of the white horse

Central European country, based on Poland.


Karzhegistan



ARMA 2: Operation Arrowhead

Central Asian country.


Kasnia



DC Comics

War-torn Eastern European monarchy.


Kastovia



Call of Duty: Modern Warfare (2019)

A client-state of Russia and former Soviet republic, located where South Ossetia should be. It was inspired by Donetsk People's Republic. The capital city is Verdansk. Later invaded by Al-Qatala terrorist group.


Kaukistan



24

Country that was a state in the Soviet Union. After 1991, was annexed by the Russian Federation. A terrorist group called New Dawn try to restore the country's independence.


Kazirstan



Beyond Two Souls

Country with a rift with its neighbour.


Kazahrus



Blindspot

Russian-speaking absolute monarchy known for human rights violations. The former king raped an embassy employee, who later gave birth to an heir. Is also stated to be an ally of the United States, which have a military base in the country.


Kashfar



Scandal

A Middle Eastern country mentioned in the episode "Whiskey Tango Foxtrot". Four US Army soldiers stationed there are taken hostage, causing President Fitzgerald Grant to send in a SEAL team to rescue them.


Kenyopia



Totally Spies!

African country,


Kekistan



Meme culture

A country that acts as a refuge for internet trolls, shitposters, and other types of people that according to them are "opressed" by political correctness and normie culture. According to internet users is led by President Big Man Tyrone.


Kerplankistan



Big Time Rush

The country where Big Time Rush got their first number one record. As seen in the episode "Big Time Wedding", it is shown to have a monarchy.


Khemed



The Adventures of Tintin

An Arabic emirate from the comic.


Khura'in



Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney − Spirit of Justice

An absolute monarchy located on the western edge of the Far East.


Kijuju



Resident Evil 5

Central African country, devastated by an epidemic.


Kinakuta



Cryptonomicon

An island state from Neal Stephenson's novels.


Kingdom of Wisdom



The Phantom Tollbooth

From the children's fantasy book by Norton Juster.


Kingdom of Loathing



Kingdom of Loathing

A small island nation ruled by King Ralph XI. Most of the game takes place here.


Klopstokia



Million Dollar Legs

A small bankrupt country which enters the 1932 Olympic Games to earn funds for its treasury.


Kolechia



Papers, Please

Kolechia is a neighbouring country west of Arstotzka. After the Six-Year War with Arstotzka, entrants from and via Kolechia are finally able to enter Arstotzka through the border town Grestin, although entrants from Kolechia are occasionally harassed by the Ministry of Admission and the Arstotzkan government due to the terrorist threat they pose.


Koratvia



SOCUM U.S. Navy SEALs: Fireteam Bravo 3

Eastern European country which act as the game's setting.


Krakozhia



The Terminal

A Slavic Eastern European country from the 2004 film. During the events of the film, civil war breaks out and is resolved in 9 months.


Krasnovia, Democratic People's Republic of



U.S. Army training exercises[24]

Enemy state to the US, standing in for the Soviet Union. After the Cold War, it was replaced by the breakaways republics like Donovia, Gorgas, Minaria, Atropia and Ariana.


Krastava



The Mourner

Small Central European country, located between Czechoslovakia and Poland.


Krpshtskani



Science Fair

A very poor country ruled by Grdankl the strong about the size of Luxembourg with only one car.


Kubanacan



Kubanacan

A small Caribbean island country.


Kulagong



Paper Tiger

South East Asian country dealing with an insurgency and inspired by Malaysia.


Kumranistan



Yes, Prime Minister

A Central Asian Islamic republic from the 2013 remake of Yes, Prime Minister, formerly part of the British Empire and a Soviet Socialist Republic; this country is a variation of Qumran (a fictional oil-rich sheikdom located in the Persian Gulf) which featured in the original series of Yes Minister and Yes, Prime Minister.


Kumbolaland



Good Omens

An African nation which is devastated after War (one of the Horsemen of the Apolcalypse) instigates an all-out civil war. It had known three thousand years of peace and had formerly been the colony of Sir-Humphrey-Clarksonland.


Kumsa



Far Cry 4

Country that border the west of Kyrat, which can be seen in some maps.


Kunami



Designated Survivor

An Emirate and Middle Eastern nation in the Persian Gulf. It shares land borders with Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, and maritime borders with Qatar, Bahrain and Iran. A unitary parliamentary monarchy, it is ruled by Emir Farhad Abbasi. Its capital city is Raza'a, and the minority state religion is Shia Islam.


Kundu, Republic of Equatorial



The West Wing

An African nation mentioned in several episodes of The West Wing.


Kurjikistan



Criminal Minds: Beyond Borders

A war-torn Arab-speaking Middle Eastern country. Appear on the episode 9 "Blowback" of the 2nd season. Based on Iraq and Afghanistan.


Kyrat



Far Cry 4

An East Asian nation in the Himalayas, roughly equivalent to Nepal. Is a landlocked country and border India and other three fictional countries: Papir Republic, Yinke and Kumsa. When the game starts is ruled by a ruthless dictator called Pagan Min and a civil war between the country's armed forces and an insurgent group called "The Golden Path", and by the end of the game, the protagonist Ajay Ghale becomes the leader of the country.


Kyria



The Vagabond

North African kingdom shown in the South Korean TV serie.


Kumar



Sniper Ghost Warrior Contracts 2

Middle Eastern wartorn country between Syria and Lebanon.

L[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Latveria



Marvel Comics

An isolated European kingdom ruled by the tyrannical Doctor Doom.


Lasria



Dark Sector

Eastern European country and Soviet Union's satellite country.


Lovitzna



Biggles Goes to War

A presumably Slavic monarchy situated in Europe. In the book Biggles Goes to War, Biggles aids a neighbouring country, Maltovia, against Lovitzna in a war.


Laurania



Savrola

A European country located on the Mediterranean torn by civil strife.


Leasath



Ace Combat

A country on the northeastern South Osean continent in Strangereal. A small but militarized state, Leasath's government became a fascistic dictatorship after a destructive civil war in the 2010s. Its capital is Alendal.


Leutonia



SCTV

Homeland of The Shmenge Brothers, Yosh and Stan, played respectively by John Candy and Eugene Levy.


Lichtenburg



Saved by the Bell

Season 3 episode "Palm Springs Weekend." An Eastern European monarchy.


Lichtenburg



The Son of Monte Cristo

An Eastern European kingdom ruled by General Gurko Lanen.


Lichtenslava



The Simpsons comics

An Eastern European country. Governed by Generalissimo Monsanto.


Lilliput



Gulliver's Travels

A land where all the people are tiny from the book by Jonathan Swift.


Liechtenhaus



Piccolo grande amore

Small Western European principality.


Livonia



ARMA 3: Contact

A Polish-speaking country that is a member of NATO and borders four other countries, Poland, Russia through Kaliningrad, Lithuania, and Belarus.[25][26]


Limberwisk



Geography Now!

An arctic nation located in the Norwegian Sea between Norway and Greenland. It was created by YouTube channel Geography Now as a 2018 April Fools' Day joke.


Loompa Land



Charlie and the Chocolate Factory

A Jungle Nation home to the Oompa Loompas, A human-like species that highly worship Cocoa Beans in the book by Roald Dahl.


Luftnarp



Welcome to Night Vale

An alpine country where the people are all somewhat disfigured and speak in guttural rattles.


Luxenstein



 Bratz

It is another fictional country located in Europe in the series.


Lugash



The Pink Panther

A South Asian country whose greatest national treasure is the Pink Panther diamond. Was ruled by a Maharajah until a revolution which forced the royal family to flee to Italy.


Lower Slobbovia



Li'l Abner

An occasional exotic setting for the classic hillbilly comic strip by Al Capp.


Lyonesse



The Stolen Lake

South American country, neighbour to New Cumbria.


Lyrobia



Totally Spies!

African country.


Leirkrakeegovnia



Brooklyn Nine-Nine




Littenstein



Pokemon Talk



M[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Madripoor



Marvel Comics

An island nation located in Southeast Asia.


Mahishmathi / Magzhmathi



Baahubali (franchise)

A fictional country in ancient India


Malagawi



The Professional (1981 film)

An African dictatorship, led by Colonel Njala.


Maldonia



The Princess and the Frog

A fictional country named mixed with Maldives and Macedonia.


Malicuria



Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles

A monarchy run by Emperor Aleister from the episode "April's Fool" of 1987 animated TV series Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.[27]


Maltovia



Biggles Goes to War

A European nation. Intimidated by its neighbour, Lovitzna, with which it is at war.


Malynera



Patalliro!

Kingdom located in South Seas, a major producer of diamonds.


Mandorra



The Brigand

Kingdom in southwestern Europe.


Islamic Republic of Mansur



The Jason Directive

Breakaway state seceded from Yemen after a revolution led by a Shia mullah. Recognised by the United Nations. Is a poor country composed by parts of the Rub Al-Khali desert.


Marina Venetta



The Man from Acapulco

Republic from the French movie Le Magnifique (The Man from Acapulco).


Marivella Islands



Tales of the Gold Monkey

A South Pacific volcanic chain consisting of hundreds of mysterious and tropical islands featured in the 1982 adventure television series and now described as the Republic of the Marivelles.


Markovia



DC Comics

An independent Alpine nation in DC Comics, ruled by the superhero Geo-Force.


Marley



Attack on Titan

A Fascist Empire that controls a huge portion of the world. This was born after the fall of the ancient Eldian empire during the great Titan War. It is characterized by being extremely racist with the Eldians and having in their control the power of the Titans.


Marshovia



The Merry Widow

Kingdom in Eastern Europe.


Maru, Kingdom of



Elena of Avalor

A country where Avalor City is located.


Matobo



The Interpreter

A state in the sub-Saharan region of Africa.


Maurania



Hercule Poirot's The Kings of Club

Country where Prince Paul of Maurania came from.


Medici



Just Cause 3

An island country located in the Mediterranean, home country of the main character Rico Rodriguez. The country is a republic in name, but is ruled de facto by Generalissimo Sebastiano Di Ravello. Medici's provinces are often the home of numerous outposts and at least one major military base for its forces and militia.


Meeskatania



"Some Assembly Required"

The country where Mrs. Bubkes is from and Candance didn't realize is a place.


Mendorra



One Life to Live

A European monarchy on the long-running U.S. soap opera.


Merania, Kingdom of



Royal Hearts

The European Kingdom of Merania was once part of the Kingdom of Abrosia. The King at the time had twin sons and couldn't decide who would be king, so he divided the Kingdom into two separate kingdoms. If there was ever a time with no male heir on the throne, the two kingdoms would be united again.


Meropis



Philippica

A parody of Atlantis created by Theopompus of Chios.


Meruza



Aconcagua

Andean mountainous country, from the Japanese videogame. Under a military dictatorship.


Metrofulus



Cicak Man

A cold city-state in the Cicak-Man movies.


Middlelands (Kingdom of the Middlelands)



"Fictional country"


Milagua



Lou Grant

A dictatorship in Central America.


Moldavia



Dynasty

A European monarchy ruled by King Galen in the TV series Dynasty. At the end of the show's fifth season, rebels storm the palace during the wedding of Galen's son Prince Michael to Amanda Carrington, killing some guests and exiling the royal family.


Moldovakia



Recess

Country from the animated TV series.


Moloni Republic



Metal Gear Acid

Southern African country, where the game is set.


Molvanîa



Molvanîa: A Land Untouched by Modern Dentistry

Former Post-Soviet Republic from a parody guide


Mombaka



Red Scorpion

An African Marxist country, in the middle of a civil war, which involves Soviet, Cuban and Czechoslovakian soldiers. Based on Mozambique and Angola.


Monroe Republic



Revolution

Republic in the northern United States, from the TV show Revolution.


Montequinto



Fast and Furious 9

Central American country, which features tropical rainforest and instability.


Moronika



You Nazty Spy!

Country used in this, and a few subsequent The Three Stooges shorts, to satirize the Nazis and the Third Reich.


Mundania



The Beasts of Clawstone Castle

An Alpine country ruled by a neighbouring country.


Mypos



Perfect Strangers

Country that Balki Bartokomous came from.


Mikene Empire



Great Mazinger


Meeskatania



Some Assembly Required

Country that Mrs. Bubkes came from, At war with its neighbor Zeeskatania

N[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Nairomi



Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice

African country appearing in the DC Extended Universe.


Nambutu



Casino Royale

African nation with an embassy in Madagascar. Presumably a former French colony, given bilingual signage seen in the embassy.


Naruba



Designated Survivor

A Western African nation stated to be one of the poorest in the world. It is located in between Niger, Mali, Nigeria, Benin and Burkina Faso. The capital is the city of Soji.


The Nation of the American Endless



East of West

A Lakota nation located in the Great Plains. Founded as a confederacy of various Plains tribes. Currently at the forefront of technogical development, supplying arms and technology to the other American nations. Its government is located in the Machine City, and consists of a tribal council.


National Socialist America

 

The Man in the High Castle

The contiguous United States east of the Mississippi River headed by a pro-German puppet government after a German victory in World War II. In the television series, however, the German-occupied section of the U.S. is depicted as a mere province of Germany, not a puppet state, and includes parts of Canada (which remained a free, neutral, and democratic nation in the book).


Nerdocrumbesia



Match Game

"Sleazy" country from the TV game show.


Nevoruss



Breath of the Past, Russ we hadn't known about

A powerful state in the north of Russia and America created by Russian writer Grigoriy Demidovtsev.


New California Republic



Fallout, Fallout 2, and Fallout: New Vegas

A self-proclaimed republic located in what was once the U.S. states of California, Nevada, and Oregon, with territory in the Baja strip. Founded by Vault 15 survivors and surrounding powers in 2186. The benevolent republic supports many old-world values.


New Cumbria



The Stolen Lake

South American country ruled by Queen Ginevra, visited by Dido Twite on her return from Nantucket.


New England, Republic of



The Alteration

In an alternate reality where Henry VIII never became King and Martin Luther and Thomas More became Pope, Protestantism was limited to the breakaway republic. The secular head is the First Citizen (Joseph Rudyard Kipling is mentioned as First Citizen, serving from 1914 to 1918) and the head of the 'schismatic' church is the Archpresbytor of Arnoldstown. Also mentioned is New England's war against Louisiana and Mexico from 1848 to 1850 (with Edgar Allan Poe as a leading general), its technological and scientific advance over the Papal jurisdiction, its productions of banned Shakespeare plays and its practice of 'separateness' against Native Americans.


New Germany



Doctor Who

Mentioned by Pete Tyler in Rise of the Cybermen.


New German Republic



Rifts

A technologically advanced Post-apocalyptic society encompassing Central Europe that is governed by the Triax megacorporation in the Rifts role-playing game.[28]


New Orleans, The Kingdom of



East of West

An absolute monarchy founded by freed slaves after the alternate American Civil War. A major economic power in the region, as it owns many oil platforms in the Gulf of Mexico. Its capital is located in New Orleans, Louisiana.


Republic of New Macedonia



Elementary

The Republic of Macedonia agree to a name change in order to access the European Union and the Eurozone. In real life FYROM did change its name in 2019 but the name was North Macedonia.


New Rearendia



Cars 2

Former Scandinavian colony and now republic that gained its independence shortly before 2011. It exists on the alternative Earth inhabited by anthropomorphic vehicles.


New Spain, Republic of



Sliders

The most powerful country in North America in a parallel universe where the Spanish Empire never lost control of the New World to the British Empire featured in "As Time Goes By". Canadians frequently cross the border into New Spain to find jobs and escape persecution in their native country.


New Zanzibar



The Simpsons

While the Simpson visit Tanzania, the country is involved in a coup and change name to "New Zanzibar" before changing name again in "Pepsi present : New Zanzibar". The President of the country promote himself as benefactor and builder, even despite he obtained power by asphyxiation of his political opponents. He is later deposed and replaced by the Simpons's tour guide.


Nibia



Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls

Small Central African State, the setting of the movie.


Night Rise



Chronicles of the Brooks: The Sword of Time

Country with hidden entrance from Salerno, existing 432 BC and abandoned in 98 BC


Ninjago



Ninjago: Masters Of Spinjitzu

A large island shaped like one half of a Yin Yang, its capital being New Ninjago City. It has a very diverse set of biomes, each community perfectly fledged out and working in harmony. The only thing ruining the circle of harmony are the evil forces attempting to either destroy the land or to rule it.


Nogova



Operation Flashpoint: Resistance

An island nation located in Northern Europe; its capital is the small city of Ligny. Formerly run by a pro-Soviet government from the end of World War II to the mid-1970s, at which point growing dissent, and disinterest from Moscow, led to the country becoming a fully-fledged democracy. A Soviet-backed coup takes place in the early 1980s; the resistance to which forms the basis of the game's campaign.


Nordennavic



Ace Combat

A country on the northwestern coast of the Anean continent in Strangereal. A kingdom with a cold climate, it has maintained a policy of diplomatic neutrality for centuries. However, it is still capable of sending its air force to assist its allies and pacify threats to its neutrality.


Norland



Danger! and Other Stories

A small European country which defeats the mighty British Empire by effective submarine warfare, in Arthur Conan Doyle's story "Danger! Being the Log of Captain John Sirius".


Nova Africa



Fire on the Mountain

After Harriet Tubman participates in John Brown's uprising in 1859, a full-scale slave revolt results in the creation of a free African-American republic in the Deep South. The establishment of Nova Africa results in the creation of a socialist utopian world by 1959.


Novistrana



Republic: The Revolution

From the 2003 computer game.


Novoselic, The Kingdom of



Danganronpa

A small absolute monarchy in Europe.


Norgborg



San Sombrèro

Small nation located within the Arctic Circle, featured in a parody travel guidebook.


Norteguay



Scorpion

A Central American country suffering from sanctions.


North American Confederacy



The Probability Broach

Country in an alternate timeline where the Whiskey Rebellion resulted in a libertarian utopia free of governmental interference and consequently a more advanced world, technologically and civilization-wise.


North American Union



The Two Georges

In an alternate timeline where the American Revolution never occurs, British America becomes a self-governing dominion within the British Empire.


Nuevo Rico



The Adventures of Tintin

A South American nation within the classic Belgian comic series, adjacent to the also-fictional country of San Theodoros.


Nuku'la Atoll



San Sombrèro

An archipelago in the South Pacific and former colony of the French colonial empire featured in a parody travel guidebook.


Numbani



Overwatch

West African city state, which borders Nigeria.

O[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Obristan



Papers, Please

A neighbor country north of Arstotzka, Kolechia, United Federation, and Antegria. Jorji Costava describes Obristan as a good place, and also comes off as more stable than war-torn Arstotzka. The inspector is given a choice to flee to Obristan, alone or with his family, when travel restrictions for Arstotzkan citizens are put in place on day 29. EZIC also evacuates the inspector's family to Obristan to safety in case he is arrested on day 23.


Oceania

[29]

Nineteen Eighty-Four

A totalitarian superstate governed by Big Brother and Ingsoc compromising the Americas, the British Isles, Southern Africa, Australia and New Zealand. Oceanian control over India is mentioned as having been achieved following the sudden availability of tea.[30]


Octavia, the Empire of



The Onion

A fictitious totalitarian dictatorship that succeeded the United States following a fake coup created by the government as part of a scheme to erase the country's national debt. It is ruled by and named after Supreme Commander Octavius Del Monte, who is played by former Deputy Secretary of Agriculture Charles F. Conner.


Odan



Blindspot

Country in Central Africa, in war with its neighbour for the control of a pipeline.


OmniStat



Mirror's Edge Catalyst

Communist country in South-East Australia. Border the countries of Sabaeus and Cascadia.


Old Hebrides



HomeScapes

A country briefly mentioned in the videogame HomeScapes. It was said to be near the New Hebrides, hence the name.


Orsinia



Orsinian Tales, Malafrena

A Central European country similar to Czechoslovakia or Hungary, the focus of Ursula K. Le Guin's Orsinian Tales and the novel Malafrena.


Osean Federation



Ace Combat

A large country encompassing most of the western half of the Osean continent in Strangereal. A global superpower, it had expansionist ideologies until the 21st century, when it shifted to a more peaceful defense-based approach. It has one of the largest and strongest militaries in the world. Its capital is Oured.


Osterlich



The Great Dictator

Representing Austria, it is a neighbour of Tomainia (Germany) and Bacteria (Italy), both of which seek to invade it. It is eventually invaded by Tomainia, and left to an uncertain fate.


Outer Heaven



Metal Gear

A militarized South African state centred around mercenaries, led by Big Boss, who possesses a nuclear-equipped bipedal walking tank.


Oz, Land of



The Wonderful Wizard of Oz

An absolute monarchy divided into four quadrants, Munchkin Country, Winkie Country, Gillikin Country, and Quadling Country.

P[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Palombia



Spirou et Fantasio

Home of the Marsupilami.


Panau



Just Cause 2

An island country in Southeast Asia under dictatorial rule and the setting for the 2010 game.


Panem



The Hunger Games

In the novel, the nation of "Panem" has risen from the ashes of a post-apocalyptic North America.[31][32] Panem's seat of power is a utopian city, called "The Capitol", located in the Rocky Mountains. Outside of the Capitol, the nation is divided into twelve districts under the hegemony of a fascist, totalitarian dictatorship, headed by a tyrannical and cruel dictator.


Papir Republic



Far Cry 4

Country that border the south of Kyrat, which can be seen in some maps.


Parador



Moon Over Parador

A South American country and location of events.


Patch Amberdash



Geography Now!

A country spread across three islands in separate oceans. Each island is populated by immigrants from the Baltic states. This was created by YouTube channel Geography Now! as a 2019 April Fools' Day joke.


Patusan



Various

An island nation somewhere in the South China Sea in Lord Jim by Joseph Conrad. Also mentioned in the 1993 film Surf Ninjas as well as in the film The Last Electric Knight and the TV series Sidekicks.


Penguina (L'île des Pingouins)



Penguin Island

In the 1908 novel by Anatole France, an island in the North Sea where penguins were miraculously transformed into humans (and which is in fact a satirical view of France).


Perryland



"Lab Rats"

Since the island wasn't previously registered as a country, Perry took the liberty of fixing that and wrote her own national anthem.


Petoria



Family Guy

A micronation created after Peter Griffin's household was allowed to secede from the United States due to a zoning error. It was repatriated in less than a week after it invaded U.S. territory to "annex" Joe Swanson's swimming pool, leading to a brief war and armed blockade.


Petria



Road 96

An impoverished country under a tyrannical dictatorship in the 2021 video game Road 96.[33] As of summer 1996 (when the start of the game takes place), the president is a dictator called "Tyrak" who is running for re-election against opposition leader "Flores".[33] The unnamed teenage protagonist has the option of either staying in Petria to campaign for Flores or leaving the country in search of a better life by illegally crossing the border into Petria's unnamed northern neighbor.[34]


Phaic Tăn



 Phaic Tăn: Sunstroke on a Shoestring

Indochinese country from a parody travel guidebook.


Pineland



US Army

An US ally located in the continent of Atlantica. Its currency is the don. Created for military exercises.


Piresia



Opinion poll

Fictional nation invented by Tárki, a Hungarian social science research institute, to establish baseline xenophobia in their poll.


Pobreza Republic



Tropico 6

Mentioned neighbour country of Tropico. Is implied that is heavily dependent on grain imported by Tropico and a poor country. Pobreza means poverty in Spanish.


Poictesme



Biography of the Life of Manuel

A country situated roughly in the south of France in the books of James Branch Cabell.


Pokolistan



DC Comics

A former Soviet Republic in the DC Comics universe formerly ruled by General Zod.


Pokrovia



Kiki Strike series

A central European monarchy in the books of Kirsten Miller.


Polrugaria



"The Tragic Life of a Polrugarian Minister"

Archetypal Communist-ruled country, "heavily modelled on Poland"[35] in Isaac Deutscher's 1952 essay "The Tragic Life of a Polrugarian Minister".


Pomegranate, Republic of



On the Pomegranate Islands

Pro-Soviet country, invaded by the United States in the 1981 Soviet film.


Pontevedro



Merry Widow

The embassy in Paris of the poverty-stricken Balkan principality of Pontevedro is holding a ball to celebrate the birthday of the sovereign when the beautiful young rich widow Hanna Glawari appears...


Potarneyland, Republic of



The Navy Lark

A republic that is located on the Indian subcontinent. Over the course of the series, it is revealed that Potarneyland had recently been granted independence from Great Britain, and had joined NATO because the Potanis considered it to be a "free gift scheme".


Pottsylvania



The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show

From Jay Ward's animated TV series.  An imaginary nation parodying the USSR.


Poyais



A financial fraud committed by Gregor MacGregor

A micronation in Central America created by Scottish adventurer and conman Gregor MacGregor in the 1820s, actually a part of the real country of the Mosquito Coast in what is now part of the south-east coast of Honduras.[36][37] Poyais consisted of roughly a trangle with corners at Cape Gracias a Dios, Cape Camarón and the Black River's headwaters.[38] Its capital city was the (fictitious) seaside town of St Joseph which MacGregor claimed to have 20,000 people living in it.[39][40][41]  While MacGregor was given ownership of the territory in 1820 by the king, George Frederic Augustus I, he did not actually handover its sovereignty and it remained part of the Mosquito Coast. In 1821, MacGregor went to Britain and claimed claimed that George Frederic Augustus made him "Cazique" (prince) of Poyais and announced that he was there to find investment and settlers for the new country.[37] MacGregor claimed that the land was extremely fertile,[42] there was plenty of fish and animals to eat[43] and that large amounts of gold were found in the rivers[36] although none of these were true.[44] MacGregor sold lots of land to settlers [36] and had them exchange their British pounds for (fraudulent) Poyais dollars.[36] Some 250 people took up the offer and sailed to Poyais in 1821 and 1822, finding that it was not was claimed with some getting sick and dying of malaria with only fewer than 50 returning to Britain.[36]  MacGregor was tried for fraud after he tried the Poyais scam in France.[36][37]


Pullamawang



Micro Nation

An island micronation that "forgot to mail in their paperwork" at the Federation of Australia and remained a separate country.[45]

Q[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Qasha



I Dream of Jeannie

A Middle Eastern country that borders Russia, Afghanistan and its sworn enemy Basenji and contains the only known deposits of phinkilium, needed by NASA for the construction of Saturn XII.


Qalif



Princess Diaries

A Middle Eastern country ruled by His Highness General Sheik Mohammed bin Zayed Faisal.


Qitzikwaka



Geography Now!

A country in middle of the sahara between Libya, Chad and Niger. A big part of its infrastructure is underground. This country was created as an April's fool's day joke in 2020.


Quebec, Republic of



Southern Victory Series

During the First Great War, the United States (a member of the Central Powers) creates the puppet state in Quebec to aid in the post-war U.S. occupation of Canada, later the suppression of Canadian guerrillas during the Second Great War.


Qumar



The West Wing

A Middle Eastern state from the television series.


Qumran (Kumrahn)



Yes Minister

An Arabic oil sheikhdom.


Qurac



DC Comics

An Persian Gulf country in the DC Comics Universe, often used when DC needs a terrorist state.

R[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Ragaan



Embassy

A South-East Asian country located halfway up the Malay Peninsula, somewhere between Thailand and Malaysia; from the Australian television series Embassy.


Rapture



Bioshock

An English colony based in the North Atlantic Ocean.


Realia



Boiling Point: Road to Hell

A South American country based on Bolivia.


Reichtenburg



Blood Royal, Fire Below

A central European principality loosely based on Liechtenstein.


Republia



Papers, Please

Republia is a relatively small land-locked country surrounded by Antegria, Kolechia, Impor, and the United Federation. It is one of the four countries on the map that do not border Arstotzka. It was recently at war with Antegria.


Republican Union of Nigeria and Ghana



Stand on Zanzibar

African country formed by merging of Nigeria and Ghana.


Rhelasia



Young Justice

Originally two nations of North and South, based on North and South Korea, from the TV series Young Justice.


Ritimba



Dictator

A banana republic controlled by the player in this 1983 strategy video game.


Robo-Hungarian Empire



Futurama

A parody of Austria-Hungary, it is mentioned as home of Bender's uncle. It is ruled over by Emperor Nikolai.


Rolisica



Mothra

A thinly-veiled fictional interpretation of the United States.  Its largest city, New Kirk City, is home to Clark Nelson (Jerry Ito), whose kidnapping of the Shobijin results in Mothra arriving to rescue them, attacking the city until the Shobijin are delivered to her at the airport.


Rocky Mountains States



The Man in the High Castle

A de facto buffer zone between the Japanese-allied Pacific States of America and the Nazi satellite United States with its capital based in Canon City. In the novel, the R.M.S. is depicted as a sovereign nation situated between California and the Mississippi River. However, in the television series, it is a 'Neutral Zone' based solely along the Rockies. Effectively an anarchistic, libertarian society, the Neutral Zone acts as a refuge for Nazi or Japanese targets but being subject to Nazi or Japanese agents.


Romanovia



Inspector Gadget

A fictitious kingdom in Europe ruled by King Woodlig visited by Inspector Gadget in search of the kingdom's royal (coat of arms) seal. The country itself is supposed to be made up of gypsies and gypsy caravans. (season 1 episode 45)


Romanza



Rosalie

A kingdom that forms part of the setting of the musical Rosalie (and film of the same name), that sees a democratic revolution and the overthrow of the monarchy.


Rovinia



Pursuit to Algiers

A Constitutional Monarchy located near the Mediterranean which figures on the plot of the 1945 Sherlock Holmes film Pursuit to Algiers.


Ruffino



Three Investigators and the Secret of the Haunted Mirror

The main characters get into a plot of a former dictator of a Spanish-speaking island nation strongly resembling the Dominican Republic during/after the Trujillo era.


Ruritania



The Prisoner of Zenda

A German-speaking kingdom in central Europe from Anthony Hope's The Prisoner of Zenda and associated works. Also used in Ernest Gellner's nonfictional Nations and Nationalism as a stereotypical country developing nationalism.


Rusalka



Ultraman Orb

A stand-in for Russia featured in the television series, Rusalka is a nation which Orb visited in 1908, fighting various monsters there; Rusalka was also the setting of a climactic battle between Orb and Maga-Zetton, the results of which created a gigantic explosion called the "Rusalka Great Explosion", a possible reference to the real-world Tunguska Event.


Rook Islands



Far Cry 3

A failed state within Indonesia, the archipelago is the location of Ubisoft's Far Cry 3.


Russian Democratic Union



Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon

After ultra-nationalists take over the Russian Federation sometime prior to 2008, they rename the country to the Russian Democratic Union and invade and annex Georgia over the objections of the international community. After the RDU invades the Baltic States, NATO counter-attacks into Russian territory, captures Moscow, and deposes the RDU's ultra-nationalist regime.

S[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Sabaeus



Mirror's Edge Catalyst

A theocratic and hermetic country, located in South-East Australia. Borders the countries of Cascadia and OmniStat.


St. George's Island



Yes, Prime Minister

An island nation located somewhere in the Arabian Sea. It was the centrepoint of the episode "A Victory for Democracy". A parliamentary republic and a Commonwealth member state, the island was on the verge of a communist coup.


Sahrani, Kingdom of



ARMA: Armed Assault

An island nation of Hispanophones located in the mid-Atlantic Ocean. Prior to the events of the game's campaign, the nation is split between the pro-capitalist, monarchist South and the pro-Communist, republican North. However, a US-led intervention reverses an invasion from the North, which ultimately leads to the collapse of the Communist government. A royal coup in post-unified Sahrani forms the basis for the story line of ARMA: Queen's Gambit.


Saint Marie



Death in Paradise

Caribbean island on which the series is set.


Samavia



The Lost Prince

Eastern European kingdom in Frances Hodgson Burnett's novel.


San Blas, Republic of



The Outer Limits

A South American country located "west of the Orinoco Basin, slight north of the Equator" featured in "Tourist Attraction". Its major exports are coffee, copra, mahogany, maize and saffron. In 1963, it is ruled by General Juan Mercurio, who came to power in the latest of a string of revolutions.


San Cristobal



Guiding Light, Another World

Caribbean principality on the long-running U.S. soap operas.


San Escobar



internet meme

San Escobar is a Latin American country that originated as a blunder of Polish Minister of Foreign Affairs Witold Waszczykowski and later have become an internet meme.[46][47]


San Esperito



Just Cause

An island country ruled by the dictator Salvador Mendoza.


Sangala



24

A Western African republic and former French colony, it is said to share a border with the Republic of Congo. The democratic government led by Prime Minister Ule Matobo is overthrown in a coup by General Benjamin Juma of the Peoples Freedom Army in 24: Redemption. It is later invaded by the United States military in 24: Season 7 after the Juma regime begins to engage in genocide. The capital city is Mali Baso, and other notable locations include Sangala City and Kasanga Province.


San Glucose



The Simpsons

South American island country.


San Lorenzo



Cat's Cradle

A tiny rocky island nation located in the Caribbean Sea in the Kurt Vonnegut novel.


San Lorenzo



Hey Arnold!

A country in Central America where the protagonist was born and his parents went missing.


San Lorenzo



Leverage

A small European nation featured in the third season of the TV series


San Madeiro



DC Comics

A small Central American country. King Faraday saved its President Ortega the night before his potential reelection and got mistaken for the assassin.[48]


San Marcos



Bananas, Archer Vice, Don Quixote, U.S.A. (1966)

A Latin American banana republic.


San Miguel, 15th Federated Republic of



Gomer Pyle, USMC

A Latin American banana republic, surrounded by Brazil, whose president, Manuel Cortez (played by Larry Storch, visits Camp Henderson in two episodes: "Wild Bull of the Pampas" and "The Wild Bull Returns".


San Miguel



Firewalker

Central American country located in the Yucatan peninsula.


San Monique



Live and Let Die

A Caribbean country led by drug lord and Bond villain Dr Kananga.


San Salvacion



Ace Combat

A small country on the northwestern Usean continent in Strangereal. A neutral country, it was occupied by the Eruseans during the Continental War and the Lighthouse War. Its capital is the city of San Salvacion; whether this means it is actually a city-state is unknown.


San Salvador



Ryhmy ja Romppainen

A banana republic in constant, but frivolous civil wars that are fought for show only, in the humor book series Ryhmy ja Romppainen by pseudonym Armas J. Pulla.[49]


San Serriffe



The Guardian

Island nation created for April Fools' Day, 1977.


San Sombrèro



San Sombrèro

A Central American country from a parody travel guidebook.


San Theodoros



The Adventures of Tintin

A South American nation featured in several of The Adventures of Tintin stories, home of General Alcazar.


San Pasquale



Commander-in-Chief

A South America dictatorship ruled by General Sanchez. Juan Duran later reassumes the Presidency of San Pasquale.


San Pedro



"The Adventure of Wisteria Lodge"

South American country from the Sherlock Holmes story.


Santa Prisca



DC Comics

A Caribbean nation in the DC Universe, home to Batman villain Bane.


Santo Marco



Marvel Comics

South American nation appearing in Marvel Mainstream Continuity, Earth-616, which was briefly occupied by the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants until they were driven out by a mutant superhero team, X-Men.


Santo Tondo



Tropico 6

Caribbean dictatorship, rival of Tropico. The President of the country issued numerous absurd laws like a single legal haircut or banned underwear in name of equality.


São Rico



The Adventures of Tintin

A Portuguese-speaking South American country.


Sakhovia



Final Score

Breakaway state located in North Caucasus, Russia. Tried to become independent with a war in 1999.


Saradia



Godzilla vs. Biollante

A Middle Eastern country with an arid climate. The government of Saradia seeks the assistance of geneticist Genichiro Shiragami to create drought-resistant crops by modifying plants with DNA from Godzilla; Japan is then caught in the middle of a multinational battle for Godzilla's DNA between Saradian agents and the American organisation Bio-Major.


Sardovia



Scorpion

A neighbor county of Belarus that shares Cold War-era infrastructure.


Sarcozia



Winback

The country from where the terrorist group the Crying Lions originate from. The U.S supported the Sarcozian Government in a civil war with the rebel faction, resulting in the rebel's defeat, thus, they form the Crying Lions and raid the U.S military base that controls the United States government's secret weapon. The GULF satellite to attack the Center for Space development, and threaten the government to attack more targets if they don't meet their demands. Thus the government sends in the SCAT team to stop them.


Sarkhan



The Ugly American

A small, peaceful kingdom in Southeast Asia, from the 1965 novel by William Lederer and Eugene Burdick.


Sauville



Gosick

A small, French-speaking European kingdom that stretches from Switzerland, through the Alps between France and Italy, to the Mediterranean Sea.


Scandinavia



Ransom aka The Terrorists

Scandinavian country inspired by Norway.


Seko



Far Cry 2

Sotho-speaking Small Central African country, devastated by a war between the Communist UFLL (United Front for Liberation and Labour) and the Pan-African APR (Alliance for Popular Resistance). Former monarchy but the monarch escaped with all the country's gold.


Selatapura



Ace Combat

A city-state on the southwestern Usean continent in Strangereal. It was formerly part of Erusea, but seceded after the Continental War. The International Space Elevator was constructed off the coast of Selatapura.


Selgina



Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster

A mountainous country situated in the Himalayas, ruled by a monarchy and bearing resemblance to Nepal, Bhutan and the Indian state of Sikkim. The heir to the Selginese throne, Princess Maas Doulina Salno, is possessed by the spirit of a Venusian intending to warn the Earth about the impending arrival of King Ghidorah after fleeing to Japan following the assassination of her father, the King.


Seyrun



Gosick

Ancient kingdom, mentioned in Episode 8 of the series.


Serdaristan



Battlefield: Bad Company, Mirror's Edge

A Central Asian country ruled by the dictator Zavomir Serdar, which border Russia and have access to the Caspian Sea. Under Russian occupation when the game takes place. Also mentioned in Mirror's Edge.


Serena Republic



Metal Gear Acid 2

Small South American country, devastated by a civil war. Under control of General Delgado.


Shangri-La



Lost Horizon

A mystical, harmonious valley, enclosed in the western end of the Himalaya in James Hilton's 1933 novel.


Shitschtorchnia



Sugar Pine 7

Eastern European country, home country of Alfredo.


Sierra Gordo



G.I. Joe

A South American country often used as a satire of banana republics in the comic book series published by Marvel Comics.


Sim Nation



The Sims

Fictional country where The Sims takes place. Although mostly reminiscent of the United States, it contains elements of multiple real-world countries.


Slaka



Rates of Exchange, Why Come to Slaka?

A Balkan communist country in Malcolm Bradbury's Rates of Exchange and its sequel, Why Come to Slaka?.


Slovetzia



The Beautician and the Beast

Small Eastern European country, bordered by Hungary, Romania, and Ukraine.


Sodor



The Railway Series Thomas & Friends

Between England and the Isle of Man, the setting for the Reverend W. Awdry's The Railway Series and its TV adaptation, Thomas & Friends.


Sokovia



Marvel Cinematic Universe

War-torn Eastern European country appearing on the Earth of the Marvel Cinematic Universe where Quicksilver. Scarlet Witch, and Helmut Zemo used to reside. It was destroyed after a battle between Ultron and the Avengers, creating an international scandal over collateral damage caused by the Avengers' responses. It briefly became the headquarters of Hydra and the hiding place of Loki's spear with the Mind Stone inside.


Solís



Just Cause 4

A South American island country, governed by the dictator Oscar Espinoza. Devastated by a war between the insurgent Army of Chaos and the Black Hand PMC, which serves as the country's armed forces.


Sontar



Doctor Who

In the episode War of the Sontarans, an event known as the Flux allowed the Sontarans to rewrite human history. Replacing both the Russian Empire and China and occupying their respective territories, the Sontarans fight against Britain in that reality's version of the Crimean War, serving as a pilot scheme for the conquest of Earth for its entire history.


Sounis



The Thief (Turner novel)

Situated in the minor peninsula, sharing it with the countries of Attolia and Eddis, in the fictional world of the book series The Queen's Thief, by Megan Whalen Turner.


Soviet Unterzoegersdorf





The "last existing appendage republic of the USSR", a country created by monochrom for theatre performances and computer games.


The Sovereign Sandian Republic



Better Call Saul

When scouting for clients, Jimmy McGill encounters Richard Sipes, a conservative eccentric who wished for his 1100-acre New Mexico estate to secede from the United States and become a business-friendly sovereign nation, a 'Vatican of the United States' as he described it. McGill declined to serve as Sipes's legal counsel after he offered to pay him one million Sandian dollars (resembling US dollar bills but bearing Sipes's portrait) for his services.


South Africa, Federal Republic of



Vortex

Successor state to the real world Republic of South Africa. After a civil war in South Africa during the 1990s over apartheid, South Africa ends apartheid and reconstitutes itself as a democratic federal republic.


South Africa, United States of



2001: A Space Odyssey

The successor state to the Republic of South Africa after the emigration of most white people and collapse of the economy in 2001: A Space Odyssey.


Sovonthak



Geography Now!

A country built near-entirely on coral reefs in the Andaman Sea. It was created by YouTube channel Geography Now! as a 2021 April Fools' Day joke.


Spensonia



Thomas Spence works

An island between "Utopia and Oceana", where English mariners form a communal society in Thomas Spence's 18th century writings.


Spotland



Spotters

a Monarch country which lived by dalmatian dogs


Squamuglia



The Courier's Tragedy

A duchy ruled by the evil duke Angelo in The Courier's Tragedy, a fictional Jacobean revenge play by Richard Wharfinger, performed in The Crying of Lot 49 by Thomas Pynchon.


Strackenz



Royal Flash

A Duchy in the 1970 The Flashman Papers novel Royal Flash.


Sultanistan



Criminal Case

Oil-exporting Arabic country. One of the game's cases revolves around the murder of its king, Khalid Souleyman, during a visit to America.


Sunda



State of Siege

In Eric Ambler's novel State of Siege, is similar to Indonesia but much smaller, confined to a single island.


Svenborgia



30 Rock

A country known only to rich people. Jack Donaghy assumes Jerry Seinfeld had traveled there in the SeinfeldVision episode.[50]


Syldavia



The Adventures of Tintin

Balkan monarchy featured in four stories of The Adventures of Tintin, neighbouring Borduria.


Sylvania



Duck Soup

Belligerent neighbor to Freedonia in the 1933 film.

T[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Takistan



ARMA 2: Operation Arrowhead

A Central Asian republic; the setting for the Operation Arrowhead expansion pack for ARMA 2. It borders Chernarus and its history, culture, and geography is reminiscent of Afghanistan. Its capital is Takmyr.[51]


Tajinkistan



Lol:-)

Central Asian country, shown in the Canadian TV show Lol:-).


Tanquir



Guiding Light, Another World

Mediterranean kingdom on the long-running U.S. soap operas.


Taronia



Thirty-Day Princess

Ruritanian country.


Tazbekistan[52]



Ambassadors

Central Asian republic, setting for the 2013 BBC TV comedy series Ambassadors.


Tazbekstan[53]



Spooks

A fictional country in Series 8 - Episode 2 of the series Spooks. The British Government are running low on gas after an explosion at a gas processing plant. They try to broker a deal to buy gas from Tazbekstan.


Taured



Urban legend

Country between France and Spain, supposedly located where Andorra should be. According to the legend, a Taured national appeared at Tokyo International Airport and disappeared when detained.


Tcherkistan



Supercondriaque

Eastern European country from the 2014 film. While France receives and accepts refugees from the country, it doesn't have diplomatic relations with it because of the civil war against a dictatorship.


Tecala



Proof of Life

South American Andean country from the 2000 film.


Teristan



Snake's Revenge

Middle Eastern country inspired by Iran. Have access to sea, and have various biomes such as jungles and deserts. The leader of thd terrorist group "Rolla Radicals", called Highrolla Kockamaeme as taken control of a WMD in the province of Ishakibibil.


Tescara



CSI: NY

Atlantic island mentioned in the TV Series CSI: NY by Jerry Bruckheimer. According to the show, this nation joined the UN in 1991 and is a free-trade port.


Texas, Republic of



Numerous

The continued existence or the revival of the Republic of Texas has featured in numerous works of fiction often set during a Second American Civil War or a Second American Revolution and occasionally in tandem with American Civil War alternate histories.


The Great Fusion



The Great Fusion

An English-speaking country formed in 2015 by the union of countries with huge public debts, and which by 2022, comprise all the world. Is an authoritarian regime, which condemns copyright infringement and digital piracy as the worst crimes. It is divided between very poor areas and a rich one. From the Spanish mobile game of the same name.


Themyscira



DC Comics

Hidden island queendom in either the Atlantic Ocean or Mediterranean Sea settled by the Greek mythological all-female warrior Amazons ruled by DC's version of the mythical Queen Hippolyta. Original home of Wonder Woman. Originally called "Paradise Island." Not to be confused with the real-world ancient Greek town Themiscyra (note the different placements of the vowels "i" and "y"), legendary home of the Amazons.


Thulahn



The Business

An Asian kingdom located in the Himalayas based on Bhutan in the Iain Banks novel The Business. The country is depicted as very poor and in the process of being purchased by a millennia-old, benevolent, democratic but secretive commercial organisation known only as "the Business" so it can gain Diplomatic immunity and a seat in the United Nations. Negotiations for the acquisition take place between Business executive, Kate Telman (the novel's protagonist) and Thulahnese Crown Prince, Suvinder Dzung.


Tibecuador



Fairly OddParents

Spanish-speaking Central American country, created by a wish of Timmy Turner. Is a poor and undeveloped country, and the inhabitants behave like the indigenous people of the Amazon rainforest.


Tijata



The In-Laws

Central American island country from the 1979 film


Tirania, Republic of



Mort & Phil, La gran aventura de Mortadelo y Filemón

A country governed by dictator Bruteztrausen; Spanish secret agents Mortadelo and Filemón helped depose Bruteztrausen and president Rompetechen was then elected.[54] Another version of this country appears in the film La gran aventura de Mortadelo y Filemón.


Tomainia



The Great Dictator

The setting of Charlie Chaplin's The Great Dictator, lampooning Nazi Germany. It is headed by Adenoid Hynkel, a parody of Adolf Hitler.


Trans-Carpathia



G.I. Joe

Eastern European Cobra stronghold; location of many stories from the G.I. Joe comic book line.


Transia



Marvel Comics

European country on the Earth of the Marvel Universe.


Tropico



Tropico

A Caribbean Spanish-speaking banana republic that serves as the main setting for the game. The country was a British colony before independence and the country goes through many eras whilst its leader (El Presidente or The Player) makes rational decisions on how to run and govern the country. It is located off the south-eastern coast of USA and north-west of Cuba. The country is inspired by Cuba.


Tsergovia



Don't Ask

Eastern European country mentioned in the novel by Donald E. Westlake.


Tundrabania



Liv and Maddie

A very cold country where Diggie Smalls goes to be a foreign exchange student.


Turaqistan



War, Inc.

A fictional war-torn desert country from the 2008 political action comedy film.


Turgistan



Borgen, 6 Underground

In Borgen it is a former Soviet republic, featured in "State Visit" in Series 1.[55] In 6 Underground it is a Central Asian dictatorship ruled by President Rovach Alimov, and appears to share borders with Uzbekistan and Mongolia. Its capital city is named Tyrus, and its native language appears to be a variant of Turkmen.


Tyranistan



San Sombrèro

An Asian country and former member of the Soviet Union featured in a parody travel guidebook.

U[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Ul Qoma



The City & the City

City-state in Eastern Europe, occupying the same geographical space as the rival city of Besźel.


Ugigistan



War Inc.




Umbutu, National Republic of (Republique Nationale d'Umbutu)



Independence Day: Resurgence

A dictatorial nation in Central Africa and a former province of the Congo, which declared its independence after the events of Independence Day. It is regarded as a breakaway state and is not recognised as an official country by the United Nations. Its official languages are English and French.


Unaudited Arab Emirates



San Sombrèro

Parody of the United Arab Emirates in a mock tourist guide.


The Union of The United States of America



East of West

An alternate version of The Union, formally established in 1910. Rife with civil unrest due to corruption. Its capital is Washington D.C.


United Federation



Papers, Please

The United Federation (sometimes shortened to United Fed.) is a country located far to the west of Arstotzka, one of the four countries that do not border Arstotzka. Entrants from the United Federation are identified by a blue passport with a silver emblem of an eagle on the front. During the game, a polio outbreak happens here.


United Eurasian State



Made in China napoletano

A nation created after the People's Republic of China annexes Russia, the European Union and a part of another Asian country because of an economic recession in 2022. It forbid, at least to Italy, to produce its own goods and to import them from China.


United Islamic Republic



Executive Orders

A nation created by the conquest of Iraq by Iran in the Tom Clancy novel.


United Kingdom, the



V for Vendetta

A dystopian United Kingdom ruled by a fascist dictatorship called the Norsefire Party.


United States of America

  

Fallout

An alternative United States that collapsed prior to a nuclear war. Later reforming into "The Enclave"


United States of Romulus, the Republic of



Star Trek

A secessionist state formed after the alternate Klingon-Romulan War; its subjugation by the Trekkie Nation resulted in the establishment of a caretaker government. Primarily comprising the US, its capital is Remus.


Uqbar



"Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius"

A nation in Asia Minor in Jorge Luis Borges's 1940 short story "Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius" that is fictional within the story.


Urk (also Uruk)



Descendants of the Sun

War-torn Mediterranean country monitored by the United Nations. The South Korean government provides peacekeeping forces and private hospitals send volunteer medical teams.


Urkesh



Forever

An Eastern European country, and a former member of the USSR. A pivotal crossroads of the Orient Express is located within the country.


Urmania



The Tick

An Eastern European country, and a former member of the USSR.


USEA Federation



Ace Combat Infinity

A large country encompassing much of Asia, Eastern Europe, and the Middle East. It was formed by the terrorist organization "Sons of Troia" in 2019 as a response to the United Nations' supposed mishandling of the Ulysses Disaster.


Ustinkistan



The Fairly OddParents

The home country of Vlad and Gladys, Timmy's maternal grandparents. The economy of the country is based on turnips.


Ustio



Ace Combat

A country on the northeastern Osean continent in Strangereal. Once a territory of Belka, Ustio was allowed to secede during an economic crisis in Belka. When the crisis did not subside and resource deposits were discovered in Ustio, Belka invaded, occupying almost the entire country; Belkan forces were eventually pushed out during the Belkan War. Ustio is known to supplement its regular military forces with mercenaries. Its capital is Directus.


Utopia



Utopia

Thomas More's island located in the New World. Usually described as a beautiful place where nothing can go wrong.


Urzikstan



Call of Duty: Modern Warfare (2019)

Arab-speaking country located in the Caucasus, bordering Russia and Georgia. Capital city is Sahkra. Inspired by Syria. Under Russian occupation for two decades.

V[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Vadeem



Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles

A state whose Prime Minister gangsters try to kidnap in the episode "Raphael Drives 'em Wild" of the 1987 animated TV series[56]


Val Verde



Commando, Predator, Die Hard 2

Spanish-speaking country resembling Nicaragua, in the films Commando, Predator, and Die Hard 2.


Valeska



Saved by the Belle

"A thriving kingdom in the tropics"; The Three Stooges are clothing salesmen trying to earn enough money to get home.


Vermillion Kingdom



Chivalry of a Failed Knight

A small European country in the Japanese light novel series written by Riku Misora and illustrated by Won.


Veyshnoria



Zapad 2017 exercise

A neighboring country of Belarus, located northwest of Minsk. It was an enemy of Belarus in the 2017 military exercise.


Vespugia



A Swiftly Tilting Planet, Troubling a Star

Spanish-speaking country in the south of South America mentioned in Madeleine L'Engle's A Swiftly Tilting Planet and Troubling a Star


Vilena



The Expendables

Spanish-speaking Caribbean country, located between the Gulf of Mexico and South America, governed by a corrupt general and a corrupt CIA agent.


Vlatava



DC Comics

Eastern European kingdom; birthplace of supervillain Count Vertigo.


Vosnia



State Secret

A European dictatorship in a 1950 film starring Douglas Fairbanks Jr.


Vyseni, Republic of



This War of Mine

Breakaway state, inhabited by the Lechitic Vyseni people. Claim Pegoren as the capital. During the game is at war with the Graznavian government.


Vulgaria



Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, Don't Drink the Water

The far-off, make-believe land in the film version of the children's story Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang, its name based on Bulgaria. "Vulgaria" is also the tourist destination in Woody Allen's play and film Don't Drink the Water, a country located behind the Iron Curtain. "Vulgaria" is also used as the name of a fictional country in some of Lawrence Durrell's short stories based on the character of Antrobus, a British diplomat.

W[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Wadiya



The Dictator

Country in the movie The Dictator located in the Horn of Africa (in the area of Eritrea).


Wakanda



Marvel Comics

Small African nation featured in the Marvel Comics series The Avengers. The nation is ruled by King T'Challa, also known as the superhero Black Panther.


Wellington Wells



We Happy Few

Microstate off the coast of what used to be the United Kingdom. Formed after an alternative World War II in which the United States never entered the war, causing the Allies to lose to the Axis. In exchange for Wellington Wells' independence, the Germans forcefully removed all children from the country, leaving the people with traumatic memories. As a result, the government mandated the use of hallucigenic drugs. This caused the people to stop producing goods and drove the country to a famine that no one's aware of.


West Angola



Scandal

A coastal African nation framed for various terrorist attacks on the United States of America in season 4.  Later invaded by the US military after President Fitzgerald Grant is blackmailed into doing so.


West Hun Chiu



Designated Survivor

A democratic republic in East Asia located on the fictional Han Chiu Peninsula off the coast of China. Ruled by President Han, it shares borders with China to the west and the totalitarian East Hun Chiu to the east. Its capital city is Gyeon. An ally of the United States, it is similar to the real life South Korea.


West Britannia



Futurama

In the episode "All the Presidents' Heads", Professor Farnsworth travels back in time to 1775 to prevent his ancestor's treachery during the American Revolution. However, Fry causes Paul Revere to mistakenly warn that the British are attacking by land, not by sea. As a result, the American Revolution fails and all of North America is united as 'West Britannia' under British rule.


Wongnaileum



The Bodyguard 2

South East Asian country, the setting of the Thai comedy.


The World State



Brave New World

An all-encompassing state that governs Earth in a dystopian fashion. The Motto of the nation is "Community, Identity, Stability".


Wredpryd



Civilization

European country.

Y[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Yamapalu



Chew

An island nation; home to the Gallsaberry.


Yara



Far Cry 6

South American nation governed by Antón Castillo and inspired by Cuba. Its capital is Esperanza (Hope).


Yatakang



Stand on Zanzibar

Former Dutch colony located in South East Asia. Inspired by Indonesia.


Yellow Empire



Blake and Mortimer

Fascist Asian power in Blake and Mortimer.


Yerba



Victorious

An insular country featured in the series Victorious, in the episode "Locked Up!", located somewhere in the Pacific Ocean, ruled by a fierce dictatorship. It is the home country of Festus, the owner of the food truck at Hollywood Arts.


Yewaire



Operation Red Sea

Middle Eastern country, based on Yemen. Some Chinese citizens are taken as hostages and the People's Liberation Army send a team to free them.


Yudonia



Drake and Josh

An Eastern European country based on the former Yugoslavia featured in the episode "We're Married?", whose citizens worship the goat as the national animal.


Yuktobania



Ace Combat

A large country encompassing most of the northeastern coast of the Verusan continent in Strangereal. It is a global superpower known for its advancements in military technology, having developed numerous submarine aircraft carriers with ballistic missiles and railguns. Its capital is Cinigrad.


Yinke



Far Cry 4

Country that borders the east of Kyrat, which can be seen on some maps.

Z[edit]



Name

Image

Work

Notes


Zahiristan



Das Ende der Wahrheit [de]

A fictional country in the German film Das Ende der Wahrheit.


Zahrain



Escape from Zahrain

Middle Eastern Arabic country dealing with a rebel movement.


Zangaro



The Dogs of War

A fictional African republic based on Equatorial Guinea which is the subject of a mercenary-led coup in Fredrick Forsyth's book and the film based on the book.


Zanzarim



James Bond novel Solo

A West African country, in a civil war with the breakaway Democratic Republic of Dahum.


Zanzibar Land



Metal Gear 2: Solid Snake

A country bordering the Middle East and, for a time, the only country to possess nuclear weapons in Metal Gear 2: Solid Snake.


Zarak

A.S.P. Air Strike Patrol

Country based on Iraq, that invade the neighboring country of Sweit.


Zekistan



Full Spectrum Warrior, Full Spectrum Warrior: Ten Hammers

Middle Eastern country between Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and Tajikistan in the video game Full Spectrum Warrior and Full Spectrum Warrior: Ten Hammers; its history and setting closely resemble Afghanistan's.


Zamunda



Coming to America, Coming to America (TV pilot), Coming 2 America

The country of origin for Prince Akeem in Eddie Murphy films.


Zubrowka



The Grand Budapest Hotel

East European country in Wes Anderson's 2014 film.


Zephyria



Son of Zorn

East European country in Fox's 2016 show.


Zanda



The Persuaders!

African country ruled by a friend of Lord Brett Sinclair.


Zembla



Pale Fire

"Distant northern land" whose deposed king the narrator weaves into a critical apparatus; possibly based on Novaya Zemlya.


Zemenia



Monk

An Eastern European war-torn country, based on Croatia.


Zeon



Mobile Suit Gundam

Country in Mobile Suit Gundam.


Zeeskatania



Some Assembly Required

The country near Meeskatania, as seen on the episode "Raindrop Rabbit".

See also[edit]
List of fictional countries by region
References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ http://knopfdoubleday.com/book/184472/wizard-of-the-crow/

^ http://nationmultimedia.com/2006/05/16/national/national_30004109.php

^ http://wisekwai-entertainment.buzznet.com/user/photos/?id=3579322

^ http://www.maktae.com/download/rv.html

^ Character, Plot and Thought in Plato's Timaeus-Critias. Leiden: E.J. Brill. p. 42. .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}ISBN 978-90-04-04870-6.

^ Hackforth, R. (1944). "The Story of Atlantis: Its Purpose and Its Moral". Classical Review. 58 (1): 7–9. doi:10.1017/s0009840x00089356

^ Clay, Diskin (2000). "The Invention of Atlantis: The Anatomy of a Fiction". In Cleary, John J.; Gurtler, Gary M. (eds.). Proceedings of the Boston Area Colloquium in Ancient Philosophy. 15. Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp. 1–21. ISBN 978-90-04-11704-4.

^ "Script for the Onion Movie". Scripts.com.

^ "Spooks - Series 9 Episode 3". BBC Online. Retrieved 20 February 2021.

^ Post Malone ft 21 Savage "Rockstar" PARODY Aluwakbar ~ Rucka Rucka Ali, retrieved 13 April 2021


^ a b Trudeau, Garry (w, a). "It's called Berzerkistan. It shares a 19-mile disputed border with Iran..." Doonesbury (12 November 2007)

^ Trudeau, Garry (w, a). "Almost there, Dawg – we just crossed over into Berzerkistan...'" Doonesbury (10 March 2011)

^ "The shadow of a Titan, (1910)", American Libraries.

^ "Arsène Lupin Timeline by A.-F. Ruaud". www.coolfrenchcomics.com.

^ Biedenharn, Isabella. "Scandal season 5 premiere recap: Heavy is the Head". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 18 October 2017.

^ https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Hammer_of_God/AcwpAAAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=%22commonwealth+of+american+states%22+%22arthur+c.+clarke%22&pg=PT30&printsec=frontcover

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "The Hammer of God - Arthur C. Clarke". YouTube.

^ Siembieda, K.; Bellaire, C.; Therrien, S.; Ward, T. & Wujcik, E. (August 2005). Rifts Role-Playing Game, Ultimate Edition. Taylor, MI: Palladium Books. pp. 24–31. ISBN 1-57457-150-8.

^ Robertson, Allen (2017). America's Digital Army: Games at Work and War. University of Nebraska Press. p. 69. ISBN 978-1-4962-0191-1.

^ a b Thomson, Ian (11 September 2015). "'Borderlines', by Michela Wrong". Financial Times.

^ a b "Borderlines by Michela Wrong review – a gripping debut thriller". TheGuardian.com. 22 August 2015.

^ "fugue state press - experimental fiction - The Kingdom of Farfelu, with Paper Moons, by André Malraux". www.fuguestatepress.com.

^ King, Frank O. (2010). Walt and Skeezix, 1927–1928. Vol. 4. Montreal: Drawn & Quarterly. p. 1927 July 27, 2 August 24 October. ISBN 978-1-897299-39-5.

^ "5 Fake Enemies US Troops Have Been Battling for Decades". 2 April 2018.

^ "Save 10% on Arma 3 Contact on Steam". store.steampowered.com.

^ "Archived copy". pbs.twimg.com. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "Episode 29". Mirage Studios. 29 December 2009. Archived from the original on 15 January 2010 – via ninjaturtles.com.

^ Siembieda, K.; Bellaire, C.; Therrien, S.; Ward, T. & Wujcik, E. (August 2005). Rifts Role-Playing Game, Ultimate Edition. Taylor, MI: Palladium Books. p. 16. ISBN 1-57457-150-8.

^ Radford, Michael (1984). Nineteen Eighty-Four. Virgin Films.

^ Orwell, George (2009). "Nineteen Eighty-Four: Part II: Chapter IX". The Complete Novels of George Orwell. Penguin Books Limited. p. 1086. ISBN 978-0-141-19039-6.

^ "Jennifer Lawrence Comes from District 12 (Haymitch Comes from Texas)". Ancestry.com.

^ "Panem Map". Archived from the original on 7 December 2013.

^ a b "Road 96 Review - the Road is My Home". 16 August 2021.

^ https://www.player2.net.au/2021/08/road-96-say-f-off-to-fascists/

^ David Caute, Isaac and Isaiah: The Covert Punishment of a Cold War Heretic, Yale University Press, 2013, p. 163.

^ a b c d e f "The king of con-men". The Economist. 22 December 2012.

^ a b c "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 July 2015. Retrieved 19 September 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ Hasbrouck 1927, p. 441. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHasbrouck1927 (help)

^ Sinclair 2004, p. 15. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSinclair2004 (help)

^ Sinclair 2004, p. 40. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSinclair2004 (help)

^ Hasbrouck 1927, p. 448. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHasbrouck1927 (help)

^ Sinclair 2004, pp. 66, 73. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSinclair2004 (help)

^ Hasbrouck 1927, p. 444. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHasbrouck1927 (help)

^ Hasbrouck 1927, pp. 441, 445. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHasbrouck1927 (help)

^ "Micro Nation". Ten Network Holdings.

^ Adam Taylor (11 January 2017). "San Escobar: How Poland's foreign minister helped create a fake country". The Washington Post. Retrieved 12 January 2017.

^ "Polish FM Sparks Jokes With Mention of Nonexistent Country". The New York Times. Associated Press. 11 January 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2017.

^ Danger Trail (vol. 2) #1

^ Community.discovery.com Archived 28 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine

^ "SeinfeldVision". IMDb. Retrieved 23 August 2018.

^ "Proving Grounds". Arma 2 Official Website.

^ "BBC Two - Ambassadors - Tazbekistan". BBC.

^ "Spooks - Series 8 Episode 2". BBC Online. Retrieved 4 February 2021.

^ (in Spanish) El sulfato atómico[permanent dead link] in La página no oficial de Mortadelo y Filemón

^ Borgen, Series 1, State Visit, BBC Four, 21 January 2012

^ 
"Episode 101". Mirage Studios. 21 January 2012. Archived from the original on 16 March 2011 – via ninjaturtles.com.


.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vteFictional countries
General list
List by region

Africa
Americas
Asia
Europe
Islands

 WikiCommons
 Category

vteFictional locations and WorldbuildingBuildings
Bars and pubs
Castles
Prisons
Railway stations
Cities and towns
Cities
in animation
in comics
in film
in literature
in television
Countries, counties and states
Countries
African
Asian
European
Pan-American
by region
U.S. states
Islands
Mythological places
Planets, worlds and universes
Fantasy worlds
Planets
Universes
film and television
animation and comics
literature
science fiction
Other terms
Continuity
Fantasy map
Lists of fictional locations
Shared universe






