Major is a military rank of commissioned officer status, with corresponding ranks existing in many military forces throughout the world. When used unhyphenated and in conjunction with no other indicators, major is one rank senior to captain, and one rank below lieutenant colonel.  It is considered the most junior of the field officer ranks. Background Majors are typically assigned as specialised executive or operations officers for battalion-sized units of 300 to 1,200 soldiers while in other nations, like Germany, majors are often in command of a company. When used in hyphenated or combined fashion, the term can also imply seniority at other levels of rank, including general-major or major general, denoting a low-level general officer, and sergeant major, denoting the most senior non-commissioned officer (NCO) of a military unit.  The term major can also be used with a hyphen to denote the leader of a military band such as in pipe-major or drum-major.Historically, the rank designation develops in English in the 1640s, taken from French majeur, in turn a shortening of sergent-majeur, which at the time designated a higher rank than at present. The term Mayor for the head of a municipal government can also  be traced to the same French word.The rank of major is also used in some police forces and other paramilitary rank structures, such as the Pennsylvania State Police, New York State Police, New Jersey State Police, and several others. As with a military major, this rank is most commonly the next rank above captain. The rank is equivalent to an inspector or commander in other large police departments or to the UK rank of superintendent. Links to major ranks by country Alphabetically sorted by name of country:Major (Brazil)Major (Canada)Majuri (Finland)Major (France)Major (Germany)Tagmatarchis (Greece; Ταγματάρχης, abbr. Τχης)Major (India)Majoras (Lithuania)Majoor (The Netherlands)Major (Pakistan)Major/Comandante (Philippines)Major (Poland)Major (Sri Lanka)Major (Sweden)Major (United Kingdom)Major (United States) Insignia = Insignia of army majors. =																																																																																																		= Insignia of air force majors =																																				= Insignia of naval infantry majors =										 Ranks equivalent to major by country Alphabetically sorted by name of country or sovereign stateJagran (جګړن) (Afghanistan)China少校 (Shao xiao) (Peoples Republic of China/Mainland china)少校 (Shaoxiao) (Republic of China/Taiwan)Bojnik (Croatia)Ra'Ed (رائد) (Egypt and most Arab League member countries)Commandant (France)Germany:Sturmbannführer (Schutzstaffel and paramilitary organisations of Nazi Germany)Tagmatarchis (Ταγματάρχης) (Greece and Cyprus)Őrnagy (Hungary)Mayor (Indonesia)Sargord (سرگرد) (Iran)Commandant (Ireland)Rav seren (רב סרן) (Israel)少佐 (Shousa) (Japan)Mejar (Malaysia)Хошууч (Mongolia)소좌 (North Korea)Magat (Philippines)Mayor (Russia)Major (Serbia)Gaashaanle (Somalia)Shelaqa (Ethiopia)소령 (South Korea)Comandante (Spain)Binbaşı (Turkey)Ukraine — Майор (Mayor)Thiếu tá (Vietnam)						 See also List of comparative military ranks References 