That high-souled one of Ikşvāku's line had competent counsellors, capable of administering business, of diving into the motives of others, and ever intent upon the good of the monarch. And that heroic king had eight famous Counsellors, pure and devoted to the royal service. They were, Dhrsti, Jayanta, and Vijaya, and Surăştra, and Răstravardhana, and Akopa and Dharmapala, and Sumantra the cight, conversant with profit. And he had two family priests beloved to him; viz., those foremost of saints. Vasistha and Vamadeva. And he had other counsellors besides, viz; Suyajna, and Javali, and Kasyapa, and Gautama, and the long-lived Markandeya, and the regenerate Katyayana. Ever associated in counsel with these Brahmarsis, his priests and counsellors serving the dynasty from father to son, were learned yet modest. and bashful, and conversant with policy, and of subdued-sense, and auspicious, and highsouled, and accomplished in the art of arms, and of high renown, and cautious, and acting according to their word, and possessing energy, forgiveness and fame and ever precluding their speech with a smile, and never committing themselves to a lie either from anger or interest or desire. And they were not unknown to what was done or sought to be done in the midst of their own or a hostile party. And they were adept in intercourse with people, and well-tried in friendship by the monarch. And they were ever busy in replenishing the exchequer and in levying troops. And they did not cherish ill will even towards enemies, when innocent. And they were heroic, and ever high-spirited, following policy, and protecting those citizens that were pure. And not bearing ill will towards Brahmaņas and Khatriyas, and filling the treasury, by inflicting punishments according lo the offences of the persons guilty. And during the time when those pure ones of one mind presided over the justice of the kingdom, there was neither in the city nor the provinces any that was a liar, or 'wicked, or going after others' wives. And peace reigned all around the city and the provinces. And the ministers wore excellent raiment, and ornaments, and were engaged in observing pure Vows, and ever kept their eye of policy open in the interest of the monarch. And the king considered them as crowned with virtues, and they were famed on account of their prowess, concluding unerringly in consequence of their intelligence of other countries. And in all climes and times they could manifest their noble qualities. They inculcated noble qualities in all aspects and were not devoid of virtues. And they were cognizant of war and peace, and possessed of goodness, passion and ignorance. And they could keep their counsel and judge of things finely, and were well-versed in the art of policy, and ever fair-spoken. Surrounded by such counseliors endowed with various qualities, the faultless king Dasaratha ruled the earth. And gathering intelligence by means of spies, and righteously protecting the subjects, and preserving the people, and not sacrificing his duties. Famed over the three worlds, and munificent, and linn in promise in battle, the tiger among men ruled over this earth. Nor did he ever meet with a foe that was either his equal or superior. And possessed of friends, and having obedient commanders, and extricating his thorns by his might, that king ruled the earth, even as the lord of celestials rules heaven. And surrounded by those counsellors studious of his welfare, and bearing affection towards him, and clever, and competent, that king, by virtue of his prowess in subduing others, resembled the sun surrounded by his rays.