Hearing those astonishing words of that lionlike king, the highly-energetic Viśvāmitra with his down standing on end, said. O tiger of a king, sprung from an illustrious line, and having Vasistha, for your guide, these words become you alone on earth and no one else. Do you, O tiger of a king, ascertain your course in respect of the matter I bear in my heart; and do you prove firm in promise! For celebrating a sacrifice, I, O foremost of men, abide by some prescribed course. And it comes to pass that two Rākşasas assuming shapes at will, have become bent upon disturbing the ceremony. And in that sacrifice which I have determined to bring to a completion, and which is on the eve of being completed, both these Rākşasas, Mārica and Subāhu, accomplished in arms and possessed of prowess, shower flesh and gore upon the altar. And on that ceremony being thus disturbed and by purpose thus frustrated, I considered my labours as all lost, and, therefore, have left my country in dejection. And, O monarch, I cannot bring myself to vent my wrath. For such is the nature of that business, that it is not proper for one engaged in it to utter a curse. Therefore, O tiger of a monarch, it behoves you to grant me your eldest son, the heroic Rāma of genuine prowess, with the sidelocks. By virtue of his own divine energy, he, being protected by me, is capable of even destroying those Rākşasas disturbing the ceremony. And I will, without doubt, confer upon him manifold blessings, by means of which he will secure the golden opinions of the three worlds. And encountering Rāma, they will by no means be able to stand him, nor is there any other who dares to slay them. And puffed up with energy, they have become ensnared at the hands of Käla, (Yama, the god of death.) and, O tiger of a monarch, they are no match for Rāma. Nor, o king, ought you to indulge in paternal affection. For ten nights only Rāma is to remain there, with the object of slaying those foes to my sacrifice, those Raksasas disturbing the rites. I tell you, do you consider the Raksasas as already slain. I know full well Rāma of sterling prowess, as also the highly-energetic Vasistha and the other ascetics present here. And if you, O king, set your heart upon acquiring religious merit and high fame on earth, do you then grant me Rāma! And, O Kākutstha, * if your counsellors together with the Brāhmaṇas having Vasistha at their head, consent, do you then dismiss Rāma! *From Kakud, an emblem of royalty, and Stha, residing, meaning a prince, the grandson of Iksvāku. Even this is my wish, and he also has come of age. Do you, therefore, part with your son, the lotus-eyed Rāma, for the ten days of the sacrifice! Do you act so, O descendant of Raghu, that the time appointed for the ceremony may not be overpassed. Good betide you! Let not your mind indulge in grief! Having said these words consistent with virtue and interest, the mighty-minded and highlypowerful Viśvāmitra paused. And hearing the auspicious words of Viśvāmitra, that foremost of kings shook with a mighty sorrow, and became bewildered. Then, having regained his senses, he rose up, and became cast down through apprehension. Having heard the words of the ascetic, capable of rending the mind and heart, the high-souled king of men became stricken with grief and shook on his seat.