Rāma saw his father, seated on a beautiful sofa with Kaikeyi, looking sorry and poorly and with his countenance dried up. And humbly bowing down at the feet of his father first, he saluted Kaikeyi with due solemnity. Uttering the word "Rāma" only, the poor king with his eyes full of tears could not see him nor could he speak to him. Seeing this unforeseen and terrible appearance of the king, like to a serpent trampled under foot, Rāma was exceedingly terrified. He was dejected and pulled down much with sorrow and penitence. He was sighing hot and hard and his heart was greatly pained. His heart was troubled like the wavy ocean agitating though incapable of agitation, and clouded like the Sun possessed by Rahu, and (that of) an ascetic speaking falsehood. Thinking of this unthought of sorrow of the king he became agitated like to the ocean during the course of the full-moon. And clever Rāma, intent on his father's welfare, thought within himself:, Why does not the king display joy on my arrival to-day. Angry though, he used to express joy whenever he saw me; then why does his sorrow prevail even seeing me to-day? Being pressed with sorrow, Rāma of pale countenance, like one miserable, saluting KaikeyI, spoke to her the following words. Is it not that I committed some offence through ignorance that I see my father angry? Do you propitiate him therefore. Why is his mind so aggrieved who was so kind to me, and why does he look poorly and of pale countenance who used to welcome me always with kind words? Is he subject to any physical or mental disturbance? Oh! happiness uninterrupted is very dear. Has any evil befallen the good-looking Bharata or high-souled Śatrughna? Is it not all well with my mothers. Dissatisfying the king, disregarding his words and offending him, I do not want to breathe for a single moment. How can a man disregard him who is god himself seen and felt, and who is looked upon as a cause from whom he has sprung. Oh mother, have you spoken any harsh word to my father either through anger or through haughtiness for which his mind is thus pulled down? Oh worshipful one, tell me all this, who am exceedingly anxious to get at the real truth. Why has this unforeseen sorrow overtaken the heart of the lord of men? Being thus addressed by the high-souled Rāghava, that exceedingly shameless Kaikeyī spoke to him the following impudent words, fraught with her self-interest. Oh Rāma, the monarch is not angry nor has any danger befallen him. He has got something in his mind which he cannot speak out through your fear. You are his most beloved son and word does not proceed from his mouth to speak you things unpleasant. But it behoves you to carry out what the monarch has promised to me. Formerly regarding me very highly he conferred on me two boons and he now repents for that like a common person. Promising 'I give you the lord of earth granted me these boons; in vain he wishes to set up a dyke when all the water has passed away. Oh Rāma, it is known to you that truth is the root of all religion and may he not renounce that for you, being angry with me. If do you carry out all that the king will speak to you, good or evil, then I shall relate to you every thing. If what I, with the king's permission, speak to you, does not go useless, I shall speak to you all; the king will not speak any thing. Hearing these words uttered by Kaikeyī, Rāma, pained at heart, spoke to her in the presence of the king in the following way: Oh! shame to me. May it not please you, Oh worshipful lady, to speak such words to me. I can at the king's words jump into the fire. Being ordered by him, who is my father and who is my king especially, I can drink virulent poison and drown into the ocean. Speak you, Oh worshipful lady, what is the desire of the king, and know that I shall carry it out, Rāma does not contradict what he has once spoken. Then that wicked Kaikeyi spoke these highly cruel words to Rāma, simple and truthful. Foremerly in a great war between the gods and Asuras, your father, being wounded with shafts was tended by me for which he conferred upon me two boons. Of these two boons I have asked of the king the installation of Bharata, and the departure of Rāghava into the Dandaka forest even this very day. Oh you best among men, if do you wish to keep your father's vows as well as yours, hear what I say. Your father is bound to me by promise, obeying therefore your father's mandate, do you repair to the forest for nine years and five. Bharata shall be installed, Ch Rāghava, by all those articles which have been brought by the monarch for your installation. Forsaking this installation, do you repair to Dandaka forest for seven and seven years and wear bark and matted hair. And here in this Kosala let Bharata govern the world, adorned with many pearls and diamonds, with elephants, horses and chariots. The king, filled with pity and having his face marked with the affliction of sorrow, cannot cast a glance upon you. Oh you descendant of Raghu, do you carry out these words of the Lord of men and save him by redeeming these great vows of his. Hearing these cruel words of her, Rāma was not grieved; but the generous king afflicted with the thought of the approaching separation with his son, was greatly pained. out these words of the Lord of men and save him by redeeming these great vows of his. Hearing these cruel words of her, Rāma was not grieved; but the generous king afflicted with the thought of the approaching separation with his son, was greatly pained.