Once upon a time there was a mighty son of Brahmā, of high austerities, named Kusa. And he was cognizant of duty, and ever engaged in observing vows and honouring good men. That high-souled one beget on Vaidarbha, sprung from a respectable line and endowed with all noble qualities, four sons like to himself, and possessed of extraordinary prowess-Kuśămba, and Kušanābha, and Asūrtarajas, and Vasu, resplendent and breathing exhaustless spirits. And with the desire of enhancing Kșetrya merit, Kuśa said to his truthful and virtuous sons"You sons! do you engage in the task of governing, and thereby acquire immense merit.' Hearing Kuśa's words, those four foremost of men and best of sons addressed themselves to founding seats for their government. And the highly energetic Kuśāmba founded the city of Kausambi; and the righteous Kusanabha, the metropolis of Mahodaya; and the magnanimous Asūrtarajas, Dharmāraṇya; and king Vasu, Girivraja, best of capitals. This city (otherwise) called Vasumatī belongs to the high-souled Vasu. And the river known by the name of Sumāgadhi flows through the Māgadhas. And in the midst of the five foremost of hills, it looks like a garland. And this Mägadhi, O Råma, belongs to the high-souled Vasu, taking, O Rāma, an easterly course, and flowing through fertile fields furnished with corn. O descendant of Raghu, the Rājarși Kusanābha beget an hundred godly daughters on Ghrtaci. And it came to pass that they endowed with youth, beautiful and like to the lighting in the rainy season, decked in excellent ornaments, coming to their garden were merrily singing and dancing and playing on musical instruments, O Rāghava! And as they perfect in every limb, and unparalleled on earth in beauty, and endowed with all qualities, and furnished with youth and grace, were in the garden, like to stars embossed among clouds, that life of all (the air, beheld them and said.)12-13-14-15 I seek for you: do you become my wives. Do you renounce this human guise, and attain long lives. Youth verily is unstable, specially with the human beings: do you attaining unfading youth, become immortal! Hearing this speech of the Air of ever fresh energy, the damsels ridiculing it, said. You range the hearts of all creatures, O foremost of celestials, and we also know your influence. Wherefore, then, do you dishonour us? O foremost of celestials, we are the daughters of Kušanābha O divine one. And god as you are, we can dislodge you from your place; but we refrain from doing so, lest thereby we lose our ascetic merit. May, O foolish one, that time never come, when disregarding our truthful sire, we following our inclination, shall resort to self choice. Our father verily is our lord an prime god. Of him even shall we become the wives to whom our father give us away. At these words of theirs, that lord and adorable one, the Air, exceedingly enraged, then entered into their bodies, and brake all their limbs. Their bodies being thus broken by Air, those damsels, exceedingly agitated and overwhelmed with shame, with tears in their eyes entered the residence of the king. And finding his supremely beautiful and favourite daughters with their limbs broken, and woebegone, the king bewildered, spoke. You daughters, what is this? Who is it that thus disregards virtue? By whom have you all come by this crooked form? And why demonstrating your grief, do you not answer me?' Having said this, the king heaved a deep sigh and became eager to hear all about it.