Hearing those words of Nārada, that one of virtuous soul, skilled in speech, together with his disciples, worshipped that great sage. Having received due honours, that Devarși Nārada taking leave of him went to his ethereal regions. And when Nārada had left for the celestial regions, that holy person went to the banks of the Tamasā not very far from Jāhnavī. And having arrived at the banks of that river, the pious one, observing a holy spot devoid of mud, spoke to his disciple standing by. Saying-O Bharadvāja, behold this holy spot devoid of mud. And it is beautiful, and contains pleasant waters, even like the minds of good men. O child, do you, put down your pitcher, and give me my bark. I will bathe even in this Tamasā, the best of holy spots. Thus accosted by the high-souled Vālmīki, Bharadvāja ever intent upon serving his spiritual guide, presented the sage his bark. That one of subdued senses, having received his bark from his disciple, began to range around, surveying that extensive forest. In the vicinity of the forest, that worshipful one espied a pair of Krauñcas, emitting melodious notes, and ranging around never parting from one another. At this juncture, a wicked-minded fowler, singling out the male, without any cause of hostility, slew him in the very presence of the holy man. Observing him struggling on the earth, bathed in blood, his female companion began to bewail in piteous accents. At the prospect of her separation from her copper-crested oviparous husband, engaged in sport with extended plumage. Finding the bird in that condition thus brought down by the fowler, the pity of that pious and righteous-souled Rși was excited exceedingly. Then considering it to be an unrighteous deed, with a heart moved with pity, that twice-born one, beholding the weeping Krauñci, spoke these words. O fowler, since you have slain one of a pair of Krauñcas, you shall never attain prosperity (respect)! Having uttered this, he got worried within himself, What is this that I have said, afflicted with grief for the bird? Resolving thus in his mind, that highly-wise one and best of sages addressed his disciple, saying. This speech that I have uttered is of equal bound with metre and accents; it has rhythm and is capable of being chanted according to measure to stringed accompaniment. Let it therefore go forth as a sloka! When the sage had spoken thus, his disciple, well pleased, assented to his excellent speech; and thereat that pious person was gratified. Then having duly performed his ablutions at that holy spot, the reverend sage retraced his steps, pondering over the incidents touching the sloka. His disciple also, accomplished in learning, and of meek demeanour, followed Vālmīki, carrying on his back a pitcher filled with water. Having entered the hermitage along with his disciple, conversant with righteousness engaged in diverse kinds of talk, revolved in his mind the circumstances connected with the verses. It came to pass that desirous of seeing the best of sages, there arrived, that lord and creator of all, the effulgent Brahmā, furnished with four countenances. Beholding him Vālmīki rose up suddenly and, wondering greatly, humbly and silently stood before him with clasped hands. And duly bending low in reverence, Vālmīki offered that deity water to wash his feet, and other things for reception. Having sat-down on a highly-honoured seat, that worshipful one enquired after the welfare of that sage Vālmīki knowing no deterioration, and then asked him to be seated. Having been seated in the presence of the Grand-sire of all, Vālmīki, his mind running upon the self-same subject, became plunged in thought. What a sin has been committed by the wicked-minded one, incited by hostile feeling, that he without cause slew that sweetly-singing Kraunca! And thereupon, again lamenting that female Krauñca, he, in grief of heart, mentally recited those verses. Then smiling, Brahmā spoke to the excellent sage,-Those verses of your which you have composed a sloka shall attain celebrity: no doubt need be entertained on this head, It is because I had intended so, that those verses had come out of your lips. Do you now, O best of saints, compose the entire history of Rāma. Do you relate to the world the history of the righteous-souled and intelligent Rāma crowned with qualities. And do you, as you have heard it from Närada. Relate all what is known, and all what is unknown to the world, O wise one, concerning Rāma, and Laksmana, and Videha's daughter, and all the Rākşasas. And even what is not known to Nārada, shall be unfolded to you. No words of yours in this poem shall contain an untruth sacred. Therefore, now compose into verses. This delightful story of Rama. As long as the mountains and the seas exist on earth, the history of Rāmāyaṇa will remain prevalent among men. As long as this story of Rāmāyaṇa shall retain its currency, you shall reside both in this world and in mine. Having said this, the Lord Brahmä disappeared there. And thereat the sage and his disciples marvelled greatly. His disciples sang those verses again and again; and, momentarily experiencing pleasure, recited it with exceeding wonder. Those verses, composed of equal accents, and furnished with four parts, have been sung by the great saint, have, in virtue of frequent repetition, been associated with a world of pathos and have attained the eminence of a sloka. Now it is the intention of that illustrious and self-centred sage to compose the entire Rāmāyaṇa in this metre. The great ascetic Vālmīki of gracious appearance and unparalleled renown composed a poetry consisting of hundreds of verses in melodious measure, couching the significance of the history of Rāma. Listen to the annals of the foremost of Raghu's race, and the destruction of the Tenheaded one composed by the ascetic, with Samāsas, Sandhis, Prakrtis, and Pratayas; and lucid with sweet and equally-accented words.