Then when the night had been spent, king Dasaratha accompanied with his priests and adherents, well pleased spoke to Sumantra, saying, To-day let the officers in charge of the treasury, taking plenty of excellent wealth, and furnished with various gems, go in advance under proper escort. And let the fore-fold forces sally out with speed. And at my command let horses and conveyances and elegant vehicles march out And let Vasiştha and Vamadeva and Jābāli and Kasyapa and Mārkandeya endowed with long life and the saint Katyāyana-let these regenerate ones go forward. And do you also yoke my car. Let not the proper time pass away; for the envoys urge speed upon me. At these words of the king, the four-fold forces together with the saints went in the wake of the monarch. After having passed four days on the way, they arrived at Videha. And bearing of Dasaratha's arrival, the auspicious king Janaka experienced great delight, and having obtained the aged king Dasaratha, he honoured him duly. That chief of men well pleased, spoke these words, Have your journey been a pleasant one, O best of men? By luck have I obtained you, O descendant of Raghu. Do you experience the joy earned by the prowess of your sons. And by luck it is that I have obtained the highly energetic and worshipful saint Vasistha accompanied by the foremost regenerate ones, like him of an hundred sacrifices, by the celestials. By luck it is that I have overcome the obstacle; by luck it is that my race has attained renown, in consequence of alliance with those endowed with prowess, the exceedingly potent Rāghavas. O lord of men, to-morrow morning after the completion of the sacrifice, do you perform the nuptials, in company with the foremost of the saints. Hearing his speech in the midst of the saints, that best of those conversant with words, the lord of men, replied to the monarch, saying, A gift should be accepted, this I heard formerly. And what you say, O you cognizant of duty, will we accomplish. Hearing these words of the truthful (king), chiming in with morality and conducive to fame, the lord of Videha was filled with admiration. Then the ascetics experiencing great delight, passed the night in each other's company. And the king, overjoyed on beholding his sons, the Rāghavas passed (the night) in exceeding delight, splendidly entertained of Janaka. And the exceedingly energetic Janaka also, versed in men and things, having in accordance with the ordinance completed the sacrifice and performed all the preliminary rites relative to the nuptials of his daughters, reposed for the night.