Hearing these unpleasant words like to death, Rama, the destroyer of foes, was not pained, and spoke thus to Kaikeyī. Be it what you say; carrying out the promise of the king, I shall repair to the forest from this place wearing bark and matted hair. Now I want to know only why that lord of the earth, invincible and the conqueror of foes, does not receive me in the same way as he used to do on previous occasions. be not angry, Oh worshipful one, I speak before you, be you propitiated well, and I shall go to the forest wearing bark and matted hair. What is there that I cannot perform, considering it good without suspicion, if I am ordered so by my well-wisher, spiritual leader, father and king, who acknowledges your service (rendered in time of danger).* *The epithet Krtajñena may as well as be rendered into general terms; such as 'who acknowledges services rendered to him.' Here in translation I have followed the commentator who has restricted it to the special sense suitable to the occasion. But this one sorrow burns my heart, why king did not tell me personally of the installation of Bharata. What of the command of the king, my father, I shall even at your mandate joyfully make over to Bharata, my kingdom, Sītā, wealth and even my life, thereby satisfying you, and fulfilling my promise. Do you now console the bashful king; why has he, with his eyes steadily fixed on the ground, been shedding tears slowly? Let messengers, with fast going steeds go today at the command of the king to fetch Bharata from his maternal uncle's house. I shall, not even judging the propriety of my father's words, speedily repair to the forest of Dandaka for fourteen years. Hearing those words of Rāma, Kaikeyi was pleased, and being certain about his departure, hurried on Raghava. Let it be that messengers with fast going steeds shall go to bring Bharata from his maternal uncle's residence. I do not think it proper for you, O Rāma, to delay, when you are so anxious; it behoves you therefore to depart from this place speedily to the forest. The king being abashed, does not himself address you, there is nothing else than this. Do you, Oh best of men, dispel this wretchedness of his. As long as you shall not hurriedly depart from his presence, Oh Rāma, your father shall not bathe, or eat anything. 'Oh fie!' 'what affliction' sobbing hard with these words, the monarch, filled with sorrow, swooned away and fell down upon the sofa, embellished with gold. Raising the king up, Rāma, being directed by Kaikeyī, began to hurry on his departure to the forest, like to a steed struck sharp with a whip. Hearing those cruel and unpleasant words of the wicked Kaikeyi, Rama, not being distressed, began to address her with the following words. Oh worshipful one, being addicted to wealth do I not long for living in this world; like to Rșis, know me, to be well established in pure religion. If I can, even at the sacrifice of my own life, satisfy my worshipful father, rest assured it is to be done first in all manner. There is no virtue greater than the serving of the father and carrying out his words. Even though not commanded by him, I shall, for your words, live in a solitary forest for fourteen years. Oh Kaikeyī, certain it is that you are not acquainted with my foremost virtues, inasmuch as possessing full authority to rule me, you have requested the monarch for this. Excuse me until I ask my mother, and comfort Sītā; even this very day shall I wend my way to the great forest of Dandaka. If behoves you to do that by which Bharata may govern the kingdom and tend our father, for this is the virtue eternal. Hearing these words of Rāma, his father, greatly afflicted and incapable of speaking anything on account of sorrow, began to cry aloud. Worshipping the feet of the king lying insensible, and those of vicious Kaikeyi, that greatly effulgent one went out. And reverentially going round his father and Kaikeyi, and issuing out of the female apartment, Rāma saw his own friends and relatives. Then followed him Lakşmaņa, the enhance of Sumitra's joy, greatly angry and with his eyes full of tears. Going round with reverence the house of installation full of necessary articles, not turning away from it his wistful look, Rāma began to proceed slowly. Loss of kingdom could not diminish the great beauty of that beloved of the people on account of its everlasting pleasantness, like to the wane of the moon. There was manifest in his no change of mind, who was about to fly as an exile to the forest and leave the world, like to one emancipated while yet living. Leaving aside the excellent umbrella and well adorned chowries, forsaking his relatives, chariot, citizens and other people, calmly bearing the affliction in mind and not manifesting the outward signs of sorrow, Rāma, with a view to communicate this unpleasant news to his mother, entered her abode. All persons, who were present there and who adorned themselves on account of the installation, did not perceive any sign of mental agony on the face of Rāma. Like to the rays of the fully brilliant autumnal moon, that hero of mighty arms, having control over himself, did not forsake his native cheerfulness. The pious Rāma, having high fame, entered into the presence of his mother, manifesting great regards for the people with sweet speech. Then followed him, the son of Sumitrā, of mighty prowess, of equal accomplishments with his brother, and bearing the mental sorrow. Rāma, entering the abode of his mother. Saw it filled with all sorts of amusements; and even though his mind was not agitated with any mental disturbance seeing the impending calamity of loss of wealth, he was anxious lest the lives of his dear relatives mighty be in danger.