And he said again, O foremost of monarchs, do you listen to me as I relate how that intelligent Sanatkumāra, best of deities, spoke. In the line of Ikşvāku will be born a righteous king, named Dasaratha, fair of form, and firm in promise. That king will contract friendship with the ruler of the Angas. And the latter will have a highly pious daughter, śāntā by name. And the (old) king of the Angas will have a son, named Romapāda. And repairing to him, the highly famous king Dasaratha will speak to Romapada, O righteous-souled one! I am without issue. Let śāntā's husband, desired by you, take charge of this sacrifice of mine, to be celebrated with the object of my obtaining a son to perpetuate the race. Hearing these words of the king, and having pondered well, he will make over to him Rsyasînga of subdued senses, together with Santa and his children. And taking that Vipra, that king, his mind free from anxiety, with a glad heart, will prepare for that sacrifice. And king Dasaratha, knowing duty and desirous of fame, with the intention of obtaining offspring and heaven, with folded hands, will appoint that best of Brahmanas, Rsyasriga, to conduct the ceremony. And that bringer of good will attain his object at the hands of that foremost of Brāhmaṇas. And four sons will be born to him of immeasurable prowess, bringing fame to the family, and known by all.' Thus spoke formerly in the divine age, that worshipful and foremost of deities, Sanatkumāra. Therefore, do you, O tiger among men, repairing there, accompanied with your forces and equipage, yourself, O mighty king, bring Rşyasſrga over with due honours. Hearing Sumantra's words, Dasaratha was exceedingly delighted. And hearing these words, and permitted by Vasistha, he, accompanied with the ladies, and his courtiers, set out for the place where that twice-born one was. And gradually passing by woods and fells, he arrived at the place where that foremost of ascetics was. And coming before that best of regenerate ones, he saw that sage's son near Romapāda, like that of a flaming fire. Then the king received him respectfully, and with a delighted mind, on account of the friendship he bore him. He communicated to the intelligent son of the saint, the fact of their intimacy, and then the latter paid homage to Dasaratha. Having passed seven or eight days with Romapäda, receiving high honours, that foremost of men, Dasaratha spoke to Romapada,. saying, Let your daughter, O king, together with her husband, O lord of men, repair to my city. I am going to be engaged in a mighty enterprise. Hearing this as to the journey of that intelligent one, the king said to that Vipra, Do you repair with your wife! Thereupon the saint's son, promising to go, said to the king, So be it! Then with the king's permission, he set out with his wife. Dasaratha and the puissant Romapāda clasping each other by the palm, and embracing each other in affection, attained excess. of joy. Then Raghu's son, bidding farewell to his friend, set out. He despatched swift messengers to the citizens, saying, Let the entire city be embellished; let it be perfumed with dhupa, and watered and decked with pennons. Hearing of the king's approach, the citizens joyfully did every thing as per message they had been communicated. Then the monarch, preceded by the foremost of Brāhmanas before him, entered the decorated city, to the blares of conches and drums. And beholding that Brāhmaṇa entering the city, duly honoured by the prime of men; subservient to Indra, like to Kaśyapa's son entering the celestial regions honoured of the thousand eyed lord of the celestials, all the citizens rejoiced exceedingly. Then taking him into the inner apartment, and paying him homage according to the ordinance, the king considered himself as having gained his object, in consequence of the presence of that Brahmana. And all the inmates of the inner apartment, seeing the large-eyed Săntă thus arrived with her husband, experienced excess of joy. Then honoured by them and the king in especial, she happily spent there some time along with that twice-born one.