There arose a great uproar of cry in the apartment of the females, when that best of men went out with clasped hands. That Rāma, who used to serve all the females in all matters even without his father's permission, who was our stay and protector, is going to the forest. Raghava from his birth pays as much attention to us as to his mother Kausalya. He, who being cursed, does not get angry, pacifies the wrathful and studiously avoids words and deeds that excite anger in others, will repair hence this day to the forest. Senseless is our king, who forsakes Rāghava who is the stay of all people, and thus kills his subjects. Thus the queens of Dasaratha, like to the cows that have lost their young ones, began to blame him and cry aloud. Hearing this terrible uproar of cry in the female apartment, that lord of earth, racked with sorrow on account of his son, hid himself in the seat (with head hanging downwards). Rāma too, having control over his own self, experiencing sorrow (for his relatives) and sobbing like an (enchained) elephant, entered into his mother's apartment, together with his brother. He saw a venerable old man, sitting at the gate and many other persons. All those present, seeing Rāma, began to shower benedictions on him, the best of all victorious heroes, saying,"Victory to you". Having passed through the first apartment he saw in the second, many.old Brahmanas, versed in the Vedas and honoured by the king. Having bowed down to them, Rāma saw in the third apartment, women, boys, and old men, all engaged in watching the gate. The female warders honoured Rāma rejoicing, and entering his mother's apartment, communicated to her speedily this pleasant news. Worshipful Kausalyā, seeking her son's welfare, kept up the whole night being absorbed in meditation, and was, in the morning, worshipping the God Vişņu. Wearing silk-cloth, pleased, and accustomed to the performance of religious rites every day, she, performing benedictory ceremonies, was offering oblation to the fire. Rāma entering the auspicious abode of his mother, beheld her thus engaged in the sacrifice to the fire. The descendant of Raghu saw there, brought for the service of the celestials, curd, grains, clarified butter, sweetmeats, things fit for oblations to the fire, fried paddy, white garlands, rice boiled in milk and sugar, rice sesamum and pea mixtures, sacrificial fuels and jars full of water. He saw his virtuous mother wearing white silk, pulled down by the austere performance of religious rites, and engaged in propitiating the deities with the offering of water. She seeing her son, ever advancing the joy of his mother, approach, became pleased, and stepped forward like unto a mare beholding her young one. Seeing his mother approach, Rāghava bowed low, and (Kausalyā) embracing him in her arms smelt his head. Kausalya, out of motherly affection, spoke these sweet and beneficent words to her own invincible son, Rāghava. May you obtain the life and fame of the pious, old Rājarşis, and the virtue worthy of your family. See, Oh Rāghava, how truthful is your father the king! That virtuous-souled one shall install you this day as the heir-apparent of the throne Rāghava, humble by nature, who was offered by his mother a seat and asked by her to eat something, stretching forth a little his clasped hands, and with his head down wards with a view to show respects towards his mother, touched the seat, and began to relate to her the object of his repairing to the Dandaka forest. O worshipful one, certain it is that you know not the great impending calamity; It is for the distress of yours, Laksmana and Vaidehi, that shall I wend my way to the Daņdaka forest. What is the use of a seat to me then? Now is the time come when I deserve a seat made of Kusa grass. I shall live in the forest for fourteen years abstaining from animal food and living on tuberous roots and fruits like to the ascetics. The king shall confer upon Bharata the heirapparentship and shall banish me as an ascetic into the forest. And I shall live in that solitary forest for eight and six years, feasting on roots, and fruits and performing the duties of a hermit. Like to the stem of a sāla tree cut asunder by an axe in a wood, like to a female celestial fallen down from the abode of the gods, she fell down suddenly (hearing these heart-rending words.) Rāma seeing his mother, who deserved no distress, fall down like a plantain tree and insensible, raised her up, and finding her covered with dust all over her body like to a mare risen up after rolling on the ground on account of toil of bearing heavy burden, wiped off (her body) gently with his hand. She, deserving happiness, being racked with the destruction of her delight, spoke thus to Rāghava, that best of men, in the presence of Laksmana. Oh! my son, Oh! Rāghava, had you not been born for my grief I would have been sonless only, but would not have been subject to this greater grief. A sonless woman has only one cause of mental affliction. Her only sorrow is “I have no child" and nothing else my son. I have not experienced in my life that blessing and pleasure which women generally feel when their husbands are devoted to them. I have sustained my life so long, O Rāma, only with the hope that I shall witness this and other happiness when I shall have a son. Myself, being the eldest of all the queens, shall have to hear unpleasant and heart-rending words from the co-wives who are all younger than I. There can be no greater misery for women than this my boundless grief and lamentations. You being present, they have reduced me to this miserable plight, I do not know what else they will do, you being away; there is death certain for me, Oh my darling! Being disregarded by my husband I have been greatly insulted, I am equal to the maid-servants of Kaikeyi or even inferior to them. Those who serve me or are obedient to me, shall not even speak with me when they will see the son of Kaikeyi (installed). She is always of fretful temper, how shall I, reduced to misery (on account of your exile), eye the face of Kaikeyī, uttering harsh words. I have spent, Oh Rāghava, ten years and seven from your (second) birth* birth* expecting a termination of my sorrow. Even though worn out, Oh Rāghava, shall not be able to suffer this great misery consequent upon your unending exile and the contempt of the co-wives. *Here the commentators differ in fixing the age of Rāma at the time of his going to the forest Rāma's age was under sixteen at the time of marriage, and after he has married to Sită he enjoyed her company for twelve years, when the proposal of installation was made. This makes totally age of twenty-seven. In the text ‘dasa sapta ca' (ten and seven) ten years fall short which are to be made up by taking into account the age of ten being left out, preceding Rāma's entering into the second birth which begins at maunjibandhana or initiation into the mysteries of the Vedic literature. Following the example of Bhāșyakāra Patañjali, the commentator, Rāmānuju, has in the sentence ‘daśa supta ca' supplied another (dasa) (ten) by means of ellipsis, thus giving an age of twentyseven. This, however, contradicts the statement of Sītā to Rāvana in guise of an anchorite, informing him of the age of her husband being twenty-five. A modern annotator with great ingenuity has devised ways to make up this discrepancy. The age of Rāma was under sixteen, when Visvamitra asked his assistance in destroying Taraka. 'Under sixteen' may mean fifteen or twelve as well. After marriage at twelve, Rāma enjoyed twelve years more the pleasure of home. This giving in total twenty-four, it is to be supposed that when he was exiled he stepped at twenty-five. The text dasa sapta ca' is correct, considering the age of eight being left out preceding his second birth at the initiation into the mysteries of the Veda. How shall I, of miserable life, pass my days in grief not seeing your face, effulgent like to the full-moon. Wretched as I am, in vain have I brought you up with fasts, contemplation's and many other toilsome austerities. Surely, I consider my heart is very hard, as it does not rend like to the bank of a great river in contact with new water in the rainy season. There is no death for me, no vacant place in the abode of Yama; otherwise why does not Death take me away like to a lion snatching away a weeping hind; certain it is that my heart is made of iron, as it does not rend nor does my body being pressed down with this sorrow and (falling) down on earth, break into pieces; verily have I no death before time. This distresses me that all my religious vows, alms giving, self-restraint and austerity, performed with a view of obtaining a son, have been fruitless, like to the seeds thrown on a barren soil. If any body in this life, being pressed down with some great calamity, could meet with death of his own accord, I would have instantly gone to the abode of death, being cut off from you like to a cow from her young one. Oh, you, having a countenance of moon-like splendour, wretched indeed is my life without you, I shall follow you to the forest out of great affection, like to an enfeebled cow following her young one. Kausalyā like a Kinnarī unable to bear this great calamity, anticipating great misfortune and seeing Rāma bound (with a great vow), began to lament in various ways. some