When the priest had gone away, Rāma, having bathed and with a collected mind, began to adore Nārāyaṇa, in company with his wife having expansive eyes. Then raising the vessel of clarified butter to his head (by way of paying reverence), he in accordance with the ordinance began to offer oblations to the flaming fire on behalf of that mighty deity. Then, having partaken of the remaining quantity of the clarified butter, Rāma prayed for his own welfare, and meditated on the god Nārāyaṇa. The son of the best of men with a collected mind, and restraining his speech lay down on a Kuśa bed together with Vaidehī within the graceful dwelling of Vişnu. When a single watch only remained of the night, Rāma awoke, and made his residence well decorated. Now he hearing the melodious utterances of genealogists and panegyrist and Brāhmaṇas versed in the Purāņas, Rāma finished devotions for the prior twilight, and with an intent mind began to recite (Savatri).* *The celebrated hymn to the sun, the most sacred thing in all the Vedas. And clad in a clear silk dress, he with bended head hymned the destroyer of Madhu, and made the regenerate ones perform the Svastivácana ceremony. Already resounding with the blares of trumpets, Ayodhyā became filled with the sweet and solemn tones of the expressions “Holy day" uttered by them. The denizens of Ayodhyā, hearing that Rāghava had fasted with Vaidehi, rejoiced exceedingly. Then the citizens, hearing of the installation of Rāma and seeing that the night had departed, fell to adorning the city. Standards with pennons were beautifully reared up in the abodes of the gods resembling a peak, enveloped with white clouds, and at the crossing, and on high ways; and over the Caitya tree; and edifices; and over the ware-houses of merchants abounding in goods and the goodly and prosperous mansions of householders, and over all the council-houses and conspicuous trees. The multitude then heard the music, soothing to the ear and heart, of stage managers, dancers and singers chanting. The people began to talk with each other anent the installation of Rāma, and the time for his installation having arrived, on terraces and houses, and doorways boys playing in bodies, conversed with each other concerning the installation of Rāma. On the occasion of the investiture of Rāma, the goodly high ways were adorned with garlands, and scented with dhūpa incense, by the citizens. And fearing lest Rāma should come out over night (to behold the beautified capital), the inhabitants of the city, by way of ornamentation as with the view of beholding Rāma himself, had by the road side reared up lamp-stands in the form of (branched) trees. Eagerly expecting the investiture of Rāma as the heir-apparent, all having thus ornamented the city and assembling them selves on terraces and in council-halls, talking with each other, extolled the lord of men, saying, “Ah high-souled is this king, the perpetuator of the Iksvāku race, for, knowing himself as old, he will install Rāma in the kingdom. Obliged we have been, since good Rāma capable of reading character, will be the lord of earth, and our protector. He is of a heart devoid of arrogance, and is learned, and righteous-souled, and affectionate to his brothers. Rāghava loves us even as he does his own brothers. May the sinless and pious king Dasaratha live long; for it is through his grace that we shall behold Rāma installed. The inhabitants of the provinces, who having heard the tidings, had come from various regions, heard the citizens conversing thus. Desirous of beholding the installation of Rāma, they coming into the city from various directions, filled Rāma's city. As the vast concourse entered (the city),there was heard an uproar like to the roaring of the heaving ocean during the fullness of the moon. Then that city resembling the regions of Indra, being filled on all sides with tumult raised by the dwellers of the provinces who had come to behold (the installation), resembled the ocean when its waters are agitated by the aquatic animals inhabiting it.