Hearing Trišanku's speech, the hundred sons of the saint, O Rāma, excited by wrath, said these words to the king, ‘Disregarded hast you been, O you of perverse understanding, by our truth-telling sire, why then, having passed him by, do you seek for others' help? To the Ikşvākus, their spiritual guide is their prime way; nor art you capable of setting at naught the words of that truth-telling one. That worshipful saint said, that he was incapable (of accomplishing this), how can we then undertake that sacrifice? You are ignorant, O foremost of men. Do you speedily retrace your steps. And, O king, that adorable one is competent to officiate at the sacrifice itself of the three worlds, how can we then contribute to his dishonour?' Hearing those words of theirs, that king, with accents tremulous with passion, again addressed them, saying, 'Disregarded by that worshipful one as well as by the sons of my spiritual guide, I will go after another way, so peace he to you, ascetics.' The saint's sons, on their part, hearing that speech couching a fierce intent, cursed him in exceeding wrath, saying, 'You shall come by Candāla-hood.' Having said this, those highsouled ones entered each into his dwelling.' And vhen the „ight had gone by the king came by Chandala-hood. And clad in a blue garb, blue and rough of person, having a short head of hair, wearing a garland composed of materials culled from a cemetery, his body bedaubed with ashes from the same quarter, he was decked out with iron ornaments. And, O Rāma, beholding him in the guise of a Chandala, his counsellors as well as followers, renouncing him, fled in a body. And, O Kākutstha, maintaining himself in patience, the monarch burning day and night, all alone went to the ascetic Viśvāmitra. And beholding to disappointed king in the guise of a Chandala, the ascetic, O Rāma, was touched with pity. And from commiseration, that pre-eminently pious and exceedingly energetic one said to that king frightful to behold, saying, 'Good betide you, O heroic lord of Ayodhya, you have fallen into Chandala-hood through a curse, what is the purpose of your coming, O highly powerful prince?' Hearing him, the king conversant with words, fallen into Candāla-hood, with folded hands, said to that one versed in speech. Disregarded had I been by my spiritual guide as well as his sons. And far from attaining my desire, I came by this calamity. O you of placid presence, I had desired to repair to heaven in body. By me have an hundred sacrifices been performed, but yet do I not obtain the fruit thereof. I have never before told an untruth; and I swear by my Ksatriya morality, that albeit fallen on evil days, I will never do so in future, O gentle one. I have celebrated many sacrifices, and I have ruled my people in righteousness; and I have pleased my preceptors by my character and conduct. But, O . best of ascetics, now endeavouring to do my duty and intending to perform a sacrifice, I have failed in enlisting the good graces of my spiritual guides. Therefore do I consider Destiny as supreme; and action as nothing. Density overtake all: Destiny is the prime way. Therefore it behove you to grant your favour to me extremely distressed, who crave your favour, and, good betide you, whole endeavours have been baffled by Density. Other way will I wend none; nor is there any other refuge for me. It behove you to meet Density with exertion.