Hearing those bold words of the ascetic, the son of that foremost of men, Rāghava firm in his vows, with clasped hands answered. In accordance with the desire of my sire, and in order to glorify it, I ought fearlessly to do even as Kusika's son says. And having been desired to that end while at Ayodhyā by that high-souled one, my father Dasaratha, in the midst of the spiritual guides, I ought not to pass by your words. Therefore, commanded by that upholder of the Veda, I, agreeably to my father's mandate, will, without doubt, bring about that welcome event-the death of Tataka. And in the interests of Brāhmaṇas, kine, and celestials, I am ready to act as desired by you of immeasurable energy. Having said this, that repressor of foes, with clenched fist, twanged his bow-string, filling the ten cardinal points with the sounds. And at those sounds, the dwellers in Tāțakā's forest were filled with perturbation, and Tātakā also amazed at those sounds, became exceedingly wroth. And rendered almost insensible by anger, that Räksasī furiously rushed in a main towards the spot whence had come the report. And beholding that frightful one of hideous visage and colossal proportions, transported with rage, Raghu's descendant spoke to Laksmana,9 Behold, O Laksmana, the terrible and hideous body of yonder Yakṣiṇī! The sight of her strike terror into the hearts of even the brave. Mark! This irrepressible one, possessing all the resources of illusion, will I oppose, and deprive her of ears and nose. But I dare not slay her, she being protected by virtue of her feminineness. I intend only to oppose her course, and deprive her of her prowess. As Rāma was speaking thus, Tāțakā, deprived of sense through ire, uttering roars, with uplifted arms rushed against him. And thereat the Brahmarsi, Visvāmitra, uttering a roar, upbraided her, and said, Svasti!* May victory attend the descendants of Raghu! *A particle of benediction, indeclinable. And raising thick clouds of dust, Tāțakā instantly bewildered both the descendants of Raghu. And then by help of illusion, she began to pour upon them a mighty shower of crags. And thereat Raghu's descendant was wroth. And resisting that mighty shower of crags by vollies of shafts, Rāghava with arrows cut off her hands. And with the fore-parts of her arms lopped off, as she was roaring before them, Sumitra's son waxing wroth deprived her of her ears and nose. Thereupon that one capable of assuming forms at will, began to assume various shapes; and to vanish from sight, bewildering her antagonists with her illusory displays. Terribly ranging the field, the Yakṣī showered crags upon her antagonists. And beholding them enveloped on all sides by that craggy downpour, the auspicious son of Gadhi spoke these words-O Rāma, renounce your antipathy. This one of wicked ways is exceedingly impious. And this sacrifice-disturbing Yakși will, by virtue of her power of illusion, come to increase more and more in energy. Do you, therefore, against the arrival of dusk, slay her! The Rākṣasas are incapable of being controlled when evening sets in. Thus addressed, Rāma, displaying his skill in aiming by sounds, enveloped with arrows that Yakṣī showering crags. Being thus hemmed in with a network of shafts, she possessed of the powers of illusion, rushed against Kākutstha and Lakşmaņa, uttering terrible roars. And as that Yaksi, in prowess like to a thunder-bolt, was rushing on, Rāma pierced her chest with arrows, and thereat she dropped down and died. Upon seeing that grim-visaged one slain, the lord of the celestials together with the celestials themselves honouring Kākutstha, exclaimed Well, Well!. And exceedingly pleased, the thousand-eyed Purandara, together with the delighted deities, said to Viśvāmitra. O ascetic, O Kusika's son, good betide you! all the Maruts with Indra at their head, have been gratified with this act (of Rāma's). Do you, O Brāhmaṇa, confer upon Raghu's descendant the sons of Prajāpati Kțśāśva, of true prowess, and charged with ascetic energy. And ever following you, he, O Brāhmaṇa, is fit to receive them of you. And this son of the king is to accomplish a mighty task in the interests of the celestials. Saying this, the deities, having paid homage to Viśvāmitra, joyfully entered the celestial regions. And now came evening on, when that best of ascetics, gratified at the destruction of Tāțakā, smelt Rāma's crown and said these words, Here, O Rāma of gracious presence, shall we pass the night; and morrow morning, went to that hermitage of mine. Hearing Visvāmitra's words, Dasaratha's son, glad at heart, happily passed that night in the forest of Tāțakā. And being thus freed from all disturbances, from that day forth that forest appeared charming, even like to the forest of Caitraratha. Having thus slain the Yakşa's daughter, Rāma, eulogised by celestials and Siddhas, spent there that night with the saint, being awakened by the latter at the break of day.