On that celestial being engaged in austerities, the deities with Indra and Agni at their head, desirous of gaining over the generalissimo, Appeared before the Grand-sire. And, O Rāma, the gods with Agni at their head, bowing to him, addressed that possessor of the six attributes, the Grand-sir, saying, 'O God, that adorable one who had formerly consigned to us the generalissimo, resorting to high asceticism, is practising austerities with Uma. Do you now, O you conversant with resources, so order as is advisable in the interests of the worlds! Verily you are our prime way.' Hearing the words of the deities, the Grandsire of all creatures, 'consoling them with soft words, spoke to them saying 'Even as the Mountain's daughter has said, sons will not be born to you of your own wives. Her words is infallible of a certainty: there is no doubt about it. This is the celestial Gangă she on whom Hutaśana will beget a son-the foe-subduing generalissimo of the celestials. And the elder daughter of the Mountain will consider that son as brought forth by Uma; and Uma also will, without doubt, look upon him with regard.' Hearing these words of him o descendant of Raghu, the gods bowing to the Grand-sire, paid him homage. Then, O Rama, repairing to the Kailasa mountain teeming with metals, the deities commissioned Agni with the view of having a son (born to him.)10 ‘Do you, O god, accomplish this work of the oddities! O you of mighty energy, do you discharge your energy into that daughter of the Mountain, Ganga. Thereupon giving his promise to the gods, Pavaka* (Fire) approached Ganga, saying, Do you, O Goddess, bear an embryo; for even this is the desire of the deities. Hearing this speech, she assumed a divine appearance. And beholding her mightiness, Agni was shrunk up on all sides. And then Pavaka from all sides discharged his energy into her, and thereat all her streams became surcharged with it, O descendant of Raghu. And to him staying at the head of all the deities, Gangā spoke, saying, "O god, I am incapable of sustaining this new sprung energy of yours: I am burning with that fire, and my consciousness fails me. Thereupon that partaker of the oblations offered to the gods, said to Ganga, 'Do you bring forth your embryo on the side of this Himavat!' Hearing Agni's words, Gangă of mighty energy cast her exceedingly effulgent embryo on her streams, O sinless one. And as it came out of her, it wore the splendour of molten gold; and in consequence of its fiery virtue, objects near and objects far were converted into gold and silver of unsurpassed sheen, while those that were more distant were turned into copper and iron. Her excreta were turned into lead. In this wise, various metals began to increase on earth. As soon as the embryo was brought forth, the woods adjoining the mountain, being overspread with that energy, were turned into gold. And from that day, O descendant of Raghu, gold of effulgence like to that of fire, became known as Jātarūpa, O foremost of men! And when the son was born, the deities with Indra and the Maruts enjoined upon the Křttikā stars to suckle him. 'Surely he shall be son to us all’-concluding thus, they as soon as he was born, by turns began to dispense milk to him. Then the celestials called him Kārtikeya, saying, “Without doubt, this son shall become famed over the three worlds.' And hearing those words of theirs, the Kșttikās bathed the offspring that had issued from her womb, flaming like fire, and with auspicious marks. And, O Kākutstha, since Kārtikeya had issued from (Gangā's) womb the celestials called that effulgent and mighty-armed one, Skanda. And then the teats of the Křttikās were filled with milk; and thereupon assuming six mouths, he began to suck milk from the teats of those six. Having drunk the milk, that lord although then possessed of a tender frame, by virtue of his inbom prowess in one day vanquished the Dänava forces. And him possessed of mighty effulgence, the celestials assembled with Agni as their leader sprinkled with water, by way of installing him as their generalissimo. He who, O Kākutstha, on earth revere Kārtikeya, is blessed, and attain righteousness, and being long-lived and obtaining sons and grand-sons, repair to the regions of Skanda.