When the horse-sacrifice of the high-souled Dasaratha had been completed, the immortals, accepting each his share, returned whence they had come. And the monarch, having observed all the rules of initiation, entered the palace with his equipage and retinue. And the lords of the earth, having been received suitably by the king, with glad hearts set out for their own countries, saluting that foremost of ascetics (Rsyaśặnga). And clad in bright apparel, the delighted Own forces belonging to those graceful kings repairing to their homes, looked exceedingly beautiful. When the lords of the earth had gone away, the graceful king Dasaratha re-entered his palace, with the foremost of regenerate ones at his head. Followed by the intelligent monarch with his retinue, Rsyasrnga, having been duly honoured, set out with śāntā. Having thus dismissed them all, the king, his object attained, began to dwell there happily, expecting sons. And then when the six seasons had rolled away after the completion of the sacrifice, in the twelfth month, on the ninth lunar day, under the influence of the Punarvasu asterism presided by Aditi devatā, when the Sun, the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, and Venus were at Arius, Capricorn, Libra, Cancer, And Pisces, and when Jupiter had arisen with the Moon at Cancer, Kausalyā gave birth to that lord of the universe, bowed to by all the worlds, Rāma, the descendant of Iksvaku, furnished with excellent marks, the one half of Vişnu,-exceedingly righteous, with rosy eyes, and mighty arms, and crimson nether lip, and endowed with a voice like the sound of a kettledrum. Then on having given birth to that son of immeasurable prowess, Kausalyā looked resplendent, like Aditi on having brought forth that foremost of celestials the wielder of the thunder-bolt. Then was born of Kaikeyī, named Bharata, having truth for prowess, endowed with all the virtues, and representing the very fourth part of Visnu. Then Sumitrā gave birth to Lakşmaņa and Satrughna, heroic, and skilled in all weapons, and endowed with the half of Vişnu. And Bharata of purged intelligence was born under the asterism Pușya, when the Sun had entered Pisces; while the two sons of Sumitrā were born when the Sun arose in Cancer, under the asterism of Aslesa. (The ninth lunar mansion) Thus were separately born four high-souled sons to the king, crowned with qualities, and graceful, and in loveliness resembling the constellations Prosthapada.* Thereat the Gandharvas began to chaunt sweetly, and the Apsaras to dance. And the celestial kettledrums sounded; and there showered down blossoms from the sky. *Otherwise called Uttarabhadrapada and Purvabhādrapada. And high festivities were commenced by the multitude in Ayodhyā. And the spacious highways became filled with players and dancers, glittering with all kinds of gems, and resounding with the music of singers and performers on instruments. And the king bestowed gifts upon bards and genealogists and panegyrists, and he also gave kine by thousands to Brāhmaṇas. When the eleventh day had gone by, the king performed the Naming ceremony of his sons. And experiencing great delight, Vasistha conferred the names. And the high-souled eldest one was called Rāma; and Kaikeyi's son was called Bharata; and Sumitrā's son was called Laksmana, and the last was named Satrughna. And the king fed the Brāhmaṇas as well as the inhabitants rural and urban; and he bestowed heaps of jewels upon Brāhmaṇas. Thus did he celebrate the natal rites of the princes. And among all those princes, the eldest, Rāma, like that of Ketu, (The ninth of the planets.) and the special delight of his father, became the object of general regard, even as the self-create Himself. And all of them were versed in the Vedas, and heroic, and intent upon the welfare of others. And all were accomplished in knowledge; and endowed with virtues. And among them all, the exceedingly puissant Rāma, having true for prowess, was the desire of every one, and spotless like to the Moon himself. He could ride on elephants and horses, and was an adept in managing cars. And he was ever engaged in the study of arms, and aye occupied in ministering to his sire. And even from early youth, that enhancer of auspiciousness Laksmana was ever attached to his eldest brother Rāma, that delight of all. And like to another life of Rāma, Lakşmaņa furnished with auspiciousness was in everything attentive to Rāma's wishes, even at the neglect of his own person. And that foremost of persons did not even attain sleep without Rāma's company, nor did he partake any sweetmeat that was offered, unless Rāma partook it with him. When mounted on horse-back, Rāghava went a-hunting, Lakṣmaṇa went at his back bow in hand, protecting him. And that younger brother of Laksmana, Satrughna, likewise became ever dearer to Bharata than life itself. On account of those exalted and well-beloved sons of his, Dasaratha experienced the excess of joy, like to the Grand-sire on account of the gods. And when they came to be furnished with knowledge, and crowned with virtues, and endowed with bashfulness and fame, and to attain wisdom in everything, and to be farsighted, Dasaratha, the father of such powerful and flamingly effulgent sons, became delighted even like that lord of worlds-Brahmā. Those tigers among men, ever engaged in the study of the Vedas, were accomplished in the art of archery, and always intent upon ministering to their father. Once upon a time, when the virtuous king Dasaratha, surrounded by his priests and friends, was reflecting about the nuptials of his sons, to that high-souled one engaged in thought in the midst of his counsellors came the mighty ascetic Visvamitra. Desirous of seeing the king, he said to the warders,-Do you speedily announce that I, Gadhi's son, sprung in the Kusika line, have come! Hearing those words of his, they, urged on by them, all hurriedly began to run towards the royal chambers. And coming to the royal apartments, they communicated to Ikşváku's descendant the arrival of the ascetic Viśvāmitra. Hearing those words of theirs, Dasaratha surrounded by his priests, went out delightedly to meet him, like Indra going out to meet Brhaspati. According to Śruti BỊhaspati is the Brahmă of the gods-Brhaspatir devānām Brahmā. And having come to that ascetic observing vows and of flaming energy, the monarch with a cheerful countenance offered him the Arghya. There upon, having accepted the king's Arghya in accordance with the ordinance he enquired of the lord of men as to his continued prosperity and peace. And the exceedingly virtuous descendant of Kusika asked the king concerning the welfare of the exchequer, and the provinces; and the peace of his friends and acquaintances. And are they captains submissive: and have you vanquished your foes? And have you performed well the human and the divine rites? And approaching Vasiştha and the other anchorites, that foremost of ascetics of exalted piety duly asked them regarding their welfare. And having been properly received by the monarch, they with glad hearts entered the royal residence, and sat them down according to precedence. Then gladly worshipping the mighty ascetic, Visvāmitra, the exceedingly generous king, wellpleased, addressed him saying. Like that of the obtaining of ambrosia, like to a shower in a land suffering from drought, like to the birth of sons of worthy wives to him without issue, like that of the recovery of a lost thing, yea, like to the dawning of a mighty joy, I consider this your arrival. O illustrious ascetic, are you well come? What is even that which is nearest to your heart? You, O Brahmana, are worthy of my best services. By luck it is that, O bestower of honour, I have gained you. To-day my birth has been crowned with fruit to-day has my life attained its object. And truly yesterday night has been succeeded by an auspicious morning, since I have beheld you. Having first attained exceeding effulgence by virtue of austerities performed for obtaining the title of Rājarşi, you have afterwards obtained the status of a Brahmarși. You are worthy of manifold homage from me. This your exceedingly holy arrival appear wonderful. O lord, by beholding you, surely my body has been rendered pure. Tell me, what is it that you would have, and what is the purpose of your coming? I wish that I may be obliged by doing your will. And, ( you of excellent vows, you ought not to hesitate. I will every way accomplish your will; for you are my god. O regenerate one, surely great prosperity come to me in consequence of your coming, inasmuch as it shall be the means of bringing me entire and excellent merit, O Brāhmaṇa! Hearing this soul-soothing, ear-charming, and free-humble speech that was uttered, the illustrious prime of ascetics crowned with virtues, and furnished with all perfections, experienced exceeding delight.