Thus addressed by Vasiştha, that bestower of all that was desired, Sabala, O destroyer of your foes, brought forth everything that was desired by everyone. And she produced sugarcanes, and honies, and fried rice, and excellent Maireyas, (A kind of wine prepared from molasses). A preparation of milk rice. and costly drinks, and various viands, and heaps of warm rice resembling hills, and other kinds of edibles, and soups, and Dadhikulyas, together with silver plates by thousands filled with meats of diverse tastes. And, O Rāma, the tarry of Viśvāmitra being superbly entertained by Vasiştha, heartily filled, became exceedingly gratified. And the royal saint, Viśvāmitra himself, together with the priests and Brāhmaṇas and the inmates of the inner apartment, was also heartily filled. And being hospitably entertained with his courtiers and counsellors and retainers, he, exceedingly de-lighted, spoke to Vasistha, saying. Received and excellently entertained have I been by you, O Brāhmaṇa, who thyself art worthy of being honoured. Do you, O you conversant with speech, listen to me. I will tell you a word. Do you bestow on me Śabala for an hundred thousand kine. O worshipful one, verily this one is a jewel; and as it is the function of kings to acquire jewels, do you confer on me Śabala; for, O twice-born one, this one by right belongs to me. Thus addressed by Viśvāmitra, the righteous and adorable Vasiştha best of ascetics, replied to that lord of earth. O king, neither for an hundred thousand nor for an hundred Koți of kine, nor yet for heaps of silver, will I part with Sabala. O subduer of enemies, this one deserves not to be separated from my side. Even like to the fame of the mighty, this Śabala is ever joined with me. my oblations to the gods and the Pitrs as well as my subsistence itself are established even in her. And my Agnihotras, (Maintenance of the perpetual fire). bali, (Offering to the spirits of air) and Homa (Burnt offerings) depend upper her. And, O royal saint, my Svahākāras and Vasaſkāras* as well as my various lore depend upon her. *Sacrifice performed with the exclamation of svadhả and Vașat respectively. All this is so: there is no doubt about it. Verily she is my all; and in her do I find my delight. And many are the reasons, O king, why I cannot give to you Sabala.' Thus addressed by Vasiștha, that one versed in speech, Viśvāmitra, eagerly rejoined. I shall confer upon you fourteen thousand elephants decked in gold chains and gold neckornaments and hooks. I will confer upon you cight hundred golden cars furnished with bells and reins, and each yoked with four white horses; and, O you of auspicious vows, I will confer upon you one thousand and ten high-mettled horses of noble breeds, and I will confer upon you a koți of youthful and variegated kine, do you grant to me Sabala. And as much of gems and gold, O best of regenerate ones, as you will ask for, shall I bestow upon you: do you grant me Sabala.' Thus besought by the intelligent Viśvāmitra, that adorable one replied, saying, 'Oking, Śabala I will not by any means give.' This is verily my jewel: this is verily my riches: this is verily my all: this is verily my subsistence. And this is my Darsa,* Gifts to Brāhmaṇas on occasions of sacrifice. and this my Paurnamäsa, and this my various sacrifices with dakşiņās; and, O king, this my various rites. *Bi-monthly sacrifice, performed at change of the moon by persons maintaining a perpetual fire. A ceremony performed at the full moon by persons maintaining a perpetual fire. This, O king, is without doubt, the root of all my rites. And what need of dilating? This one bestowing everything that is desired will I not part with.