Hearing the words of Viśvāmitra, Rāghava, together with Laksmana, was struck with amazement, and spoke to Viśvāmitra, saying, O Brāhmaṇa, wonderful is the story that you have recited to us, viz; that of Ganga's sacred dissension and the replenishing of the Ocean. And, O afflicter of foes, as we had been reflecting upon all this at length, the night has passed away as if it were as moment. And the live-long night has passed away as I in company with Sumitrā's son, was pondering over Viśvāmitra's auspicious speech.' Then in the morning which happened to be bright, that subduer of his foes, Raghu's descendant, addressed the ascetic Viśvāmitra, who had finished his devotion. The auspicious night is past, and we shall (again) listen to your wonderful narrations. Let us now cross over this sacred stream, foremost of rivers, wending in three ways. And learning that you have arrived at this place, the pious ascetics have speedily come hither, and have also brought this barque with a spacious carpet. Hearing those words of the high-souled Rāghava, Kausika crossed over the crowds of ascetics; and on reaching the north bank, he paid homage to the saints. And when they had landed on the banks of the Gangā, they beheld a city named Viśālā. And thereupon speedily that that foremost of ascetics in company with Rāghava, went towards Viśālā, beautiful and elegant like to the celestial regions. Then the highly wise Rāma, with folded hands, asked that mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra concerning the excellent city of Viśālā. O mighty ascetic, what royal line reside in yonder large city? I desire to hear this, good betide you; and great is my curiosity. Hearing those words of Rāma, that foremost of ascetics began to relate the history of Viśālā, saying, Do you listen, O Rāma to what I had heard from Sakra relating this history; and, O descendant of Raghu, do you listen to all that befell in this city. Formerly in the Krita age, O Rāma, Diti's highly powerful sons, as well as those of Aditi, possessed of prowess, and virtuous and pious, high-souled ones both. O foremost of men, fell to reflecting, 'How can we become exempt from decrepitude and disease, and immortal.' And as they reflected, it struck them, 'By churning the ocean of milk, we must obtain ambrosia.' Then deciding upon churning (the ocean), those ones of immeasurable energy making Vasuki the cord, and the Mandara (hill), the stick, began to churn the deep. After a thousand years had gone by, the hoods (of the serpent) serving as the churning cord, began to vomit virulent venom and to bite at the crags, with their fangs. And thereat there came out powerful poison like to fire; and in consequence the entire universe with celestials, and Asuras, and men, began to burm. And thereupon, intending to seek refuge, they appeared before that mighty god, Sarkara, or Pasupati, or Rudra, hymning him. 'Save us, Save us.' When that master, the lord of the celestials, was being thus addressed by the deities, there appeared before them Hari bearing the conch and the discus. Smiling Hari said to the trident-bearing Rudra, 'O chief of the celestials, since you are the foremost of the gods, this that has come out of the ocean churned by the celestials, in your as Remaining here, O lord, do you receive the first offering in the form of this poison.' Having said this, that best of celestials vanished there. Witnessing the dismay of the celestials, and hearing also the words of Śārngiņa, Śiva took in that dreadful poison as if it were nectar, and then leaving the deities, the worshipful Hara wen away. And then, O descendant of Raghu, as the celestials resumed the churning, that foremost of hills serving the cord, entered the subterranean regions. Thereupon the gods and the Gandharvas felt to extolling the slayer of Madhu, saying, “You are the way of all beings, of the celestials in especial. do you, O mighty-armed one, protect us, and recover the mountain.' Having heard this, Hrsikesa, or Hari, assuming the form of a tortoise, stood in the sea, supporting the hill on his back. That Soul of all, Kesava, best of male beings, taking hold of the top of the hill by his hand, began to churn the deep, stationed in the midst of the celestials. After a thousand years, had rolled on, arose a male being impregnated with the Āyurveda, of exceedingly righteous soul, called Dhanvantari, bearing in his hands a stick, and a Kamandalu. And there arose also, from the cream of the churning waters, those magnificent dames the shining Apsaras. And, O foremost of men, as they had emerged from water, they are called Apsaras. There sprang sixty koțis of shining Apsaras. And, O Kākutstha, the female attendants of those are numberless. And neither the deities nor the Dānavas would accept them, and in consequence of this nonacceptance, they are known as women belonging to all. And then, O Raghu's descendant, arose the eminently pious daughter of Varuna, Varuni, who fell to looking for acceptance. And Diti's sons, O Rāma, did not accept the daughter of Varuna and Aditi's sons, O hero, accepted that one of blameless limbs. Hence Diti's son go by the name of Asuras; and Aditi's by that of Suras. And the celestials became exceeding glad, on having accepted Vāruņi. O foremost of men, next arose ucchaiśravā best of horses, and also Kaustubha; and next, the excellent ambrosia. O Rāma, tremendous was the carnage for the possession thereof (ambrosia); and Aditi's and Diti's sons fought together. And the Asuras assembled together with the Raksasas; and, C hero, mighty was the battle that was fought, striking terror into the three worlds. And when a great havoc had been committed the highly powerful Vişņu, assuming a captivating form speedily stole away the ambrosia. And those that came forward before that best of male beings, Visnu, knowing no deterioration, were crushed in conflict by Vişnu in a different form. And in that exceedingly dreadful battle between the sons of Diti and Aditi, those heroic ones viz., Aditi's heroic sons slaughtered those of Diti. Having slaughtered the sons of Diti's and regained his kingdom, he happily began to rule the worlds, containing saints and Caranas.