When Bharata set out for the home of his maternal uncle, he affectionately took with him the sinless Satrughna ever repressing his passions. And there he abode with his brother, being ministered to in very respect and tended by his maternal uncle, Aśvapati, with all the fondness of a father (with the fondness shown to a son). Albeit thus staying, with every ministration extended towards them as much as they could wish, yet those heroic brothers failed not to remember the aged king Daſaratha. And the puissant king also on his pare remembered his sons away from home, Bharata and Śatrughna, resembling the mighty Indra and Varuna. All those four chiefs of men were dear to him even as four hands issuing from his own body. Yet among them all, that highly energetic. Rāma was the favourite of his sire. He was the foremost of in every virtue, like to Svayambhu's (Brahmā) self in the esteem of creation. Solicited by the celestials wishing for the destruction of Rāvana, he, who is the eternal Vis ņu, was born as Rāma in the world of men. And with that son of immeasurable energy, Kausalya looked graceful, even as Aditi, with that foremost of the celestials, the wielder of the thunder-bolt. He was furnished with grace, and possessed of prowess; and he did not seek for defects in others in the midst of virtues. That son of Kausalyā and incomparable on earth and in worth fully equal to Daśaratha him self. He was aye of quiescent soul; and always precluded his speech with an amiable phrase; and although he might be addressed in a harsh manner, yet he returned no corresponding reply. He was gratified even with a solitary instance of benefit; and from freedom of soul did not remember an hundred injuries. In the intervals of martial exercises, he always discoursed with persons of character, or wise men, or the aged, or the virtuous. He was intelligent, and sweet-speeched, and spoke first (to visitors) and used grateful words, and was possessed of prowess, withal not proud of his mighty native virtue. He never spoke untruths; and he was learned; and he rendered homage to the aged. He felt kindly towards the subjects; and the subjects on their pare held him in dear regard. He was kind to the poor; and he had conquered his anger; and he regarded the Brāhmaṇas; and he commiserated the wretched; and was versed in morality; and always chastised the wicked; and was pure in spirit; and possessed the thoughts and sentiments of his race; and regarded highly his own Kșatriya duties; and considered that heaven was to be attained through the glory acquired by performing them. He was never engaged in forbidden piactises; and never relished improper talk; and argued in chain even like the lord of speech himself. And he was free from ailments, and of young years; and endued with eloquence; and of an excellent person; and versed in season and place; and discerned character, the one honest person ever created. Endowed with supreme excellence that son or the monarch was by virtue of his merit dear to the subjects like their life ranging externally. He had performed his ablutions after having mastered all learning; and was properly versed in the Vedas with their branches. In all weapons either inspired with mantras or otherwise Bharata's eldest brother was superior even to his father. And he was the spring of all good; and was saintly; and of undisturbed soul; and truthtelling; and candid; and humble towards the aged twice-born ones cognisant of virtue and interest. He was cognizant of virtue, profit, and interest; had an excellent memory; and was possessed of genius. He was an adept and was well versed in social usages and customs. He was lowly; and of close counsel; and used to keep to himself his purposes; and was resourceful. Neither his pleasure nor his displeasure went for naught. He knew the season of amassing riches, and of giving them away. And he was ardently reverential; and his wisdom never wavered; and he accepted no improper present; and he used no rough speech. He knew no idleness; and was vigilant; and had a knowledge of his own as well as of others' failings. He was conversant with the scriptures; and was grateful; and could read the hearts of others. He had sagacity to perceive the seasons for duly showing favour or disfavour. are He understood all about the reception of the righteous, the maintenance of family, and the occasion for chastising, evil-doers; and he was an expert in collecting dues (from the people;) and knew the manner prescribed (by the authorities) for expending money. He had attained proficiency in all the scriptures and literary works composed in both Sanskrit and Prakrit. He sought pleasure without sacrificing either interest or morality; and he was never dilatory in duty. He understood the of those who entertained others. He knew the various heads on which wealth was to be expended. He was skilful in riding and training up horses and elephants. He was the foremost of those accomplished in archery; and was acknowledged among men as an Atiratha. * He led his forces in the direction of the foe; and he slew his enemies; and was accomplished in marshalling the troops. *He who alone vanquishes an innumerable host of warriors is called an Atiratha. He was incapable of being repressed in fight even by the enraged gods and Asuras. He was not given to carping, and had subdued his anger, and he was never elated, or malicious. He did not disregard any creature; he was no slave to the times. That son of the monarch was furnished with such qualities. And he was liked by the subjects as well as by the three worlds. In forgiveness he was like to the Earth; and in intelligence like to BỊhaspati; and in prowess like to the Sacī's lord. Furnished with such qualities acceptable to the people as well as gratifying to his father, Rāma looked beautiful like the effulgent Sun surrounded by his rays. And the Earth desired for her lord even him (Rāma) possessing an excellent character and of prowess incapable of being repressed, like to Lokanātha (Vişnu.) himself. And finding his son crowned with so many incomparable qualities, that subduer of his enemies, king Dasaratha, thought within himself. The long-lived aged monarch reflected, saying, "How can Rāma become king, I living; and how can this delight be mine?” When shall I behold my beloved son installed* in the kingdom? * The Sanskrit abhişikta literally means sprinkled. But such a rendering would sound outlandish. Surely he always wished for the prosperity of the people; and he showed kindness to all creatures. And like to the showering rain-cloud, he is dearer to the people than myself. He is like to Yama and Sakra in prowess, and to Brhaspati in intelligence; and in forbearance, to a mountain, yea, he is far more qualified than myself. Therefore in this age, beholding my son established in (the dominion of) this entire earth, I shall repair to heaven. Seeing him (Rāma) thus crowned with all these various as well as other sterling and immeasurable virtues rare among other princes, the king then took counsel with his ministers, and made up his mind to confer upon Rāma the dignity of heir-apparent. And that intelligent (king) mentioned (to his ministers) the dreadful evils portended by appearances and phenomena in heaven and the air and on the earth, and also pointed out the circumstance of decrepitude having taken possession of his person. He therefore gave them to understand that the installation of the high-souled Rāma of countenance resembling the full moon would dispel his grief, at the same time that it would be universally hailed by the people. Therefore, influenced by his affection (for his subjects,) and with the view of compassing his own as well as their welfare, the righteous monarch urged expedition (upon his counsellors;) and that lord of earth brought together the prime and noble from the various regions and countries of the earth. Like to Prajāpati's self before all creatures, the king appeared before them, who had been received respectfully, and had, as befitted their ranks, various ornaments conferred upon and quarters assigned to them. But that lord of men did not, on account of haste, bring over either Janaka or the king of the Kekayas, concluding that a little while after they would receive the glad tidings. Then when the king, that captor of hostile capitals, had sat down there, began to pour in all the princes popular with their subjects, all save (the two afore-mentioned rulers.) Facing and eyeing the monarch, those kings sat them down on different seats pointed out by the former. Surrounded by those prime and noble of the various provinces, and all those lowly rulers, who had been received honourably and who generally resided at Ayodhyā, the sovereign appeared like to the adorable thousand-eyed (one) surrounded by the immortals. 51