And although engaged in austerities with the view of having sons born to him, the powerful and high-souled king, had no son capable of perpetuating his race. Mentally turning the matter over, the highsouled one thought, Why do I not celebrate a horse-sacrifice with the intention of obtaining a son? That highly-energetic, pious and intelligent monarch, in consultation with all his counsellors of sedate minds, having made up his mind to celebrate the sacrifice, said to that best of counsellors, Sumantra, Do you speedily summon my spiritual guides, along with the family priests. Thereupon, going out speeding, Sumantra of swift movements called together all the spiritual guides, as well as others versed in the Vedic ritual. They were Suyajña, and Vămadeva, and Jabali, and Kasyapa, and Vasistha, and other principal twice-born ones. And having paid homage to them, the virtuous king Dasaratha then spoke to them these sweet words. Consistent with duty and interest,-Ever pining on account of a son, I know no happiness,-therefore it is my intention that I should celebrate a horse sacrifice. I intend to celebrate it according to the ordinance. Do you, therefore, consider how I may attain my object. Thereat, the Brāhmaṇas with Vasiştha at their head, exclaiming well! Well 1 approved the words that had fallen from the lips of the monarch. And exceedingly pleased, they asked Daſaratha,-“Do you order the necessary articles, loose the horse, and prepare the sacrificial ground on the north bank of the Sarayû." And, king, since with the intention of obtaining offspring your purpose so piously, you will surely obtain sons after your heart. And hearing these words of the regenerate ones, the king was highly gratified. And with eyes expanded in delight, he asked his ministers, Do to procure the necessary sacrificial articles, according to the injunction of my spiritual preceptors; and loose a horse protected by a competent person, and followed by one of the chief family priests; and prepare the sacrificial ground on the north bank of the Sarayū; and in due order and according to the ordinance perform the śānti rites required to secure an uninterrupted completion to the ceremony. This ceremony is incapable of being celebrated by every king. Particular care should be taken that the sacrifice is not defective on account of any serious omission; inasmuch as with learned Brahma-Rākṣasas ever on the look-out to spy shortcomings in the ceremony. The performer thereof speedily perishes, should anything take place not consonant to the ordinance. And do you possessed of ability so arrange, that this sacrifice may be completed in harmony with the ritual. Thus addressed with due respect, the counsellors listened to the word of the monarch, and said, So be it. Then hearing those words of that best king again, as heard before, conversant with their duty, having blessed the monarch, taking permission of the king, they returned to their respective quarters. Dismissing those Brāhmaṇas, the king spoke to his ministers, saying, Do you, even as the family priests have ordered, arrange for the sacrifice! Having said this, that mighty-minded tiger among nen dismissed his ministers, and himself entered into the inner apartment. And coming there, that lord of men said to his favourite wives, Do you know it for certain that in order to obtain a son I am going to perform a sacrifice. And hearing those sweet words, the countenances of those shining dames looked resplendent, like lotuses after the cold season is over.