HAVING in company with the ascetics passed the remainder of the night on the banks of the Sona, Visvāmitra, when the day broke, spoke, O Rāma, the night has passed away, and the morn has come. The hour for performing the prior devotions has arrived. Arise! arise! good betide you! Do you prepare for going. Hearing these words of his, Rāma, having finished his morning devotions and rites, and ready for departure, said, This is the Sona, of excellent waters, fathomless, and studded with islets. O Brāhmaṇa, by which way shall we repair Thus addressed by Rāma, Viśvāmitra replied. Even this path has been fixed upon by men, that, namely, by which the Maharșis go. Having proceeded far, when the day had been half spent, they beheld that foremost of streams, the Jahnavi, worshipped by ascetics. Having beheld that river furnished with sacred waters, and frequented by swans and cranes, the ascetics who accompanied Rāghava were exceedingly delighted. And they took up their quarters on the banks of the river. And then having bathed and duly offered oblations of water to the gods and the manes of their ancestors, and performed Agnihotra* (Sacrifice with burnt offering.) sacrifices, and partaken of clarified butter like to nectar, those high-souled and auspicious ones, with glad hearts, sat down surrounding Viśvāmitra. And the descendants of Raghu also sat down, occupying prominent places as befitted their rank. Then Rāma with a heart surcharged with cheerfulness spoke to Viśvāmitra, saying, O adorable one, I desire to hear how the Gangă flowing in three directions and embracing the three worlds, falls into the lord of streams and rivers. Influenced by Rama's speech, the mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra entered upon the history of the Gangā's origin and progress. O Rāma, that great mine of ore, Himavat is the foremost of mountains. To him were born two daughters, unparalleled on earth in loveliness. O Rāma, their mother of dainty waist, the amiable daughter of Meru, named Menā, was the beloved wife of Himavat. She of whom was born Gangā the elder daughter of Himavat; and , O Raghava, a second daughter was also born to him, named Uma. And it came to pass that once upon a time, the deities, with the view of accomplishing some work appertaining to them as divine beings, in a body besought that foremost of mountains for that river flowing in three worlds, Himavat in obedience to duty, conferred upon them his daughter flowing everywhere at will, and sanctifying all creatures. Thereat in the interests of the three worlds, accepting her, those having the welfare of the three worlds, at heart, went away with Ganga, considering themselves as having attained their desire. The other daughter of the mountain, O descendant of Raghu, adopting a stern vow, began to carry on austerities, having asceticism for her wealth. And that best of mountains bestowed upon Rudra of unequalled form his daughter Uma, furnished with fiery asceticism and worshipped of the worlds. And these, O Rāghava, are the daughters of that king of mountains, worshipped of all, viz, Gangā, the foremost of streams, and the divine Uma. Now, O best of those endowed with motion, have I related to you how that sin-destroying one flowing with her waters in three diverse directions, first, O child, went to the firmament and then ascended the celestial regions.