Thus commissioned by Janaka, the envoys, having spent three nights on the way, entered the city of Ayodhyā, with their conveyances afflicted with fatigue. In accordance with the royal commission, entering the king's residence, they saw the aged king Dasaratha, resembling a celestial. Freed from apprehension the envoys with clasped hands addressed the monarch in sweetly humble accents, saying, O mighty monarch, Mithilā's lord, king Janaka, in company with this priests, in sweet and affectionate words, repeatedly enquires after the complete welfare of thyself along with your priests and servants. After having enquired after your complete welfare, Mithila's lord, Vaideha, by permission of Kausika, addresses you thus, You know the vow I had made formerlyviz., to confer my daughter upon him that would bend the bow,-and the kings, in consequence of their having been deprived of prowess, and being baffled, have come to entertain spite against me. And that daughter of mine, O king, has been won by your son, arrived one, that divine, jewelled bow has been snapped in the middle by the high-souled Rāma in the midst of a large assembly. Upon that high-souled one should I confer Sītā, having prowess assigned for her dower. And in this wise will I free myself from my vow; and this you should permit. 10 O mighty king, do you, good betide you, come speedily headed by your priests. It behove you to see the Rāghavas; And, O foremost of kings, to see me delivered from this vow. And do you attain the joy incident to the nuptials of both your sons, Thus spoke sweetly the lord of Videha, permitted by Viśvāmitra and staying by the opinions of Satānanda.' Hearing the words of the envoys, the king, exceedingly rejoiced, addressed Vasiştha and Vamadeva, as well as his counsellors, saying, Protected by Kusika's son, that exhancer of Kausalyā's joy stay in Videha in company with his brother, Laksmana.15 And the high-souled Janaka has witnessed the prowess of Kākutstha; and he wish to bestow his daughter upon Rāghava. If this alliance with the high-souled Janaka is relished by you, we shall speedily repair to his capital. Let there be no waste of time. Thereupon, the counsellors along with the Maharsis said, Excellent! And the king highly delighted, said to the counsellors, Our journey commence on the morrow. And excellently ministered to, the counsellors of that foremost of monarchs (Janaka), endowed with every excellent quality, spent that night in joy.