Then next morning Janaka skilled in speech, having in company with the Maharsis performed his daily duties, addressed the priest Satānanda, saying My highly energetic, puissant and eminently righteous brother known by the name of Kusadhvaja dwell in the auspicious city, Sāņkāśyā, whose ramparts are ranged round with pointed weapons, and which is laved by the river Ikşumatī, and which resembles the celestial regions or the aerial car, Pușpaka. I wish to see him, and he is in charge of my sacrifice. And that highly energetic one will partake with me the joy of this occasion. This having been said to Satānanda, some competent persons presented themselves; and Janaka commanded them (to set up) for Sāņkāśyā. And commanded by the monarch, off they want, mounting on fleet coursers, with the view of bringing over that tiger among men, like Viş nu at the mandate of Indra. And arriving at Sāņkāśyā, they presented themselves before Kušadhvaja, and faithfully delivered to him the intention of Janaka. And hearing the tidings conveyed by those foremost of envoys endowed with great fleetness, Kusadhvaja set out at the mandate of the monarch. And on coming to Videha, he appeared before the high-souled Janaka addicted to righteousness. And saluting Satānanda as well as the eminently virtuous Janaka, he sat down on an excellent and superb seat worthy of a King. Having been seated, both the heroic brothers of immeasurable splendour addressed that foremost of counsellors, Sudáman, saying, 'Go, foremost of counsellors, and speedily bring over the irrepressible Ikşvāku of immeasurable splendour along with his sons and ministers. Thereupon, repairing to the camp of that enhancer of the race of the Raghus, he saw Dasaratha, and saluting him with beaded head, addressed him. O heroic lord of Ayodhyā, Vaideha, the master of Mithila, has wished to see you along with your priests. Hearing the words of that best of counsellors, the king accompanied by the saints and his adherents, came to Janaka. And in company with his counsellors with his counsellors and priests and adherents, the king, foremost of those skilled in speech, spoke to Vaideha. O mighty king, you know that the worshipful saint Vasiştha is the spiritual guide of our race; and in every ceremony that we undertake, he it is who serves the function of a spokesman. And permitted by Viśvāmitra along with all the Maharsis, even this one of a righteous soul will relate my genealogy. And on Dasaratha resuming silence, the worshipful saint Vasistha, versed in speech, spoke to Vaideha in company with his priests, saying, The perpetual, everlasting, and undeteriorating Brahmā sprang from the Unmanifest (Brahmā). From him sprang Marīci; and Kasyapa is son to Marīci. And from Kaśyapa sprung Vivasvat; and Manu is son to Vivasvat. This Manu is otherwise called Prajäpati; and Ikşvāku is Manu's son. And this Ikşvāku you must understand, was the first king of Ayodhyā. And Ikşvāku's son, it is well known, was the graceful Kuksi. And Kuksi's son was the graceful Vikuksi. And Vikuksi's son was the exceedingly energetic and powerful Bāņa. And Bāna's son was the highly energetic and powerful Anaranya. From Anaranya sprang Prithu; and from Prithu, Trisanku. And Trisanku's son was the highly famous Dhundhumāra. And from Dhundhumāra sprung the Mahāratha, Yuvanāśva. And from Yuvanāśva sprung Māndhātā, lord of earth. And Māndhātā's son was the graceful Susandhi. And Susandhi's two sons were Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit. And from Dhruvasandhi sprung the famous Bharata. And from Bharata sprung Asita; to fight whom were born as hostile kings, those heroes, the Haihayas, the Talajanghas, and the Sasabindus. And engaged in conflict with them, that king fled (from his kingdom); and repairing to the Himavat in company with his two consorts, the feeble Asita there paid his debt to nature. The story runs that his two wives were in the family way; and that with the intention of destroying the embryo of the other, one of them administered poison to the former mixed in her food. And it came to pass that at this time, Bhrgu's son, the ascetic Cyavana, had become addicted to the romantic Himavat, foremost of mountains. And here one of those exalted dames with eyes resembling lotus-petals, saluting Bhrigu's son born shining like a celestial, desired of him an excellent. son. And drawing near to that sage, Kalindi saluted him. And that Vipra said to her, who was desiring of having a son born of her,-In your womb, O exalted one, will be speedily born an excellent son mixed up with poison, highly powerful, and exceedingly energetic, and possessed of mighty strength, and graceful. Therefore, do you not grieve, O you of lotuseyes. And having paid reverence to Cyavana, that chaste and worshipful princess, although bereft of her husband, gave birth to a son. And since intending to destroy her foetus she that was co-wife with her had administered poison to her, Sagara* was born together with the poison. *Gara-poison. Sagara means, with poison, i.e. here, one born with poison. And Sagara's son was Asamanja, and Ansumat. And Dilīpa was son to Ansumat, and Bhagiratha to Dilīpa. And from Bhagiratha sprang Kākutstha, and from Kākutstha, Raghu. And Raghu's son was the puissant Pravşdha, feeding on human flesh. And he came finally to be known by the name of Kalmāşapāda.* And from him sprung Śarkhana. And Sudarśana was Sankhana's and Agnivarna was Sudaśana's son. He incurred Vasiştha's curse, and was turned into a Rākşasa. He took up water, intending to clear scores with Vasistha; but at the request of his wife, desisted, pouring down the water at his own feet. Hence the name of Kalmāşapāda. Śīghraga was Agnivarņa’s, and Maru was Śīghraga's son. And Maru's son was Prasuśruka, and from Praśuśruka sprung Ambarīşa. Ambarisa's son was Nahusa, lord of earth. And Nahusa's son was Yayāti, was Nābhāga. And Nābhāga's son was Aja, and from Aja sprung Dasaratha. And from this Dasaratha have come the brothers Rāma and Lakşmaņa. It is in the interests of Rāma and Lakşmaņa belonging to the heroic and truthful and pious sovereigns sprung in the Ikşvāku line, and possessing purity of race even from the time of their founder, that, Oking, we solicit the hands of your daughters. And, O foremost of men, it be-hove you to confer like brides upon like bridegrooms.