Thus addressed, Kaikeyi, with her countenance flaming in wrath, sighing hot and hard, spoke to Mantharā, saying. Even this very day will I speedily send Rāma into the forest and without delay install Bharata in the royal heir-apparentship. Do you now see by what means I can effect this. Bharata must obtain the kingdom and never Rāma. Thus addressed by the noble one, the wickedminded Mantharā, envious of Rama's interest, thus spoke to Kaikeyi. Ah! O Kaikeyi, consider: Listen to my words, telling you how your son alone will obtain the kingdom. Do you not remember, O Kaikeyi, or conceal although remembering, wishing to hear from me of the means for your welfare which you had before communicated to me. If O dallianct loving damsel it is your wish to hear it as told by me, listen you, I will tell it you. And having heard it, do you act accordingly. Hearing Manthara's words, Kaikeyi raised herself a little from her tastefully spread bed, and said. Do you tell me the means. By what means, O Mantharā, Bharata will gain the kingdom, and in no wise Rāma. Thus addressed by the worshipful one, the wicked minded Mantharā, envying Rāma's interest, thus spoke to Kaikeyi. Formerly during the wars of the gods and Asuras, your husband taking you along, went with the royal saints for the purpose of assisting the king of the celestials. O Kaikeyī, ir Dandaka, situated towards the south, there is the city known by the name of Vaijayanta, where dwelt Timidhvaja, otherwise called Samvara, possessed of an hundred conjurations, and a mighty Asura. That unreproved gave battle Sakra one to accompanied by the celestials. And in that mighty conflict the Rākşasas during the night used to drag by main force persons asleep having their bodies cut all over, and kill them. Then king Dasaratha warred with the Asuras most heroically. And that mighty armed one, O worshipful lady, losing his senses in consequence of wounds received from weapons, was removed from the field by you. In that imminent danger, your husband, sadly cut by weapons, was preserved by you. Thereupon gratified, he, O, you of gracious presence, granted you two boons. Whereupon you did say, 'I shall receive from my lord the boon whenever I shall wish. Thereupon that high-souled one said., 'So be it? I did not know anything about this, O respected one; and it was you who did formerly communicate this (to me.) And it is because I bear affection to you that I have not forgotten it. Now do you forcibly make the monarch desist from installing Rāma. And ask your husband for these two boons, the installation of Bharata, and the exile of Rāma into the woods for fourteen years. On Rāma having been banished into the woods for fourteen years, your son securing the affections of subjects, will be firmly established (on the throne). Entering the anger-chamber to-day, do you, O daughter of Aśvapati, clad in soiled garment, lie down on the uncovered floor. Do not look at him, nor speak to him ought. Do you on beholding the lord of the earth, overwhelmed with grief, weep only. You have always been the favourite wife of your husband. Of this I have not the least doubt, For your sake the monarch can enter into a flame. He can never anger you, nor can he eye you when angered. For compassing your pleasure the king can renounce life itself. Therefore the monarch can never set aside your word. O senseless lady, do you now reflect upon the strength of your good fortune. King Dasaratha will offer you rubies and pearls and gold and gems of various kinds; but do not you bend your heart to them. Do you, O exalted dame, bring into Daśaratha's recollection the two boons which he had granted you at the time of the war between the gods and Asuras, and you shall not fail to achieve your objects. And when that descendant of Raghu, raising you will go to bestow the boons, do you then binding him fast by oath, unfold to the monarch the boons, saying. Send Rāma to the forest for nine and five years, and let Bharata, becoming on earth the foremost of monarchs, carry on the Government. And Rāma having been banished for fourteen years, your son growing (in the interval) firm and fast, will remain (on the throne) during the rest of his life. Do you, therefore, O worshipful one, demand even the banishment of Rāma; for by this it is, O damsel, all interests will be secured to your son. Thus banished Rāma will no longer maintain possession of the hearts of the people; and your Bharata with his foes put out, will be the king. By the time that Rāma returns from the forest, your son, your prudent son along with his friends, securing the hearts of the people externally and internally, will have been firmly established on the throne. Now is the time, I apprehend. Renouncing fear, do you forcibly make the monarch remove from his mind his intention of installing Rāma. Having been thus made to accept that for good which was really evil, Kaikeyi, desirous of obtaining the boons, was filled with delight. And at the words of the hump-backed woman, that exceedingly beautiful Kaikeyi experienced the height of surprise, and betook herself to this wrong course, like a mare attached to her young, (springing up after it). And she said to Manthara. O excellent wench, O speaker of things fair, your wisdom I do not dishonour. In ascertaining the propriety or otherwise of actions, you are the very first of hump-backed women on earth. And ever intent on my interest, you seek my welfare. I had not, O hump-backed one, (ere this) apprehended the endeavours of the king. O humpbacked one, there are many deformed, crooked and unsightly women (on earth). But you alone down, look beautiful like a lotus bent by the breeze. Your breast weighed down by your hump, is high near the shoulders. And beneath is your belly graced with a goodly navel, which has grown lean from shame (on holding the attitude of your bust.) Your buttocks are spacious, and your breasts are firm. Your countenance is like the bright moon, Ah! O Manthara, how lovely do you look! Your hips are smooth, and is decked with chains; and your thighs and legs are of large proportions. O Mantharā, O you clad in linen garment, O graceful damsel, with your pair of spacious humps, you go before me like a she-crane. In your heart reside all those thousandconjuration's belonging to that lord of the Asuras, Samvara; and besides thousands there are many more. Intelligence and policy and conjuration's reside in your elevated hump resembling the nave of a chariot-wheel. When Bharata has been installed and Rāma gone to the woods, I will, O hump-backed one, furnish your hump with a garland made, O beautiful one, of well melted gold. And when I shall have attained my object and be happy, I will smear your hump with sandal paste. O hump-backed one, I will prepare for your face an excellent tilaka of gold; as well as other ornaments. Wearing elegant apparel, you will go about like a very goddess. With an incomparable countenance challenging the moon himself, you will attain pre-eminence, defying your foes. Even as you serve me, other hump-backed women adorned with every ornament will serve your feet. Thus praised by Kaikeyi, as she was lying down on a white bed, like to fire up on the sacrificial dais, Manthară addressed her, saying. O blessed one, when water has flown out, it is not proper to set up a dyke. Arise. Do your welfare. Show yourself to the king. Puffed up with the pride of good fortune, that noble lady of expansive eyes thus encouraged (by Manthara), went with her to the angerchamber. (Having entered the chamber), that exalted lady put off her pearl neck-lace priced at many hundreds and thousands of gold, together with other elegant, beautiful and rich ornaments. Then sitting down upon the ground, Kaikeyi, comparable to gold, under the influence of Manthara's words, spoke to her, saying. Do you, O hump-backed one, tell the monarch, that I am dead at this place. On Räghava having gone to the forest, Bharata will obtain the earth. I do not require gold, or gems, or repasts; this will be the end of my existence if Rāma be installed. Again the hump-backed woman addressed Bharata's mother in exceedingly cruel language fraught with good to Bharata and evil to Rāma. If Rāghava attain the kingdom, you will surely grieve along with your son. Therefore, O blessed one, do you strive so that your son Bharata be installed. Thus momentarily pierced by the wordy shafts shot by Mantharā, the queen exceedingly surprised, laying her hand on her bosom, wrathfully broke out. Either beholding me gone to the regions of Death, you will apprise the king of it, or Rāghava repairing to the forest for a long time, Bharata will attain his desire. If Rāghava do not repair hence into the forest, I will not desire beds, nor garlands, nor sandal paste, nor colyrium, nor drinks, nor life. Having said these cruel words, and thrown off every ornament, the wrathful dame lay down on the ground having no covering, like a fallen Kinnarī. Casting away her excellent garlands and ornaments with her countenance clouded with the gloom of wrath, the King's wife became sunk in thought looking like a sky enveloped in darkness, with the stars hid. Casting away her excellent garlands and ornaments with her countenance clouded with the gloom of wrath, the King's wife became sunk in thought looking like a sky enveloped in darkness, with the stars hid.