Forsaking the northern direction the mighty Muni, O Rāma, betaking himself to the Eastern quarter, became engaged in dreadful austerities. Adopting the high vow of taciturnity for a thousand years, he, O Rāma began to perform the most signal and arduous austerities. When the thousand years had been complete, many an impediment tried the mighty Muni staying like the trunk of a tree, yet could not anger enter his heart. And firmly deter mined to shut out anger, he, O Rāma, kept his asceticism from deterioration. And, O foremost of the Raghus, when his vow of a thousand years had been observed, that one of mighty vows became desirous of feeding on boiled rice. And it came to pass ( best of the Raghus that at this time Indra assuming the guise of a regenerate one, asked for the rice. Thereupon he gave it away to the Vipra; and when the rice had been thus exhausted, that worshipful one of mighty austerities went without foot. Nor, abiding by the vow of reticence, did he say aught to the Vipra. And he then again resumed his dumb guise, restraining his breath at the same time. And that puissant ascetic did not breathe for a you sand years. And as he restrained his breath, vapours began to issue out of his head. And at this, the three worlds became afflicted with fear. And bewildered on account of the energy of his asceticisin, and shorn of their brightness, and afflicted with anguish, the Devarsis and the Gandharvas and the Pannagas and the Uragas and the Rakşasas in a body addressed the Pitāmaha, (Brahmā). O divine one, various were the means by which we endeavoured to affect the mighty Muni Viśvāmitra with covetousness and lust; but for all that he increase in asceticism. Nor do we perceive in him ever so little of anger or lust. And if you do not confer upon him what his mind desire to have, he will annihilate the three worlds with all that is mobile and immobile in them. And the ten cardinal points are disconsolate: and nothing can be discovered therein. And the seas are vexed, and the mountains, riven. And the earth shake, and the winds keep steadily blowing. O Brahmana, we do not know how to remedy, this. And every one is inactive like an infidel. And the three worlds look as if stupefied, with their minds exceedingly exercised. By virtue of that mighty saint's energy, the sun itself has been deprived of his splendour. Therefore, O god, against the mighty Muni bending his mind upon destruction, and consuming the three entire worlds like to the fire raging at the universal dissolution, that exalted one of exceeding effulgence resembling a flame, should be pacified. Even should he desires the dominion of the celestial regions, do you grant him his wish. Then the celestials with Pitamaha at their head, addressed the high-souled Viśvāmitra in sweet-words, saying, "Welcome, O Brahmarşi! Well pleased have we been with your penances. And, O son of Kusika, in consideration of your fiery asceticism, you have obtained Brāhmaṇahood.' O Brāhmaṇa, I will in company with the Maruts confer on you long life. hail to you! Do you accept this, good betide you. Go you, O gentle ascetic, bowing down to the celestials, said in delight, If Brāhmaṇa-hood has really been obtained by e together with length of days, let Omkâra and Vaşaļkāra and the Vedas crown me; and let, you gods, that foremost of those versed in Kștra Veda ad well as of those cognizant of the Brahmaveda, even Brahma's son, Vasistha, recognise me. Having granted this prime desire of mine, do you go away, you gods. Then pacified by the celestials, that best of reciters, the Brahmarsi Vasistha, made friends (with Viśvāmitra), saying, 'So be it.' You are a Brahmarsi. There is no doubt about this. And everything has been compassed in your behalf, having said this, the deities went to their respective regions. And that Brahmarși, the righteous Viśvāmitra also, having attained excellent Brāhmaṇa-hood, paid his homage to that best of reciters, Vasistha. And, having secured his end, began to range the entire world, staying in asceticism. In this wise, O Rāma, was Brāhmanya actually obtained by the high-souled one. This, O Rāma, is the foremost of ascetics, this one is Asceticism incarnate. This one ever abide by duty; and he is the stay of ascetic energy. Having said this, that best of regenerate persons paused. Hearing Satānanda's narration delivered in the presence of Rāma and Laks maņa, Janaka with clasped hands addressed the son of Kusika. Blessed and beholden am I, that you, O Kausika, accompanied with Kākutstha, hast arrived at my sacrifice, O puissant anchorite. Purified am I, O Brāhmaṇa, by your very sight. O mighty Muni. And from your sight have I received various qualities. O Brāhmaṇa, your mighty austerities have been related in detail; and myself as well as he high-souled Rāma have listened to the narration relative to your formidable ascetic energy; and the assembled courtiers have heard of your various perfections. Immeasurable is your asceticism; and ever immeasurable your power; and immeasurable your qualities, O Kusika's son. I never, O lord, am tired of listening to that wonderful narration. Now, O foremost of ascetics, the hour for performing the daily devotions has arrived, and the solar disc hangs aslope. To-morrow morning, O highly energetic one, you will see me again. Welcome, best of reciters. It behove you to favour me. Thus addressed, that best of ascetics, extolling that powerful one, well pleased, dismissed the delighted Janaka. Thus accosted, Mithila's lord, Vaideha, in company with his priests and friends, went round that foremost of ascetics, And the righteous Viśvāmitra also together with Rāma and Lakşmaņa, having been honoured by the high-souled ones, took up their quarters there.