Then having arrived at the Ocean, the king wending in Ganga's wake, entered underneath the Earth, at that spot where those (sons of Sagara) had been reduced to ashes. And, O Rāma, on the ashes being washed by the waters of Gangā, Brahmā, the lord of all creatures thus spoke to the monarch. O most puissant of men, the sixty thousand sons of the high-souled Sagara have been delivered and they have ascended heaven like to celestials themselves. O lord of earth, as long as the waters of the ocean shall endure in the world. Sagara's sons shall reside in heaven like to celestials. This Gangā shall become your eldest daughter; and she shall attain celebrity among all, being called after your name. And Gangā is called both Tripathagã and Bhăgirathi. And she is know as Tripathagā, is consequence of her proceeding in three directions. Do you now, O lord of men, her offer oblations of water to your grand-sires, and thereby, O king, make good your promise. O king, that foremost of righteous ones, your ancestor of exceeding renown, had failed to attain his desire. O child Ansumat likewise unparalleled in the worlds in energy, had failed in realising his cherished promise of bringing down Gangā. Then again that royal saint, crowned with qualities; of austerities like to mine, ever abiding by his Ksatriya duties, even Dilipa's self, your exceedingly puissant sire. O eminently righteous one, had failed in bringing down Gangā according to his cherished resolve, O sinless one. And now, O foremost of men, that promise having been fulfilled by you, you shall attain signal glory in the world by the common consent of all. And, O vanquisher of your foes, having brought about Ganga's dissension, you shall from this act of your also attain the regions of Brahma. Do you, O best of me, lave thyself in these waters worthy of the pious, O prime of men, and thereby become purified, and attain sanctity. Do you perform the watery rites of your grand-sires. May luck be your, I shall now repair to my own regions: do you depart, O king. Having said this, the illustrious lord of the celestials the Grand-sire of all creatures, went to the celestial regions. The royal saint king Bhagiratha also of high fame having performed his ablutions and purified himself, and duly and in proper order offered oblations of water to the sons of Sagara, entered his capital. And attaining exceeding prosperity, that foremost of men ruled his kingdom. O descendant of Raghu, having him as their sovereign, the people rejoiced greatly; and with their griefs removed and prosperity secured, they lived in peace of mind. Thus, O Rama, have I defailed to you the history of Gangā. Auspiciousness may you obtain! Good betide you, the evening draw nigh. He that recite this story conferring prosperity, fame, long life, and heaven to Vipras, Kșatriyas, and other, attain the good graces of his ancestors and the celestials. O Kākutstha, he that listen to the sacred history of Ganga's descent, conferring length of days, attain all his desires, and all his sins are destroyed, and his life and fame increase.