Having given his directions to Rāma as to his in coming installation on the morrow, the king, summoning his priest, Vasiştha spoke to him, saying. O you, having asceticism for your wealth, go, to Kākutstha, and for his welfare and obtaining the kingdom, make him fast along with my daughter-in-law. Thereupon, saying, “So be it," that best of those versed in the Veda, the worshipful Vasiştha conversant with mantras, that one practising excellent vows, mounting a Brahma car, himself went to the residence of Rāma cognizant of mantra, for the purpose of making him fast. And that foremost of ascetics, having reached Rāma's sable hued residence resembling a mass of clouds, passed through three several apartments, mounted on the car. With the view of honouring the saint worthy of honour, Rāma swiftly issued out of his abode. And nearing the car of that intelligent one, Rāma, personally taking him by the hand, made him descend. Finding Rämna so humble and dear, the priest addressed him, gratifying and delighting him with words that were acceptable. O Rāma your father has been well pleased with you; since you achieve the kingdom (through him). Do you to-day fast with Sītā. And in the morning, the king, your father Dasaratha, will, well-pleased, install you as heirapparent like Nahusa installing Yayāti. Having said this, that pure spirited one, observing own with mantras, made Rāma fast along with Sītā. Then having been duly worshipped by Rāma, and taken Kākutstha's permission, the spiritual preceptor of the king, went away from Rāma's residence. Rāma, having passed some time with sweetspeeched friends, and been honoured by them, with their permission entered his apartment. At that time Răma's residence was filled with joyous men and women; and it was like to a lake containing lotuses and graced with maddened birds. (On the other hand) Vasistha, issuing from the palace of Rāma like to the king's palace itself, found the street filled with people. On all sides, Ayodhya's high ways were crowded with groups of men full of curiosity. The tumult that arose in the high ways in consequence of the concourse and noise, was like the roaring of the ocean. The streets were cleared and washed and hung with garlands, and that day Ayodhya had her dwellings furnished with upraised flagstaffs. In the city of Ayodhyā men with women and children eagerly expected the rising of the sun (next day), and Răma's installation. And the people burnt to behold in Ayodhyā the august festivity, that was like to an ornament to the subjects, and that enhanced the joy of the people. Dividing the crowd thronging the high way, the priest slowly proceeded to the royal family. And ascending the palace like to a peak of the Himavat, he met with the lord of men, like Bệhaspati meeting with Sakra. Seeing him come, the king rising up from his royal seat, asked Vasiştha whether his intention had been carried out, whereupon Vasiştha answered that it had. The courtiers who had all along sat with Dasaratha, rose from the seats, for worshipping the priest. Then with the permission of his spiritual guide, leaving that assembly of men, the monarch entered his inner apartment like a lion entering his den. Even as the moon illumines the firmament crowded with stars, the handsome king entered his mansion, like to the abode of the mighty Indra, and thronged with females excellently attired, gracing it (by his presence).