Hearing Jamadagni's, words, the son of Dasaratha, in consideration of the presence of his father, said these words in subdued tone, O Bhrgu's son, I have heard of the deeds you have performed, resolved on avenging your sire. O Brāhmaṇa, I acknowledge that. But, O Bhargava, you insulted me abiding by the Kșatriya duties, as pusillaniinous or devoid of prowess. Do you to-day witness my energy and vigour. Saying this, the enraged Rāghava, endowed with fleet vigour, took up Bhrgu's noble bow, together with the shaft. And fixing the string upon it he set the arrow. And then Rāma enraged addressed Jamadagni's son, Rāma, saying, You are a Brāhmana and through Viśvāmitra, art worthy of my homage. Therefore it is, o Rāma, that I can not let go this life-destroying shaft. Which of these shall I reduce to aught, O Rama, Your aerial course, or the merit you have attained through your asceticism of ascending to certain incomparable regions. This wonderful arrow of ours sprung from Vişnu, capable of conquering hostile towns, never hit fruitless, with energy destroying the pride of prowess of foes. And with the object of beholding Rāma holding that foremost of weapons, there assembled in a body the celestials and the saints, with the great-father at their head. The Gandharvas and the Apsara and the Siddhas and the Cāraņas and the Kinnaras and the Yakşas and the Rākşasas and the Nagas assembled to behold that mighty wonder. And on Bhārgava's energy having been observed by Rāma bearing that best of bows, Jamadagni's son became bereft of prowess, and Rāma (Parasurāma) kept steadily eyeing Răma. And rendered inert in consequence of his energy having been dispelled by Rāma's own, Jamadagna mildly addressed Rāma of eyes like lotus' petals, saying, When formerly I gave away the earth to Kasyapas, he said to me, You must no longer stay in my dominions. In consonance with the words of my spiritual guide, ever since that time I have never spent three nights together on earth. Even this had been promised by me, O Kākutstha. Therefore, O hero, it behove you not to destroy my course, O descendant of Raghu. With the speed of the mind shall I now wend my way to the Mahendra, best of hills. O Rāma, the regions I have conquered by my asceticism do you destroy with that foremost of arrows: let there be no delay about it. Even from your handing of this bow I know you to be the chief of the celestials even that eternal one, the slayer of Madhu. Hail to you, O vanquisher of foes! And all these celestials assembled are beholding you of unparalleled deeds, and without an antagonist in fight. And, O Kākutstha, neither ought I to be ashamed (because of this discomfiture); I have been baffled by the lord himself of the three worlds. And it behove, O Rāma to disengage this peerless shaft (from the bow), O you of noble vows; and on your shooting the shaft. I shall repair to that fore most of mountains, the Mahendra. When Jamadagni's son, Rāma, had said this, the puissant and graceful son of Daśaratha, had said this, the puissant and graceful son of Dasaratha shot that excellent arrow. And witnessing the destruction by Rāma of his regions earned by his own austerities, Jamadagni's son speedily started for that best of mountains, the Mahendra. Then all the quarters became cleared of gloom; and the celestials and saints fell to extol Rāma when he had shot the arrow. And that lord, Jamadagni's son Rama, having gone round Rāma, the son of Dasaratha, and honoured (by all), set out (for his own quarters).