When the thousand years had been completed and the mighty ascetic had accomplished his vow, the celestials in a body desirous of conferring upon him the fruit thereof, appeared before him. The exceedingly effulgent Brahmă addressed him in soothing words, saying, “You are henceforth a saint, good to you, and (this. eminence) you have attained through your own laudable exertions.' Having spoken thus to him, the lord of celestials returned to heaven. And Viśvāmitra of mighty energy became again engaged in rigid austerities. And, O foremost of men, it came to pass that after a long lapse of time that prime of Apsaras, Menaka, was at that time perforining her ablutions in Puskara, and she was observed by Kusika's son like to lighting among clouds. And coming under the control of Kandarpa, (Cupid) the anchorite spoke to her, saying, 'O Apsari, has your journey been a pleasant one? Do you abide in my asylum.' Do you favour me; for, good betide you, I have been rendered senseless by Madana. Thus addressed, that one of shapely hips began to dwell there. And mighty was the hindrance that befell Viśvāmitra as regarded his asceticism, as she, O Rāghava, staying in that asylum of his, pleasantly spent five and five years, O gentle one. And after this period had gone by, overwhelmed with shame and afflicted with anxiety and grief, the mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra impatiently thought, O son of Raghu, that all this mighty loss of austerities was the work of the celestials. And deprived of his senses by lust, the decade had passed away imperceptibly as if it were one day and night; and this impediment stood in the way of his austerities. Having a sigh, that best of ascetics burned in repentance. And with sweet words renouncing the terrified and trembling Menaka standing with clasped hands, Kusika's son, Visvamitra, O Rāma, went to the northern mountains. And practising the Brahmacarya mode of life with the intention of subduing lust, that highly famous one engaged in arduous austerities on the banks of the Kausiki. And as he was thus engaged in profound austerities on the northern mountain, a thousand years, O Rāma passed away. Then taking counsel together, the celestials and the saints appeared before (Brahma), saying, 'Let Kusika's son obtain the title of Maharsi.' Hearing the words of the celestials, the Grand sire of all addressed the ascetic Viśvāmitra, in these sweet words, 'O mighty saint, hast you had a pleasant journey? Satisfied with your fierce austerities, O Kausika, I confer upon you the eminence of the foremost saintship.' Hearing Brahma's speech, the anchorite Viśvāmitra bowing down thus answered the Grandsire with clasped hands, The incomparable title of Brahmarși is to be won by one by performing sterling works. And since you have not addressed me (by that title), it appears that I have not yet succeeded in subduing my senses. *The text is very faulty. The literal meaning would be, since you have not.....I have subdued my senses, which would be absurd. I have therefore rendered the passage freely. Thereupon Brahmā said to him, 'Do you exert thyself until you conquer your senses?' Saying this, Brahmā went to heaven. And when the celestials had gone, the mighty ascetic, Viśvāmitra, with upraised arms, and without any support, and subsisting on air, began to perform penances. And in summer, the ascetic surrounded himself with five fires, and in rains remained in an uncovered place, and in winter day and night stood submerged in water. Thus passed by a thousand years of terrible penances. And on the mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra being engaged in austerities, great was the agitation that exercised the celestials and Indra, in particular. Śakra together with the Maruts spoke to Rambha these words, fraught with weal to himself, and woe to Kausika.'