Thus addressed by Vasiştha, the mighty Viśvāmitra, aiming a fiery weapon, said, 'Stay! Stay!' The worshipful Vasiştha also on his part, raising a Brahmā staff resembling another staff of Kala, exclaimed in wrath. Wretch of a Kșatriya! here am I, do you display the might you are master of. To-day, O Gādhi's son, will I humble your pride of arms. You disgrace of the race, where is your Kș atriya might, and where my high Brahmä energy? Do you behold my superhuman Brahmā energy. And even as water ally the fierceness of a flame, the Brahmā staff quenched the energy of the powerful fiery weapon discharged by Gadhi's Son. Then Gādhi's son, waxing wroth, discharged Vāruņa and Raudra and Aindra and Pāśupata and Aișika weapons. Mānava, and Mohana, and Gandharva, and Svapna, and Jrmbhana, and Mohana, and Santapana, and Vilapana, and Sosana, and Dāruņa, and Vajra hard to baffle, and Brahmapāśa, and Kālapāśa, and Varuņapāśa, and Pinaka (favourite of Siva), and the two ASanis, wet and dry, and the Danda weapon, and Paisaca, and the Krauñca weapon, and Dharmacakra, and Kālacakra, and Vişnucakra, and Vāyavya, and Mohana, and the Hayasiras weapon, and the mighty weapon Vidyādhara, and the terrible Kala weapon, and the dreadful Trisula weapon, and Kapala, and Kankana, all these weapons hurled he (Viśvāmitra), at that best of mantra-reciting ones, O descendant of Raghu. And it was wonderful to behold. But Brahma's son baffled all those by means of his staff. And on those (weapons) being resisted, the son of Gadhi hurled a Brahm, weapon. And on that weapon being discharged the deities with Agni at their head, and the Devarsis, and the Gandharvas, and the mighty Serpents, became afflicted with fear. And on that Brahm, weapon being discharged, all the three worlds became exceedingly alarmed. O Raghu's descendant, Vasistha by virtue of his Brahmā energy completely baffled that terrible Brahmā weapon. When the high-souled Vasiştha had baffled the Brahmă weapon, his form the three worlds. And from the pores of his body, resembling a smoking flame, darted out scintillation's of fire. And resembling another staff of Yama, the Brahmā staff raised by Vasiştha's arm flamed like to the fire at the universal dissolution. Then the ascetics in a body fell to eulogizing that best of mantra-reciting ones, Vasistha, saying, “Your might, O Brāhmaṇa, is infallible. Do you rein in the (Brahmā) energy, by your own.' O Brāhmaṇa, Viśvāmitra of mighty strength has been subdued by you. Infallible is your extraordinary mighty. Let the creatures now be relieved from their distress.' Thus addressed, that highly energetic one of rigid austerities, became pacified. And Viśvāmitra, being put down, heaving a sigh said, 'Fie upon the Ksatriya might: the strength begot of Brahma energy, is might indeed. By one Brahmā staff has all my weapons been put to the rout. Beholding this, I with a placid mind and senses will engage in mighty austerities, which shall earn for me Brāhmaṇa-hood.