The next morning, which happened to be bright, the lord of men, having performed his daily devotions, welcomed Viśvāmitra and Rāghava. And having, in accordance with the scriptures, paid homage to the former as well as the two high-souled Rāghavas, that virtuous one said, Hail, O worshipful sir! What shall I do to you, O sinless one? Do you command. Surely, I deserve to be commanded by you. Thus addressed by the high-souled Janaka, that first of ascetics endowed with a righteous soul, well versed in speech, answered, These sons of Dasaratha-Ksatriyas, famed among men, are eager to behold than best of bows. If it be with you, do you show it to them, may it be well with you! having obtained a sight of that bow, the king's sons, their desires crowned with success, will success, will return as they list. Thus accosted, Janaka replied to the mighty Muni, saying, Lisen to why the bow lie here. There was a king known by the name of Devarata. He was the elder brother of Nimi. And, Oworshipful one, this bow was consigned to the hands of that high-souled one, this bow was consigned to the hands of that high-souled one as a trust. Formerly with the view of destroying Dakşa's sacrifice, the puissant (Śiva), drawing this bow, sportively spoke to the celestials in ire, saying, 'Since, you gods, you deny me the shares (of this sacrifice), which I lay claim to, I will with my bow even sever those heads of yours.' Thereat, O powerful ascetic, with agitated hearts, the deities fell to propitiating that lord of the celestials, and Bhava was pleased with them. And well-pleased with them, he conferred this upon those high-souled ones. And even this is that jewel of a bow belonging to the high-souled god of gods, and which was ultimately, O lord, consigned as a trust to our ancestor. And as I was ploughing the mead, arose a damsel, and as I obtained her while hallowing the field (for sacrifice), she has come to be known by the name of Sītā. And arising from the earth, she grew as my daughter. Unsprung from the usual source, she was then established here as my daughter, whose hand must be obtained by bending the bow. And, O foremost of ascetics, many a king, coming here, had saught to obtain my growing daughter arisen from the earth. But, O worshipful one, in consideration of her being one whose dower must be prowess in bending the bow, I would not bestow my daughter upon those lords of earth seeking for the kings in a body began to flock to Mithila, desirous of being acquainted with the strength of the bow. And on their being curious (as to the bow), I showed it to them; but they could neither hold nor wield it. And, O mighty Muni, finding those powerful kings to be but endowed with small prowess, I passed them by. Hear what then befell, O you of ascetic wealth. Then, O powerful anchorite, in high ire, the kings, doubtful as to their strength in stringing the bow, laid siege to Mithila. And those potent princes, conceiving themselves as frustrated by me, began to harass the city of Mithila, waxing wondrous wroth. And when a year had been completed, my defensive resources were entirely exhausted, and at this, I was exceedingly aggrieved. Then I sought to propitiate the deities; and well-pleased, the celestials granted me a Caturanga army. At length those wicked kings, meeting with slaughter, broke and fled in all directions, together with their adherents, bereft of vigour, and confidence in their strength. And, O puissant ascetic, this highly effulgent bow will I show to Rāma and Laksmana. O you of excellent vows. And, if, Ascetic, Rāma succeeds in fixing string to it, I will confer upon Daſaratha's son my daughter unsprung from the usual source. Sītā,