Mantharā, making Kaikeyi the object of her wrath, threw off the noble ornament, and spoke these words, in anger and grief. You senseless girl, wherefore do you display your joy on such an unfit occasion. You did not see that you are in the bosom of an ocean of grief. Being grieved at heart do I laugh at you inwardly. O worshipful lady, because you having met with signal calamity, rejoices even in what should be lamented. I lament you for your perversion of sense. What sensible woman can rejoice in the advancement of a co-wife's son, like to death itself? From Bharata proceeds Rāma's fear concerning the kingdom to which both have an equal claim. Thinking of this, I am pressed down with sorrow, because fear proceeds from the person who fears much. The mighty armed Laksmana has for certain in all ways taken refuge in Rāma; and Satrughna like to Lakşmaņa has taken refuge in the Kakutstha, Bharata. With reference to gradation of birth, the probability is in favour of Bharata's attempting the kingdom; yet by reason (of Rāma's being the elder) of the two Bharata has been thrown off. Anticipating the peril that might spring to your son from Rāma, learned and versed in the functions of the Kșatriya, and of quick decision, I tremble. Surely Kausalya is of blessed fortune, for tomorrow under Puşya the foremost of the twiceborn ones will install her son as the mighty heir apparent to the empire. You will, with clasped hands, serve as a slave the illustrious Kausalyā, mistress of the world, and brimming over with joy, with all her foes discomfited. Thus along with us you will attend her commands, and your son also will await the pleasure of Rāma And Ráma's wives* together with their handmaids will be filled with delight' and in consequence of Bharata's name, your daughtersin-law will be afflicted with sorrow. *Historically Rāma had but one wife. Manthară here anticipated that Rāma would marry many wives like his father after the installation. Seeing Manthară dead set against Rāma, and speaking in this wise, the noble Kaikeyi praised the virtues of Rāma. Rāma is cognizant of morality, and filled with perfections, and accomplished, and grateful, and endowed with truth, and pure. And as he is the eldest son of the King, he deserves the Kingdom as heir-apparent. That long-lived one shall maintain his brothers and his retainers even like a father. Why then, O hump-backed one, do you grieve, hearing Rāma's installation. And for certain, that foremost of men, Bharata also, an hundred years after Rāma, will attain the kingdom bequeathed by his father and grandfather. O Mantharā, you burn (with grief) in this auspicious time. Our good fortune will come (after this in the shape of Bharata's installation); why then do you grieve. Surely Rāma is dearer to me than Bharata; and he also loves me more tian he does Kausalyā. And if the Kingdom be Rāma's it will be also Bharata's at the same time. Rāma regards his brothers even as his own self. Hearing Kaikeyi's words, Mantharā exceedingly aggrieved, sighing hot and hard, thus addressed Kaikeyi, saying. Regarding that to be evil which is your good, you do not through your want of understanding know that you are going to be drowned in a sea of grief and peril. Rāghava will become king; and after Raghava his son; so that, O Kaikeyi, Bharata will come to be at once cut off from the royal line. O emotional one, surely all the sons of the king do not obtain the kingdom. And if all were placed on the throne, mighty would be the disturbance therefrom. Therefore it is that kings, O Kaikeyi, lay the task of Government on the eldest son if worthy, or else upon a younger most meritorious. This your son, O affectionate one, cast off from the royal race, and deprived of happiness, will fare like one forlorn. You do not understand that I am taking such pains, and it is evident that you does not understand that I have come to you for your good. You are conferring on me rewards on the advancement of your co-wife. For certain, Rāma having attained the kingdom without let, will send Bharata either to a distant land, or to the other world. Bharata is a mere boy, and by you it is that he has been sent to his maternal uncle's mansion. Even in immobile objects attachment grows by virtue of nearness. Śatrughna also ever following Bharata has gone with him. He is attached to Bharata as Lakşmaņa is attached to Rāma. It is heard that once upon a time the woodsmen had intended to cut down a tree; but it was relived from the high peril because of the proximity of prickly shrubs around it. Sumitrā's son protects Rāma and Rāghava protects Lakşmaņa. Their fraternal love like that of the Asvins is celebrated in the world, Therefore Rāma will never do any wrong to Lakşmaņa; but he will do wrong to Bharata, there is no doubt about this. Therefore let that son of Raghu be sent to the woods from the palace. This pleases me; and this also is for your supreme welfare; and in this wise also will be realised the good of your relations. But if Bharata can get at his ancestral kingdom by just means, that would also be welcome to your kindred. That boy deserving of happiness is the natural enemy of Rāma. How can he live under the prosperous Rāma being deprived of all wealth. Therefore it behoves you to save Bharata about to be overcome by Rāma, like a lion pursuing the leader of an elephant herd in a forest. Your co-wife, Rāma's mother, had formerly through pride and good fortune been slighted by you. Why will not she upon you wreak her revenge now. When Rāma will obtain the earth furnished witr many oceans and mountains, then, O proud dame, you rendered forlorn, will along with Bharata, sustain sorry discomfiture. And when Rāma will obtain the earth, Bharata will certainly meet with destruction, therefore do you ponder as to how you can place your son on the throne and banish your enemy.