Thus perversely advised by the exceedingly wicked Mantharā, the noble and sagacious lady, influenced by passion, having completely decided in her mind as to her course, was lying down on the ground like a Kinnarī pierced with poisoned shafts. And gradually told everything to Mantharā. And having made up her mind, that lady wrought up with ire, being under the influence of Manthara's words, sighed hot and hard like the daughter of a Nāga, and for a while reflected on the way which was to bring her happiness. Then her friend and well-wisher Mantharā, hearing of her resolution, rejoiced exceedingly, as if she had already secured success. And, having fully ascertained her course, that weak one being angry, lay down upon the floor, knitting her eye-brows. The ground was strewn with many beautiful garlands and excellent ornaments which Kaikeyi had cast away. And they adorned the earth as the stars adorn the welkin. Like an enfeebled Kinnarī she clad in a soiled garment, binding fast her braid, lay down in the anger-chamber. The monarch having issued orders for the installation of Rāma, entered his inner apartment after giving permission to the courtiers to repair to their respective abodes. "To-day it has been fixed to install Rāma, but Kaikeyi has not yet heard of it”, thus thought the monarch. Therefore with the view of communicating the welcome news to that lady deserving of good, (Kaikeyi), that renowned one of subdued senses entered the inner apartment. Like to the moon entering the sky covered with white clouds and with Rähu present in it, that one of high fame entered the excellent apartment of Kaikeyi, having parrots and peacocks and Krauñcas and swans, resounding with the sounds of musical instruments, containing hump-backed and dwarfish women, graced with houses containing creepers, and pictures, and adorned adorned with aśokas and campakas, furnished with daises composed of ivory and silver and gold, and adorned with trees bearing flowers and fruits always, and tanks, having superb seats made of ivory, silver and gold; rich with various viands and drinks and edibles, with costly ornaments, and resembling heaven itself. And the prosperous monarch having entered his own inner apartment did not see his dear Kaikeyi on the excellent bed. The lord of men not seeing his favourite wife, asked (within himself) and was struck with grief. Never before this that noble lady spent that hour (at any other place); nor had the monarch ever entered the empty apartment. Then the king entering the apartment asked (a sentinel) concerning Kaikeyi, not knowing that that unwise woman was hankering after her selfinterest, as on previous occasions not finding her he used to ask. Thereupon, hurriedly and with clasped hands, the warder said, “Worshipful sire, the noble lady being exceedingly angry, has repaired to the anger-chamber." Hearing the warder's word, the king exceedingly anxious, with his senses agitated and afflicted, again grieved. There burning with grief, the lord of the earth saw her lying down on the ground in an improper guise. And the sinless aged (monarch) saw on the ground his youthful wife dearer to him than life itself, cherishing an unrighteous intention, like a torn creeper, and lying down like a very goddess, resembling a Kinnari fallen from heaven because of sin, like a fallen Apsarā, like to an illusion spread to take another, and like an ensnared doe, or a she-elephant that has been pierced with an envenomed shaft shot by a hunter. And himself resembling a mighty elephant in the midst of a foremost, the king, exceedingly aggrieved, out of affection, gently passing his hand upon Kaikeyi's person, thus addressed her furnished with eyes resembling lotus' petals. I do not know why you have been angry with me. O noble lady, who has reprimanded you, or who has offended you, that, О auspicious one, in this guise you are lying down in dust enhancing my sorrow? And wherefore are you down on the ground, I, who seek your welfare, being yet alive? O you that afflicts my heart, are like one under the influence of a malignant spirit. I have skilful physicians whom I have completely satisfied with gifts, they will render you whole. Do you, O angry wench, mention your malady. Whom do you wish to please; and whom to displease? Who shall to-day receive an welcome office, and who a highly unwelcome one? Do not conceal your thoughts, nor, O noble one, afflict your person. Who, that should not be slain, shall be put to death; and who that should, is to be set at liberty? Who that is poor is to be made rich; and who that is affluent is to be turned into a pauper? I and mine are at your command. I dare not cross any wish of yours. Tell me your mind, and I will satisfy you by laying down, life itself. You know the influence you have upon me, therefore, it behove you not to entertain any apprehension. By all my good deeds I swear that I will compass your pleasure. The space that is lighted up by the solar disc is mine, the Dravidas, and the Sindhus, and the Sauvīras, and Surāṣtras and the Dakṣiṇāpathas, and the Bangas, and the Angas, and the Māgadhas, and the Matsyas, and the flourishing Kāsis and the K salas. In these are produced many things, wealth and corn and animals. Do you, O Kaikeyi, ask for those things that your mind may take a fancy to. What, O timid one, is the use of afflicting yourself thus? O beauteous damsel, arise, arise. Do you, O Kaikeyi, unfold to me the cause whence has proceeded your fear. On hearing the reason, I will dispel it, even as the sun dried up the due. Thus addressed and encouraged, she desirous of saying that disagreeable things with the view of afflicting her lord still more, spoke to him thus.