Then that sinful woman, seeing the descendant of Ikşvāku distressed on account of his son, and deprived of consciousness, and lying inert on the ground, spoke to him, saying. Having promised to grant me the boon, how distressed do you lie on the ground, as if you did commit some sin? It behove you to keep untainted your dignity by performing what you have promised. Truth, say persons cognizant of it, is the prime virtue. And it is in the interests of virtue, that I have been exhorting you. Having promised his own person to the hawk, that lord of earth, Saivya, having granted the same to the bird, went the excellent way. In the same manner, Alarka, being asked, plucked out his eyes readily and bestowed them on a certain Brāhmana versed in the Vedas. And the lord of rivers, having promised, even on occasions of Parvas, does not pass over his bounds for the sake of truth. The one syllable (Om signifying) Brahma is the truth itself. In truth is established righteousness. Truth is the undecaying Vedas, and through truth people attain the foremost state. If your mind is established in virtue, do you then follow truth. Since, O excellent one, you have promised the boon, let that boon bear fruit. Do you, incited by me with the view of maintaining virtue, banish Rāma. Thrice, do I tell you. If you did not fulfil this noble vow, O worshipful Lord, you have made to me, forsaken by you will I even in your very presence renounce my life. Thus fearlessly urged by Kaikeyſ the king could not take off from himself the noose (of promise), even as Bali could not take off the noose that had been fixed upon him (by Upendra) at the instance of Indra. Thereupon, the king looked blank, and his heart became agitated, like to a beast of burden moving tortuously when placed within the yoke and wheels. Then calming himself with a great effort, the king, as if not seeing Kaikeyi, with his haggard eyes, addressed her, saying. "I do here, O wicked wretch, renounce that hand of yours which I had held with mantras before the sacrificial fire, and I do also renounce along with you own-begotten* your son Bharata. * This is a new coinage rendered necessary for the exigencies of translation. If 'first-born' is justifiable, 'own-begotten,' is also such. O exalted one, the night has departed; and as soon as the Sun rises, the superiors will surely urge me for installing Rāma with the provisions that have been procured for the purpose. But if, O you of auspicious ways, hinder the installation of Răma, Rāma will perform my funeral obsequies, when I am dead, and not you accompanied by your son shall perform the same. That countenance of Rāma which I have once seen expanded in delight, I shall never be able to behold bereft of joy and cheerfulness, and down, with melancholy clouding it As the high-souled ruler of earth was speaking thus to her, the night engarlanded with the moon and stars.was succeeded by the morning. Then Kaikeyi of vile ways versed in speech, rendered senseless by wrath, again addressed the monarch in harsh language, saying. What words, O king, do you say, comparable to poison or painful indisposition's. It behove you to summon hither your son, the energetic Rāma. Having established my son in the kingdom, and rendered Rāma a ranger of the woods and made myself rid of rivals, I shall attain my end. Thus urged by Kaikeyī, the king like to an excellent steed stung by a sharp goad, again spoke to her. I have been bound fast by the ties of virtue, therefore have I lost my senses. I now only wish to behold my beloved eldest son, the righteous Rama. Then when the night had gone by and day broke and the Sun arose, and when the sacred astral hour had arrived, Vasistha endowed with many virtues, surrounded by his disciples and furnished with the provisions, entered that foremost of cities. Whose streets had been swept and watered and which had been decorated with streamers, and which was filled with people rejoicing, and whose stalls overflowed with articles, and which resounded with the noise of festivity, and which was populous with folks eager for the installation of Rāghava, and which was every where scented with sandal and dhüpa and aguru. Having entered the city, like to the metropolis of Purandara himself, he saw the graceful inner apartment decked with innumerable standards, and which was thronged with citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces, and graced with Brāhmaṇas cognizant of sacrifices, and crowded with highly worshipful assistants at sacrifice, entered the inner apartment and passed by that press. Vasiştha exceedingly delighted, surrounded by great saints, saw at the gate the charioteer of that great one, who at the same time was his counsellor of gracious looks. Therefore the highly energetic Vasiştha said to the kilful scr. of the charioteer, Do you speedily acquaint the mighty monarch that I have come. Here are golden vessels filled with water from the Gangā and the ocean; and for the installation, an excellent udumbara seat, and all kinds of seeds, and scents and various gems, and honey, and curds and clarified butter and fried paddy, and milk, and sacrificial grass, flowers, and milk, and eight good-looking maids, and an excellent mad elephant, a car yoked with four horses, and a sword, and an elegant bow, and a carriage containing men, and an umbrella like to the moon, and two white cámaras, and a golden vase, and a pale-coloured bull tethered with a golden chains and bearing a hump adorned with ornaments, and a mighty lion, the best of his race, furnished with four teeth, and a throne, and a tiger-skin, and sacrificial fuel, and fire, and all kinds of musical instruments, and courtezans, decked out with ornaments, and preceptors and Brāhmaṇas, and cows, and various kinds of pure animals and birds, have been brought. The foremost citizens and inhabitants provinces and the merchants with their retinue, all these and others, with hearts filled with joy, and mouth speaking pleasant words, stay with the sovereigns to witness the installation of Rāma. Do you urge expedition upon the mighty monarch, so that this day under the influence of the Puşya star Rāma may obtain the kingdom, Hearing these words of his, the charioteer's son possessed of mighty strength, eulogising that powerful monarch, entered his quarters. And advanced in years, he had before this been granted free access everywhere, so that the warders, loved of the king and seeking his good, could not prevent his entrance. Not knowing the plight that had befallen the king, Sumantra presenting himself before him, endeavoured to gladden the latter with pleasing speech. And having entered the apartment of the king, the charioteer Sumantra with clasped hands, pleasing the monarch as he proceeded, said. Do you please us delightedly and with a glad heart, even as the strong ocean pleases people at the rising of the sun. The charioteer Mätali used to hymn Indra at this season, and (encouraged by that eulogy) he conquered the Dänavas. Even so do I hymn you. And even as the Vedas with the Angas and other lore indoctrinate the self-create lord Brahmā, so do I enlighten you. As the sun in company with the moon enlightens the fair earth containing creatures, so do I to-day enlighten you. Arise, O foremost of monarchs, clad in excellent attire and decked with ornaments, like to the sun issuing from the (mount) Meru. All the articles necessary for the installation of Rāma are ready. And the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces and the merchants stay with clasped hands. And the worshipful Vasiştha stays with the Brāhmaṇas. Do you, O king, immediately order the installation of Rāma. Like to cattle's without their keeper, like to and army without its commander, like to a night without the moon, like to kines without their bull, is a kingdom without a king. Hearing these words of Sumantra, bland and appropriate, the lord of earth was afresh overwhelmed with grief. Then the graceful and virtuous king, waxing disconsolate, on account of his son, and with his eyes reddened with the effect of grief, seeing the charioteer, said, “This eulogy of your pains me the more." Hearing those sorrowful words and finding the lord of earth aggrieved thus, Sumantra with clasped hands went off a little. Seeing the king utterly incapable of speaking any thing personally owing to his heavy sorrow, Kaikeyī, the best counsellor in matters like these, addressed Sumantra with the following words. Sumantra, being elated with joy on account of Răma's installation, the king has kept up the whole night, and being tired therefore, is overpowered with sleep. Go you therefore speedily, O charioteer, and bring Rāma here, the praiseworthy son of king. This will do you good, do not hesitate in this. “How can I go," replied Sumantra, Without the permission of the king?” Hearing these words of the counsellor, the king spoke to him. Sumantra, Bring the beautiful Răma here, I want to see him. Thinking that some good would accrue to Rāma, he was pleased at heart and away he went speedily delighted at the royal mandate. Being asked again by Kaikeyi to hurry on at the time of departure Sumantra thought within himself. "Evident it is that the Queen has become impatient to see Rāma's installation and hence is the hurry, and the king will now take rest.' Thinking this the energetic charioteer with great delight, intent on seeing Rāma, issued out of the city like a lake near the ocean. Having come out of the presence of the king suddenly, he saw the warders, various citizens and great personages sitting at the gate.