And to that ruler of the earth extremely under the influence of passion, Kaikeyi spoke cruelly, saying. O worshipful one, none has wronged or reprimanded me. I have a certain intention, which I wish that you will carry out. If you will execute that do you then promise to that effect. Then only will I express my desire. Thereupon, by his hands placing Kaikeyi's head upon his lap, the mighty monarch, under the influence of passion, smiling fairly, addressed her lying on the ground, O you that are swollen with the pride of good fortune, you know that foremost of men, Răma excepted, there live not any that is dearer to me than yourself. I swear by that invincible prime of men even the high-souled Răghava, who is the stay of my existence. Do you tell me your heart's desire. By that Rāma, Kaikeyī, whom if I do not see for a moment, I die for certain, do I swear that whatever that will say I will accomplish. By that Rama, O Kaikeyi, foremost of men, whom I hold dearer than my other sons, do I swear that, I will accomplish whatever you will say. O gentle one, my heart is in what I say. Do you, considering this, deliver me from this distress. Taking all this into consideration, do you, O Kaikeyi, speak out what is in your mind. You see the power you wield in me, therefore it behove you not to fear. I will do your pleasure, by my good deeds do I swear this. Thereat intent upon her own interests, that exalted dame seeing her own wish (almost) attained, assuming an attitude of intercession, being rejoiced, spoke harsh words (to the monarch). And delighted at the king's speech, she unfolded that dreadful intention of hers like to the approaching death. You swear repeatedly, and confer on me a boon. Let the three and thirty deities headed by Indra, hear this. Let the Sun, and the Moon, and the Sky, and the Planets, and Night, and Day, and the Cardinal Points, and the Universe, and the Earth, with the Gandharvas and Rākşasas, and the Rangers of the night, and all Beings, and the house-hold gods residing in dwellings, together with all other creatures, know your utterances. Let all the deities hear that a highly energetic one speaking the truth, and pure, and cognizant of morality, and abiding by his promise, has conferred on me a boon. Having entreated the monarch thus with a view to prevent him from swerving, and keeping him firm in his promise, she again addressed that mighty bowman, overcome by desire, who was ready to confer on her a boon. Remember, o king, the incidents that took place formerly in the war between gods and Asuras. Incapable of taking your life, your enemy had rendered you exceedingly feeble. Because, O respected Sir, I tending you sleeplessly, preserved you, you did grant me two boons. Entrusting the boons then with you, dc I now, O descendant of the Raghus, ask for them (at your hands), O lord of the earth. If having religiously promised to that effect, you did not confer the boon, this very day, will I, coming by this disgrace from you, renounce my life. When the king was completely brought under the influence of Kaikeyi, he was ensnared by her speech for his destruction, like a deer entering into the noose. Thereafter she thus spoke to the king about to confer a boon, who was under the influence of passion, saying, Of the boons that you had then promised me, I shall speak to-day: do you listen to my words. Preparations are being made for installing Rāghava. Do you with the provisions made ready install Bharata in the kingdom. O exalted one, the time has also come for you to confer on me the second boon which you being pleased had promised in the war of the gods and Asuras. Let the gentle Rāma, clad in deer-skin, lead the life of a mendicant in the Dandaka forest for the space of nine and five years. And let Bharata gain the heir-apparentship rid of thorns. Even this in my prime wish; and I beseech you but to grant the boon you have already promised. Even this very day will I see Rāma despatched to the woods. Do you by proving true to your word, become the king of kings; and preserve your race, character, and birth. Truthful speech, say the ascetics, is of supreme welfare to men in the next world.