Then with his heart burning, in consequence of the remembrance of his humiliation, and having made enemies with that high-souled one, Viśvāmitra of mighty asceticism sighing and sighing, went towards the south, in company with his queen, and became engaged in dreadful austerities. O Rāghava. And subsisting on fruits and roots, and restraining his senses, he performed the most rigid austerities. And four sons engaged in observing truth and duty, Havișpanda, Madhuspanda, Dhrdhanetra, and Maharatha, were born to him. And when a thousand years had been completed, the Grand-sire of all, Brahma, addressed the ascetic, Viśvāmitra in sweet words, saying, 'O son of Kusika, the regions of the Rājarșis have been won by you through your austerities. And account of this your asceticism, we recognise you as a Rājarși.' Having said this, the highly energetic prime Lord of all creatures went to the celestial regions in company with the celestials. Hearing this, Viśvāmitra hanging down his head from shame and possessed by a mighty sorrow, said, in piteous accents, I have performed rigid austerities, yet the deities and the saints recognise me only as a Rājarși. I do not consider the fruit of my asceticism as gained.' on Ascertaining this in his mind, that righteous one of high austerities, O Kākutstha, again engaged in penances with a composed self. O Rāghava, it came to pass that at this time, that enhance of Ikşvāku's line, the celebrated and truthful Trisanku of subdued senses made up his mind, saying, 'I will perform a sacrifice, and in body win the prime way of the celestials.' And summoning Vasiştha, he unfolded his mind to him. And on the high-souled Vasiştha saying, 'I am incapable of doing this,' And disregarded by the latter, the King went towards the southern quarter. And with the view of securing success to his endeavours, the king repaired to where Vasiştha's sons had for a long time been performing austerities. And the highly energetic Trisanku saw the hundred exceedingly effulgent sons of Vasistha engaged in austerities with fixed faculties. And approaching all those high-souled sons of his spiritual guide, and paying them reverence he, hanging down his head from shame, with clasped hands, addressed those mighty spirits, saying. I seek protection of you; and I take refuge in you capable of conferring it. Disregarded have I been, good betide you, by the high-souled Vasiştha. I have set my heart upon celebrating a mighty sacrifice: it behove you to command me. And with the view of propitiating you, I, lowly bowing down my head, beseech the sons of my spiritual guide, Brāhmaṇas ever staying by asceticism, do you with collected minds officiate in this sacrifice, so that success may be secured to me; and that in body I may attain the regions of the celestials. Disregarded by the ascetic Vasiştha, other way find I none, you anchorets, except the sons of my spiritual guide. To the Ikşvākus, their preceptor is their prime way. Therefore after him (Vasistha), even you are the objects of my adoration.