And, O Raghava, when Brahmadatta was married, that sonless one, (Kušanābha), with the intention of obtaining male offspring, took in hand a son-conferring sacrifice. And when the sacrifice had commenced, that son of Brahmā, the exceedingly noble Kusa, spoke to king Kusanābha, saying, O son, there will be born to you a virtuous son like to thyself: you will obtain even Gādhi, and through him enduring fame in this world. Having said this to king Kusanabha, Kusa, O Rāma, entering the welkin, went to the eternal regions of Brahmā. Then after sometime, an eminently virtuous son, named Gadhi, was born to the intelligent Kusanabha. O Kākutstha, even that highly pious Gadhi is my sire. And, O descendant of Raghu, I, called Kausika, am sprung from Kusa's line. O Rāghava, I had a sister of noble vows born before me. And her name was Satyavatī; and she was bestowed upon Rcīkā. And following her lord, she ascended heaven in her own proper person. And my highly generous sister, Kausikī, has finally assumed the form of a mighty river. And in order to compass the welfare of all creatures, my sister is now a noble and charming river of sacred waters, issuing from the Himavat mountains. And thenceforth, out of affection for my sister, Kausiki, I ever dwell happily in the vicinity of the Himavat, O Raghava. And that virtuous Kausiki, Satyavati, as well established in religion as truth, and chaste, and eminently pious, is now the foremost of streams. And, O Rama, it is only for the purpose of completing my sacrifice that leaving her behind, I have come to Siddhāśrama. And now by virtue of your energy, have I attained fruition. Now, O Rāma, I have narrated to you the circumstances connected with the history of my line and myself, as also of this place, O mightyarmed one, which you had asked me to relate. But, O Kākutstha, while I was speaking, half the night has been spent. Do you now sleep, good betide you, so that you may not feel any difficulty while on the journey. The trees stand motionless, and the beasts and birds are silent, and, O descendant of Raghu, all sides have become enveloped in nocturnal gloom. The noon of night is gradually passing away; and the firmament thick-studded with stars resembling eyes, is illumined up with their light. And that dispeller of darkness, the mildbeaming moon is rising, gladdening the hearts of all creatures with his splendour. And night-ranging being terrible carnivorous Yaksas and Rākşasas—walk here and there, Having said this the mighty ascetic of exceeding energy paused. And those ascetics honouring him, said, Excellent! Excellent! This line belonging to the Kuśikas is exalted and devoted to virtue. And those foremost of men sprung in the Kuśa race are high-souled and like to Brahmarsis. And specially you, O illustrious Viśvāmitra, art so. And that best of streams, Kausiki, has added lustre to your lien. And the auspicious son of Kuśika having been extolled by those delighted ascetic, the foremost of their order-slept, like to the sun, when setting Rāma too along with Sumitrā's son having in admiration praised that tiger among ascetics, enjoyed the luxury of slumber.