When Vasiştha had spoken thus, Janaka with clasped hands answered to him, saying,-It behove you to listen to our genealogy as related by myself. In the matter of disposal of daughters, O foremost of anchorets, one's own line should be described by one boasting of a noble ancestry. Do you then, O mighty-minded one, listen to the same. There was a king famed over the three worlds by his own acts, Nimi-eminently picus and the foremost of those endowed with strength. His son was named Mithi, and Mithi's son was Janaka. And from this king Janaka have we son was derived that word as applied to every one of us. And from Janaka sprang Udāvasu; Udāvasu's the pious-souled Nandivardhana. And Nandivardha's son was the heroic Suketu. Suketu's son was the mighty and righteous Devarata. And the Rājarși Devarāta's son was Brhadratha. Bịhadratha's son was the heroic and puissant Mahāvīra. And Mahāvīra's son was Sudhști, endowed with fortitude and having truth for prowess. Sudhrtia's son was the pious-spirited and eminently righteous Dhīșțaketu. And the Rājarși Dhistaketu's son was Haryasva. Haryaśva's son was Maru; and Maru's son was Pratīndhaka. And Pratīndhaka's son was the righteous king Kirtiratha. Kirtiratha's Devamidha, and Devamidha's Vibudha, and Vibudha's Mahidhraka. Mahīdhraka's son was king Kirtirāta endowed with great strength. And the Rājarşi Kirtirāta had Mahāroman born to him. Mahāroman, the virtuous Svarnaroman. And the Rājarşi Svarnaroman had Hrasvaroman born to him. son was This high-souled king conversant with morality had two sons: the elder, myself the younger, even my brother, who was the elder son, and consigning to my care Kusadhvaja, our father sought the forest. And on my aged sire ascending heaven, I righteously ruled the kingdom and cherished my brother Kusadvaja resembling a celestial, with the eye of affection. It came to pass that on one occasion a certain powerful king named Sudhanvan came before Mithilā intending to lay siege to it. He sent word to me, saying, 'Do you give me the all-excellent bow of Śiva, as well as your daughter, the lotus-even Sītā.' And is consequence of my not granting him either, king Sudhanvan, O Brahmarsi, entered into hostilities with me; but he was both defeated and slain by me in the encounter. O foremost of ascetics, slaying king Sudhanvan. I installed in Sānkāśyā my heroic brother Kuśadhvaja. Thus one, O mighty anchorite, is my younger brother, and I am his elder. O powerful ascetic, well pleased will I confer on you these as your daughter-in-law, Sītā on Rāma, good betide you, and Urmilā on Laksmana. And, I take oath thrice that, without doubt, I will with a glad heart confer upon you, O potent ascetic, as your daughters-in-law my second daughter Urmilā and also Sītā resembling the daughter of a celestial, having prowess assigned for her dower. do you now, O king, give away kine on behalf of the nuptials of Rāma and Lakşmaņa; and also perform their ancestral rites, good to you; and then complete the marriage ceremony. To-day the star Magha is on the ascendant. On the third day, my master, when the Phalguna will be on the north, do you, O monarch, perform the marriage ceremony. Do you now, however, dispense gifts for invoking blessings upon Rāma and Laksmana.24