The Brahmana, versed in in Veda, the counsellors, the commanders of military forces and the leading merchants, together with the royal priest, all brimming with joy on account of Rāma's installation, were waiting at the royal gate all night long On the appearance of the bright Sun, on the approach of the day under the astral influence of Puşya and on the ascension of Karkata, the presiding star of Rāma's birth, they brought all articles necessary for the installation and as ordered by the best of Brāhmaṇas, namely; gold, earthen jar (for preserving water), well ornamented excellent seats, chariot with a coverlet of splendid tiger-skin, water brought from the sacred confluence of the Ganges and Yamunā, from other holy streams, lakes, wells, ponds and rivers full of water flowing in the East, over mountains, and from the North to the South; and waters brought from all the oceans, honey, curd, clarified butter, fried paddy, sacrificial grass, milk, flowers, eight unmarried girls exquisitely beautiful, a mad elephant, gold and silver jars, adorned with fig leaves and lotuses and filled with holy water, a best yellow câmara for Råma crested with jewels and resembling the bright rays of the moon; a brilliantly ornamented beautiful umbrella of yellow colour, resembling the disc of the moon, and the most important of all the articles necessary for installation; a well adorned yellow ox and horse. And all musical instruments, bringing these and all other things necessary for the installation of the descendants of Ikşvāku, in accordance with the king's permission, the panegyrists and other persons were assembled there. Not finding the king present there, they began to speak amongst themselves;, “Who will intimate the king of our arrival? The Sun is up and we do not see the king amongst us as yet. All articles necessary for the installation of the intelligent Rāma are ready." While they were thus conversing, the charioteer Sumantra, well respected by the king, reached there and spoke to all those persons and the kings the following words. With the king's permission I am going to bring Rāma speedily here. Worshipful you are all to the king and specially to Rāma, I shall with your words, ask the king of his sound sleep, and then of the reasons for his not coming here as yet though up from the bed. Saying thus, Sumantra, versed in legends, arrived at the gate of the royal seraglio. And he entered the palace with its open gates; and having entered the apartment of the lord of earth he went into his sleeping room, and placing himself behind a screen near at hand, addressed the descendant of Raghu thus, pleasing him with blessings fraught with good to him. Oh! Kākutstha, may the moon, Sun, Siva, Vaisravana, (the god of wealth), Varuna, (the god of water), Agni and Indra grant you victory. The worshipful night is gone and blessed morn has arrived; arise, Oh! you great king, and perform morning ablutions. Brāhmaṇas, commanders and merchants are assembled at the palace gate, desirous of seeing you, do you therefore arise, Oh descendant of Raghu. Perceiving from the voice that it was charioteer Sumantra versed in good counsels, who was thus eulogising, the king rose up from his bed and thus addressed him: Oh Charioteer, 'Bring Rāma here' was the order I gave you; what is it that makes you neglect my command? I am not asleep; go and bring up Rāma here instantly. Saying this, king Dasaratha despatched Sumantra again. Hearing the words of the king and bowing him with his head down, he issued out of the king's residence, thinking that some great good was awaiting. And having reached the public roads adorned with flags and pennons, he, filled with an excess of joy, began to wend his way, casting his look around. There on his way he heard the passers by, all talking about Rāma and his installation, as if brimming with joy on that account. Then proceeding a little, Sumantra saw the beautiful palace of Rāma towering like the Kailāsa hill and resembling the abode of Sakra. It was closed with two big panels at the gate way (of which the trap-door was flung open), and adorned with hundreds of terraces, on its top were many idols made of gold, and arches crested with pearls and diamonds; its colour was white as the autumnal cloud and bright as the golden cave of Sumeru. It was ornamented with highly brilliant jewels set in the garlands of gold flowers and strewn with pearls and diamonds and sprinkled with sandal and Agaru, the fragrance of which captivates the mind like the summit of the hill Dardura; it was graced with the presence of Sarasas and peacocks emitting pleasant sounds. And covered with well-made figures of wolves and pictures of artistic excellence, the splendour of which captivates the mind and the eye as well; bright as the sun and moon, resembling the abode of Kuvera and the capital of the king of the celestials; filled with birds of various kinds and high as the summit of Sumeru. Sumantra saw the place filled with people coming from different quarters with clasped hands and adorned with citizens approaching with various presents and eager (to see the installations of Rāma) and (standing at the gate) being prevented by the warders to enter, resembling a huge cloud, of picturesque situation, spacious; strewn with pearls and diamonds and crowded with servants. That charioteer, in his chariot with its wooden ledge and horses, beautifying the crowded streets and pleasing the citizens, entered the abode of Rāma. Thereupon arriving at this abode filled with wealth, and having its beauty greatly intensified with deer's and peacocks, moving to and fro, resembling the exquisitely splendid palace of the lord of the celestials, that charioteer was extremely enraptured, having the hairs of the body erect. Then that charioteer entering several apartments, well adorned and resembling the Kailāsa hill and the abode of the celestials and passing by many persons, dear to Rāma and abiding in his purpose, entered the apartment of the ladies. And he became exceedingly pleased on hearing pleasant words, meaning well to the son of the king, from all persons, engaged in some sort of service for the installation. He saw the pleasant abode of Rāma, resembling that of Mahendra, and filled with deers and birds, having its top high as the summit of Meru and situated well in splendour, and the gateway filled with millions of citizens with clasped hands keeping their conveyances outside and coming from various quarters with presents for Rāma. He saw there a wild elephant by the name of Śatruñjaya or the conqueror of foes having a huge body resembling a mountain enveloped in dark clouds, beautiful, capable of bearing the goading hook and intended Rāma's conveyance. He saw well adorned ministers dear to the king with horses, chariots and elephants; and leaving them all on either side, entered unprevented, like to the marine monster Makara entering the ocean containing many pearls and diamonds, the splendid apartment of the ladies, resembling the clouds that hover over the summit of the Hill Himadri, and having a number of beautiful houses comparing with great celestial cars. as