Hearing all about it, the king's charioteer addressed the monarch in private, saying, Do you listen to what is related in the Purānas, and to what I have heard myself! This horse-sacrifice is enjoined by the family priests; and I have myself heard the following story celebrated in ancient chronicle. And what the worshipful Sanatkumāra had said formerly in the presence of the saints, applies, O king, to the case of your having a son. Kaśyapa has a son known by the name of Vibhāņdaka. He will get a son called Rșyasſiga. And he will grow up and pass his days in the forests. And that foremost of Brāhmaṇas will not know anything else save following his father. And, O king, it is rumoured abroad, and also always said by the Vipras, that the high-souled one will practise (Those that assume the staff and the kamaņdalu are reckoned the first order; while those that continue to live with their wives are considered as next in worth.) the two modes of Brahmacarya life. And he spent some time in serving the sacrificial fire and his famous sire. At this time, the powerful Romapāda of exceeding strength will be famed as king of the Angas. And in consequence of some default on his part, there will occur in his kingdom a terrible and dreadful drought, capable of striking terror in the all. And filled with grief on account of this drought, the king will call about him Vedaaccomplished Brāhmaṇas, and speak to them, saying, You are conversant with the Vedic ritual and the social duties. Do therefore, tell me how to expiate for this evil. Thus accosted by the king, those excellent Brāhmaṇas versed in the Vedas, will say to the ruler of earth. Do you, O monarch, by all means, bring Vibhandaka's son. And having, Oking, brought that Brāhmaṇa versed in the Vedas, Vibhandaka's son Rsyaśộnga, and duly honoured him, do you, O monarch, with a concentrated mind, perform the betrothal of your daughter śāntā, with him according to the ordinance. And hearing those words of theirs, the king will began to think as to how he can bring over that one endowed with energy. Then in consultation with his counsellors, the prudent king having come to a conclusion will, honouring them duly, desire his priest and his courtiers to set out in quest of Rsyaśộnga. Thereupon hearing the king's words, with aggrieved hearts, and with heads hanging down, they will beseech the monarch, saying, Afraid of the saint, Vibhāndaka, we shall not be able to repair thither. Anon hitting upon the appropriate means, they say, 'We will search for the Vipra, and no blame shall accrue to us.' Thus by help of courtesans, the saint's son was brought by the lord of the Angas. And then the god (Indra) poured down showers; and the king conferred on him śānta. And now your son-in-law Rşyaśộnga will help you in obtaining a son. Now I have related to you what Sanatkumāra had communicated. Thereupon king Dasaratha, well pleased, asked Sumantra, Do you now tell me by what means Rşyaśộnga was brought over (by the lord of the Angas).