And beholding them sore harassed, and overwhelmed by Visvāmitra's weapons, Vasistha directed (Sabala) saying, 'o cow of plenty, do you create (fresh troops), through your Yoga power.' And from her roar, there came into being Kamvojas, resembling the Sun. And from her udders sprang Barbaras, arms in hand; and from her mysterious parts, Yavanas; from her anus, Sakas; and from the pores of her skin, those barbarians, Hārītas and Kirātas. And, (descendant of Raghu, Viśvāmitra's entire host consisting of foot, and elephant, and horse, and car, was exterminated by them. Seeing the army annihilated by the highsouled Vasiştha, the hundred sons of Viśvāmitra, equipped with various weapons, rushed in high ire against that best of mantra-reciting ones. Thereupon, uttering a roar, that mighty ascetic consumed them quite. In a moment, Viśvāmitra's sons together with horse and car and foot were reduced to ashes by the high-souled Vasistha. And witnessing them all destroyed, together with the army, the illustrious Viśvāmitra, covered with shame, became plunged in thought. And like to a tideless ocean or a fangless snake, he instantly became shorn of his effulgence, like to the sun overwhelmed by Rahu.* *A Daitya with the tail of a dragon, whose head was served from his body by Vişnu; but being immortal, the head and tail retained their separate existence, and being transferred to the stellar sphere, became the author of eclipses. And deprived of his forces and sons, he appeared like a bird bereft of its wings; and losing his entire army and with it the high spirits that it had inspired him with, his heart died within him. Then entrusting one of his (remaining) sons with the sovereignty, with, 'Do you rule the earth agree ably to the duties of the Kșatriya,' he went into the forest. And repairing to the side of the Himavat inhabited by Kinnaras and Serpents that one of mighty asceticism began to perform austerities with the view of propitiating Mahādeva. On a certain occasion the lord of the celestials, Vrsadhvaja,* intending to confer a boon, appeared before a mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra. *An appellation of Śiva: meaning who has the bull for his vehicle. What for, O king, art you performing penance?. Do you unfold what you have to say. I am for conferring a boon: do you express what boon you would obtain. Thus addressed by that god, that performer of mighty austerities, Viśvāmitra, bowing down to him, addressed him, saying. If, O mighty god, you are pleased (with me), do you confer upon me the science of archery with all its mysteries and mantras, as well as its virtues of helping from far and near. O sinless one, may all those weapons that are with the celestials and the Dānavas and the Maharșis and the Gandharvas and the Yakşas and the Rākşasa, shine on me ! May this my desire be granted me through your grace, O god of gods! Thereupon, saying, 'Be it so' the lord of the celestials vanished. And obtaining the arms from the lord of the celestials, the mighty Viśvāmitra, naturally haughty, became swelled with insolence. Surcharged with energy, like to the sea during the equinox, he considered, O Rāma, as if that foremost of saints, Vasistha, was already slain. And repairing to Vasistha's asylum, the king began to discharge weapons; and by their energy the hermitage began to burn. Beholding those weapons discharged by the intelligent Viśvāmitra, the ascetics, overtaken by fear, by hundreds began to fly. Vasiştha's disciples as well as the animals and birds inhabiting there, fled in all direction by thousands. For a time the hermitage of the high souled Vasiştha was bare of living beings, and still like to a wilderness. And Vasistha cried momentarily, 'Do not fear. To day will I slay Gadhi's son, even as the sun (destroys) mist.' Having said this, that best of mantra reciting ones, Vasistha, in high wrath, addressed Viśvāmitra, saying. Since, O fool, you have destroyed this hermitage that had been prospering for a long time, you of execrable ways shall not live long. Saying this, he, transported with wrath, and like the smoking flame at at universal dissolution, speedily upraised a staff resembling another mace of Yama itself.' to