Having accepted those weapons with purity, Käkutstha while proceeding, with a complacent countenance spoke these words to sage Visvāmitra,- O adorable one, I have received these weapons, incapable of being repressed even by the celestials themselves. Now, O best of ascetics, I would acquire a knowledge of with drawing them. Upon Kākutstha's representing this, Viśvāmitra of high austerities, endowed with patience, of excellent vows, and pure in spirit, communicated to him the mantras for restraining the weapons. Do you, O Rāma, accept Satyavat, and Satyakirti, Dhrsta, Rabhasa, Pratihāratara, Paranmukha, Avanmukha, and also Laksya, a Alakṣya, Dędhanabha, Sunābha, Sunabha, Dasaksa, Satavaktra, Dasasirsa, Satodara, Padmanabha, Mahanabha, Indunābha, Svanābha, Jyotisa, Sakuna, Nairasya, Vimala, Yaugandhara, Vinidra, and the two Daityapramathanas, and Śucibāhu, Mahābāhu, Niskali, Viruca, Arcimāli, Dhrtimali, Vrttimān, Rucira, Pitrya, Saumansa, Vidhuta, Makara, Karavīra, Rati, Dhana, and Dhānya, O Rāghava, and Kāmarūpa, Kāmaruci, Moha, Avarana and Jrmbhaka, Sarpanātha, Panthāna, and Varuņa-these sons of Kļśāśva, O Rāma, effulgent, and assuming shapes at will. And, good betide you, O descendant of Raghu, you are worthy to receive these weapons. Thereupon, Kākutstha with heart overflowing with delight, said,-So be it! And those weapons were furnished with celestial and shining persons, and endowed with visible shapes, and capable of conferring happiness. And some of them were like (live) coals; and some comparable to smoke; and some were like to the Sun or the Moon. And with folded hands, they spoke to Rāma in honied accents; O chief of men, here we are! Do you command as to what we are to do on your behalf. Then the descendant of Raghu answered, saying, Repair whither soever you will! Recurring to my memory, do you in time of need, render me assistance! Thereupon paying homage to Rāma, and having gone round him, they replied to Kākutstha, What is yonder wood hard by the hill, appearing like clouds? Great is my curiosity. It is pleasing to the sight, and abounds in beasts, and is exceedingly romantic, and is adorned with various birds singing sweetly. Now, O foremost of ascetics, we have come out of a wilderness capable of making one's hair stand on end. And from the pleasantness attaching to this place, I have come to a conclusion. Tell me, O reverend sir, whose hermitage is this? Have we, O eminent ascetic, reached that spot where dwell those wicked minded wretches of impious deeds, given to slaughtering Brāhmaṇas, who disturb your sacrifice? Where, O adorable one, is that hermitage, repairing to which, O Brahmana, I am to protect your sacrificial rites, and to slay the Raksasas? All this, O foremost of ascetics, I desire to hear, O lord.