When the ascetic had spoken thus, both the heroes, Rāma and Lakşmaņa, saluting that first of anchorites, said, O Brāhmaṇa, you have delivered this noble narration fraught with morality. Now it behoves you to speak about the elder daughter of the mountain-king. You are extensively conversant with everything relative to men or gods. Why is it that purifier of the worlds lave three directions? And why is that foremost of streams, Gangā, famous as wending in three ways And, O you cognizant of morality, what are her performances in the three worlds? Thereat Viśvāmitra having asceticism for this wealth, began to relate to Käkutstha that history in detail in the midst of the ascetics. In days of yore, O Rāma, the blue-throated one of mighty asceticism, having entered into matrimony, commenced upon knowing the goddess. And as that intelligent blue-throated god, Mahadeva, was thus engaged in sport, a divine hundred years passed away. And yet, O Rāma, chastiser of foes, no son was born of her. Thereat all the gods with the Grand-sire at their head became exceedingly anxious. Who will be able to bear the offspring of this union? And thereupon the celestials repairing to Mahadeva, thus addressed him, saluting low, O god of gods! O mighty deity! ever engaged in the welfare of all, it behove you to be propitious at the humble salutations of the celestials. The worlds, O foremost of celestials, are incapable of bearing your energy. Therefore, for the welfare of the three worlds, do you, being furnished with Brahmā asceticism, in company with the goddess practise austerities, and rein in your energy by your native indomitableness. Do you preserve these worlds; for it become you not to destroy all.' Hearing the words of the deities, the great god of the worlds said to them, 'So be it!' And addressing them again he said, You gods, by my own energy I will assisted by Uma bear my virile vigour, therefore let the creation find rest! But tell me, you foremost of celestials, who will sustain my potent virility rushing out from its receptacle?' Being thus addressed, the gods answered him having the bull for his mark, ‘The earth will today bear your vital flow.' Thus assured, the mighty lord of the celestials let go his vital fluid; and thereat the earth containing mountains and forests was overspread with the energy. Then the gods spoke to the Fire, saying, 'Do you in company with the Wind entrain to this fierce an mighty energy!' When the Wind had entered into it, it was developed into a white hill, and a forest of glossy reeds, resembling fire or the Sun. Here sprang from Fire Kārtikeya of mighty energy. And thereupon the celestials and the saints, with gratified hearts, began to pay enthusiastic adorations to Uma and Siva. Then the Mountain's daughter, O Rama, addressed the celestials, cursing them with eyes reddened in wrath. While in association with Mahadeva for obtaining sons, I was broken in upon by you, for this, you shall not be able yourselves to beget offspring on your wives. And from this day forth, your wives shall remain without issue.' Having thus spoke to the celestials, she cursed the Earth also, saying, 'O Earth, you will have multiform surface and many husbands.' Nor, stained because of my ire, shall you experience the pleasure that is felt on obtaining a son, O you of wicked understanding, O you that do not wish me a son! Witnessing the gods, thus distressed, the lord of the celestials set out in the direction presided over by Varuna (The West). And having repaired to the north side of that mountain, Mahesvara along with the goddess became engaged in austerities on the peak Himavatprabhava. I have now related to you, O Rāma, the spread of the Mountain's daughter, (Gangā). Do you now together with Lakşmaņa listen to the narration of Bhāgīrathi's potency.