When the king had spoken thus, Kausika's son, moved with pity, said these sweet words to the king who had undergone Candāla-hood. O descendant of Ikşvāku, have you had a pleasant journey? I know you well, O highly virtuous one. Refuge will I grant you, so fear not, O best of monarchs. I shall summon all the pious Maharsis, who shall assist at the sacrifice. O king, and then you will be able to accomplish your purpose easily. And should the guise you have come by in virtue of your preceptor's curse, cling to you yet, you will bodily repair to heaven in this form. And since appearing before Kuśika's son, you have taken his refuge, I consider heaven, O lord of men, as if within they grasp. Having said this, that exceedingly energetic one ordered his highly virtuous and profoundly wise sons to provide the sacrificial necessaries. Summoning his disciples, he said, 'Do you by my command bring hither all the saints together with Vasistha's sons; and our friends and their disciples an the family priests variously versed in lore.' Should any summoned by my mandate, say aught, 'do you fully represent to me the expression of slight.' Hearing his speech, they set out in different directions; and Brahmavādis* began to pour in from various countries. And the disciples (of Viśvāmitra) returning, fully communicated to that ascetic of flaming energy the words of the Brahmavadis, saying. can * A Brahmavādi is one who maintains that all things are Spirit. Hearing your message, the regenerate ones resident in every part will come here, and some have already arrived, all save Mahodaya and the hundred sons of Vasiştha. Do you, O foremost of ascetics, listen to the words that they said with accents tremulous with emotion. How can celestials and saints partake of offerings in the court of him that in addition to being a Chandala, has for this priest a Kşatriya? And how high-souled Brahmanas, patronised by Visvāmitra, attain to heaven, having partaken of a Candāla's fare? These cruel words, O powerful ascetic, did Vasiştha's sons together with Mahodaya, utter with reddened eyes.' Hearing those words of theirs, that foremost of ascetics, with eyes reddened in anger, wrathfully cried. Since blameless , as I am, those wicked-minded ones censure me practising fierce austerities, they shall, without doubt, be reduced to ashes. And this very day bound by the noose of Kala, meeting with destruction at the hands of Vivaśvata's son, (Yama) they shall for seven hundred firths range these worlds, wearing dead men's clothes, always feeding on dogs' flesh, going by the name of Mahodaya also has blamed me, although undeserving of blame; therefore, reproved of all, he shall undergo Nişadahood. And becoming cruel, and engaged in taking life, he shall through my ire fare wretchedly for a long lapse of time.' Having uttered this in the assembly of saints, that mighty ascetic, the highly powerful Viśvāmitra of fierce asceticism, paused.