Hearing the speech of the celestials, that possessor of the six attributes, the Grand-sire, spoke to them exceedingly frightened and deprived of their senses on beholding the prowess of Sagara's sons like to the Destroyer himself. This entire Earth belong to the intelligent Vasudeva, she being his consort. And that adorable one is indeed her lord. And assuming the form of Kapila, he unceasingly sustain the Earth. And the sons of king Sagara will be consumed by the fire of his wrath. The pre-ordained excavation of the Earth, as well as the testruction of Sagara's sons, had been foreseen by the farsighted. Hearing the words of the Grand-sire. those repressors of their foes, the three and thirty* celestials, being exceedingly rejoiced, went back to their respective quarters. *The eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas and two Asvins. And as the sons of Sagara were riving the Earth, there arose a mighty noise, like to the bursting of thunder. Then, having rived the entire Earth and ranged it all around, the sons, of Sagara together (returned to their father) and spoke to him. By us has the Earth been extensively surveyed, and have powerful deities and Dānavas. Rākşasas, Piśācas, Uragas and Pannagas been slain; and yet do we find neither the horse nor the stealer thereof. What are we to do now? Good betide you, do you consider it well. Hearing those words of his sons, that foremost of kings, getting into a wrath, said, O descendant of Raghu. 'Do you yet again, good betide you, delve the earth, and having got at the stealer of the horse, cease.' Receiving this mandate of their sire, the sixty thousand sons of the high-souled Sagara rushed towards the depths of the earth. And as they were engaged in excavating, they beheld the elephant of the quarter resembling a hill, named Virūpākṣa, holding the earth. O son of Raghu, that mighty elephant, Virūpākşa, held on his head the entire earth with its mountains and forests. And, O Kākutstha, when on sacred days the mighty elephant, from fatigue, shake his head, then takes place the earthquake. Thereupon, O Rāma, going round that mighty elephant, and honouring him duly, they went on piercing the under earth. And having pierced the East, they pierced the South, and in the Southern quarter also they beheld a mighty elephant, the high-souled Mahāpadma, resembling a huge hill, holding the earth on his head. And thereat they marvelled greatly. And having gone round him, the sixty thousand sons of the high-souled Sagara began to penetrate into the Western region. And in the western quarter also those highly powerful ones beheld the elephant of that quarter named Saumanas, resembling a mighty mountain. And having gone round him and asked him as to his welfare, they delving on, arrived at the Northern region. And on the North like wise, O foremost of the Raghus, they beheld Bhadra, white as snow, holding this earth on his goodly person. Having felt as well as gone round him, those sixty thousand sons of Sagara went on penetrating the depths of the earth. Then repairing to the famous North eastern region, Sagara's sons becoming enraged, began to dig the earth. And there those high-souled, exceedingly powerful and vehement ones beheld the eternal Vasudeva in the guise of Kapila. And there also, experiencing exceeding delight, O descendant of Raghu, they found his horse, browsing hard by. And knowing him to be the destroyer of the sacrifice, they bearing spades, and ploughs, and innumerable trees and crags, with eyes reddened with ire, furiously rushed against him, exclaiming, 'Stay! Stay! And you it is that hast stolen our sacrificial horse.' O you of wicked understanding, know that you have fallen into the hands of the sons of Sagara. Hearing this speech of theirs, Kapila, O descendant of Raghu, overwhelmed with rage uttered a tremendous roar. And then, O Kākutstha, the sons of Sagara were reduced to ashes by the high-souled and incomparable Kapila.