In that city of Ayodhyā resided king Dasaratha, versed in the Vedas, commanding all resources, far-sighted, of mighty prowess, dear to the inhabitants both rural and urban. He was an Athiratha in the Ikşvāku line, performing sacrifices, engaged in the performance of duties, self-controlled like a Maharși, a royal saint famed in the three worlds. He possessed of strength, the destroyer of foes, having friends, of subdued senses, comparable to ſakra and Vaiśravaņa by virtue of accumulated riches and other possessions. As the highly-powerful Manu protected the people, Dasaratha did the same. As Indra rules Amarāvatī, that one firm in promise, and following duty, profit, and pleasure, ruled that best of cities. In that excellent city, the men were happy and righteous-souled, and widely-read, and each contented with his possessions, and devoid of covetousness, and speaking the truth. In that prime of cities, there was none who had not at his command a plenteous supply of the good things, and there was no householder who was not well off in horses and kine, and corn and wealth. And one could see nowhere in Ayodhyā persons given up to lust, or unsightly, or crooked-minded, or unlettered, or atheistical. And all the men and all the women were of excellent character, and subdued senses, and a happy frame of mind, and both on respect of occupation and conduct spotless like to the Maharsis. And all wore ear-rings and tiaras and garlands, and abundantly enjoyed the good things of life. And all were clean, daubing their limbs, and perfuming their persons. And feeding on pure food, and giving away, and wearing Angadas (A bracelet worn upon the upper arm) and Niskas (An ornament for the breast or neck.) and hand-ornaments, and repressing passions. There were not on Ayodhyā persons not lighting the sacrificial fire, or not performing sacrifices, or mean-minded, or thieving, or engaged in improper occupations, or of impure descent. The Brāhmaṇas of subdued senses were always engaged in the performance of their own duties, giving away in charity, and studying, and receiving gifts with discrimination. None of them was atheistical or untruthful or be reft of hearing scriptures or detracting or incompetent or illiterate. There was no Brāhmaṇa who was not versed in the Vedas and Vedangas, or poor-spirit, or of insane mind, or afflicted. And no man and no woman was seen devoid of grace or beauty, or lacking in reverence for their monarch. The four orders with Brāhmanas at their head contained persons serving gods and guests, and endowed with gratitude, and munificent, and heroic, and possessing prowess. And the men were long-lived; and ever abode by duty and truth; and lived in that best of cities, always surrounded by sons and grandsons and wives. The Kşatriyas were obedient the Brahmanas, and the Vaisyas followed the Kșatriyas, and the sadras, occupied with their proper vocations, ministered to the three other orders. That city was ably govered by Dasaratha that lord of Ikşvāku's line, even as that foremost of men, the intelligent Manu, had governed it before him. And as a mountain-cavern abounds with lions, it was filled with warriors resembling flaming fire, of straight ways, unforbearing, and of accomplished learning. to And the city abounded with excellent horses sprung in Kamboja, and Vahlika, and Vanayu, and the banks of the Sindhu, and like to that best of horses, Hari's charger. With fierce elephants sprung on the Vindhya mountain, and the Himavat, filled with juice, and of exceeding strength, and resembling hills. And with Bhadra, Mandra, and Mrga* elephants; and those sprung from the mixture of the three, and from the mixture of Bhadra and Mandra, and froin Bhadra and Mrga, and from Mrga and Mandra, superior like to Airāvata, and coming from Mahapaama, Anjana, and Vamana breeds, fierce, and looking like hills. And that city was over two Yojanas; and truly it was called Ayodhya. (incapable of being conquered.) *(Those elephants whose limbs are contracted are bhadras; those whose bodies are fat, slack, and contracted are Mandras: and those whose bodies are lean and large are Mrgas.) Repressing enemies, that city was governed by the great and the exceedingly. And that lord of earth resembling Sakra govemed that city of Ayodhya bearing a true name furnished with strong gates and bolts, and auspicious, and graced with excellent edifices, and teeming with thousands.