Then when the right had passed away, the mighty Muni Viśvāmitra, having greeted the monarchs, yet out for the Northern mountains. When Viśvāmitra had gone away, king Dasaratha, greeting Mithila's lord, Vaideha, actively prepared for setting out for his own capital. Then the king of the Videhas gave a dower consisting of various things. And Mithilā's lord gave many hundred thousands of kine, and excellent woollen stuffs, and Koțis of common cloths; and elephants, and horses, and cars, and footmen, as well as an hundred damsels adorned, endowed with elegance to form goodly waitingmaids. And well-pleased the king gave as a noble dower gold and silver and pearls and coral. Having given divers kinds of articles, that king, the lord of Mithila, bidding adieu to the monarch (Dasaratha), re-entered his own capital. And the master of Ayodhyā accompanied with his high-souled sons, and headed by the saints in a body, started on the journey, followed by his own army. As that tiger-like one was on his way, in company with Rāghava and the saints, the fowls began to utter frightful cries all around, and the beasts on earth to stream in a Southern direction. Beholding them, that tiger-like monarch asked Vasistha, saying, Those birds of fierce aspects emit frightful cries and beasts stream in a Southerly direction. What is this? My heart tremble and my mind is not at ease. Hearing the speech of king Dasaratha, that mighty saint spoke sweetly, saying, 'These fowls of the air by their cries presage some dreadful impending evil; but these beasts betoken peace restored. Therefore do you renounce anxiety' As they were thus conversing, there blew a strong wind; and all the earth began to speak; and the trees to topple down. And a deep gloom enveloped the sun; and no quarter could be discovered. And enveloped in ashes, that host became stupefied. At that dreadful hour, Vasiştha and the other saints and the king alone retained their senses, all else were deprived of their senses, and the army was enveloped with ashes. The king saw that repressor of kings, the descendant of Bhrgu, Jamadagni's son, dreadful to behold, wearing a head of matted locks, like to the Kailāsa, had to baffle, resembling the fire at the universal dissolution, difficult to bear, flaming in energy, incapable of being looked at by the unrighteous, with his axe on his shoulder, equipped with a bow like to the lighting, and fierce arrows, looking like Śiva the slayer of Tripura. Beholding him of dreadful appearance like to flaming fire, the Vipras headed by Viśvāmitra, engaged in reciting mantras and and offering oblations to the fire, those saints assembled together, began to converse with each other. Is this one, enraged because of the slaughter of this sire, intent upon exterminating the Kș atriyas? Formerly, having slaughtered the Kșatriyas, he pacified his ire and mental ferment, 'therefore, the annihilate the Ksatriya once again can never be his endeavour. Having said this, the saints offered Arghya to Bhrgu's son of dreadful appearance; and addressed him in soothing words, saying, 'Q Rāma! O Rāma. Accepting that homage rendered to him by the saints, that puissant one, Jamadagni's son, Rāma, addressed Rāma, the son of Dasaratha.