Then that one of capacious intelligence, versed in the Vedas, having pondered for a time, and regained his senses, returned to the king this excellent answer. On your behalf, and with the view of obtaining sons for you, I will by help of mantras laid down in the Atharva Veda, duly celebrate the famous ceremony, capable of crowning you with offspring. Then with the view of obtaining sons (for the king,) that effulgent one set about the sonconferring ceremony; and in accordance with the ordinance, and with mantras, offered oblations to the sacrificial fire. And the deities, with the Gandharvas, and the Siddhas, and the principal saints, assembled there duly with the object of each obtaining his share of the offerings. And having duly assembled there, the deities addressed these words to Brahmă the lord of creatures. O you possessed of the six attributes, through your grace, a Rākşasa named Rāvaņa oppresses us all by his prowess, nor can we baffle him. O lord, as you have well-pleased conferred on him a boon, we always suffer him in deference to it. The wicked-minded one harasses the three worlds furnished with prosperity, and bears illwill against them and seek o defeat Indra, the king of Tridaśa. And blinded by the boon he has received, that irrepressible one intends to bring down the lord himself of the celestials, and the Yakşas, and the Gandharvas, and the Brahmanas, and the Asuras. And the Sun does not burn him, or the Wind blow about him; and at sight of him, that one engarlanded with billows, the Ocean, dares not stir. Therefore, great is the fear that afflict us, coming from that Rākşasa of dreadful appearance. And, O lord, it behoves you to devise some means for destroying him. Thus addressed by the deities in a body, he said, Alas! I have, however, decided on the means of destroying that wicked-souled one. He had asked, 'May I be incapable of being slain by Gandharvas, and Yaksas, and gods, and Raksasas!,-whereat I said, 'Be it so!' Through disdain, the Rākşasa did not at that time mention men. Therefore, by men alone he is capable of being slain; nor can his end be compassed by any other means. Hearing this welcome speech uttered by Brahmā, the deities and the Maharșis became exceedingly delighted. At this juncture, that lord of the universe, the highly-eifulgent Visnu, clad in yellow apparel, and bearing in his hands the conch, the discus, and the mace, and adorned with burnished Keyūras, (A bracelet worn on the upper arm.) arrived there, riding Vinatā's son; like to the Sun riding the clouds. And worshipped by the foremost of the celestials, he drew near Brahmā, and sat down with a collected mind. And bending low before him, the deities spoke to him saying, O Vişnu, for the benefit of the worlds, we shall appoint you to some work. Do you, O lord, dividing yourself into four, O Vişņu, become born a sons in the three wives, resembling Modesty, Auspiciousness, and Fame, of Ayodhyā's lord, king Dasaratha, cognizant of Duty, and munificent, and possessing energy, and like to a Maharsi. Do you, O Visnu, becoming man, slay in battle this thorn of the worlds, the pampered Răvaņa, incapable of being slain by the gods; for the foolish Rākşasa by virtue of sublimated prowess, baffles the deities, and the Gandharvas, and the Siddhas, and the foremost of saints. And by him bereft of the sense of right and wrong, have saints and Gandharvas and Apsaras sporting in the groves of Nandana, been wantonly slain. It is to compass his death that accompanied by the ascetics, we have come here: it is for this that the Siddhas and the Gandharvas and the Yaksas have taken refuge in you! O God, you are the prime way of us all, O repressor of foes! Do you, for bringing destruction to the enemies of the gods, turn your thoughts to being born as man. Thus besought, that foremost of gods and chief of celestials, Visnu, worshipped of all creatures, addressed the assembled deities, following Duty, with the grand-sire at their head, saying. Do you renounce fear! For your behoof, slaying in battle the wily and irrepressible Răvaņa, dreadful to the saints and the celestials, together with his sons, and grandsons, and friends, and counsellors, and relatives, and acquaintances, I will abide among mortals, ruling this earth for ten thousand and as many hundred years. Having thus conferred a boon upon the gods, the lord Vişnu of subdued soul fell to thinking as to the place where he would be born among men. Then that one of eyes resembling lotus-petals, dividing self into four parts, chose even king Dasaratha for his father. Thereat the celestials and the saints and the Gandharvas and the Rudras and the Apsaras hymned the Slayer of Madhu in excellent hymns. Do you utterly uproot the haughty Råvaņa of fierce prowess and enhanced insolence-that foe of the lord of celestials, who is the occasion of the tears of the three * Lit. the thorns of pious ascetics. Slaying that one of terrible prowess, who distresses the three worlds, with his forces and friends, do you, O foremost of gods, your fever of heart removed, repair to the celestial regions protected by you and purged of all its faults and sins.