Rāma, having his friends delighted, ascending the car, and viewing the city adorned with pennons and flags and incensed with Dhūpa and Agaru, entered the high way, crowded with people and containing houses coloured as the pale white clouds, and the place between the two rows whereof scented with Dhūpa and Agaru. It was a splendidly spacious road decorated with a coilection of sandal, Agaru and other fine scents, with silk and red cloth, with pearls holed and other valuable crystals and strewn with various flowers and filled with edibles multiform. Like to the lord of celestials in heaven he saw this high way and the court-yard covered with curd, clarified butter, fried paddy, Dhüpa, Agaru and sandal, and embellished with garlands and other scents. Having heard benedictions uttered by many in the following strain and paying proper respects to all, he wended his way. Being installed this day do you following in the footsteps of your fathers and grand-fathers cherish and protect us. You taking the reins of government we shall live more happily than what we were under your ancestors. Seek not we earthly comforts or the highest things (in the life to come), if we can only see. Rāma installed in the kingdom issuing out from his father's abode. There is nothing more pleasant to us than the installation of the highly energetic Rāma on the throne. Rāma, hearing these and other auspicious words from his friends eulogising his own self, went on his way without being moved. Rāghava passed away, but not a single person could withdraw his eyes and mind from that best of men. In fact he who did not see Ráma, and whom Rāma did not see, was looked down by all, and he considered himself contemptible. That righteous one showed mercy to all, old and young, of the four castes, and hence, they were all obedient to him. He proceeded leaving on his left side the junctions of four roads, the path leading to temples, the religious fig trees and altars, and reached after all the family dwelling of the king, with its palatial tops piercing the sky, looking beautiful, resembling mass of clouds, white as the celestial cars and high as the hill Kailāsa, and with sporting houses sporting with pearls. And the son of the monarch, shining in beauty, entered into the palace of his father, the best on earth resembling the abode of Mahendra. Dasaratha's son, the best of men, crossed in his chariot three apartments guarded by warriors with bows in their hands, and other two of foot. And in this way passing by all, and ordering his followers to go back, entered the inner apartment. That son of the king entering into the presence of his father, all were extremely gladdened and were eagerly expecting his return like to the lord of water expecting the appearance of the moon.