At this time Laksmana, sorely distressed, addressed the weeping Kausalyā, the mother of Rāma with the following words suitable to that occasion. I like it not, Oh worshipful one, that Räghava, should repair to the forest, renouncing this grandeur of sovereignty. The king is uxorious, old and therefore of perverted judgement and is addicted to worldly affairs; being under the influence of his wife and passion what could he not speak? I do not see any such fault or sin in Rāma that he should be banished from the kingdom to range in the wood. I do not find any such man in this world, even amongst great enemies, who, forsaken for heinous sins, can cite, even in his absence, any fault of him. Observing what law of righteousness does the monarch, without any cause, renounce such a son who is like to celestials, simple, well disciplined and beloved even of the enemies? What son, remembering his father's conduct, shall carry in his heart these words of the king, who has again gone back to childhood? Ere people come to know this proposal of exile, do you secure the government of the kingdom to yourself with me. Who can disturb the installation, Oh Rāghava, myself protecting you by your side with my bows, like to Death himself. If any body stands here as an enemy, surely shall I, Oh best of men, depopulate the whole city of Ayodhyā with sharp arrows. I shall immolate all who shall stand by Bharata or wish him well, certainly mildness brings about discomfiture. If father being propitiated and excited by Kaikeyi, turns out to be our enemy, he shall be slain, without any hesitation. Even a spiritual leader deserves chastisement if he is puffed up with pride, and is devoid of the power of judging good actions and bad, and when he is gone astray. Tell me, Oh best of men, by what law of virtue and what reason does he purpose to confer this kingdom upon Kaikeyi, which has devolved upon you (by the law of inheritance). Who dares conferring on on Bharata the kingdom, carrying hostility with me and you? Oh worshipful one, verily am I attached at heart to my brother. By truth, bow, gifts and things dear to me, do I swear to you; if Rāma shall enter into the wood, know me, Oh worshipful one, to have entered into the fire before that. Like to the sun dispelling darkness, shall I remove your sorrow by dint of my power; may your worshipful self and Rāghava witness it. Readily shall I despatch my father, whose heart is unduly attached to Kaikeyſ and who is therefore vile and being old contemptibly playing the child. Hearing these words of the high-souled Laks maņa, Kausaly, weeping and being pressed with sorrow spoke these words to Rāma. You have heard, Oh my son, what your brother Laksmana said; and if you like, do what seems reasonable to you. It does not behove you, hearing the sinful words given vent to by the co-wife, to repair hence, leaving me who is sore distressed with sorrow. Oh you pious one, having knowledge of religion, if do you wish to acquire righteousness, serve me here and continue practising the best of all virtues. Hear, Oh my son, the great ascetic Kasyapa, lived in his house, serving his mother continually and being crowned with best moral merit reached heaven. As the monarch is worshipful to you in veneration so am I. I do not permit you, to repair hence to the forest. Separated from you I do not need life or happiness; with you I would prefer faring on grass. If do you depart to the forest leaving me troubled with sorrow, I shall resort to the vow of fasting and shall not be able to sustain my life. And then you shall receive the penalty of hell, well-known to the people, as did the ocean, the lord of rivers, for like unrighteousness, suffer the agony of Brahmanicide".* *The text has been here a little freely translated to make it compatible with the legend to which it refers. The ocean, thus goes the story, caused the grief of his mother. Upon which, Maharși Pippalāda, through magical power, subjected him to agony of hell. This agony the mother of Rāma relates as the same that follows the sin of Brahminicide. Whereupon to his mother Kausalyä, sorrowful and weeping, spoke Răma, virtuous-souled these words of righteousness. There is no power in me to transgress my father's behest's; bend low I my head to you, I want to proceed to the forest. The learned Rși Kandu, who lived in the forest keeping the word of his father, killed a cow, knowing it to be unrighteousness. In our line the descendants of Sagara, at the command of their father, met with signal destruction, while digging the earth. Rāma the son of Jamadagni, at his father's words, decapitated his mother in the forest. These and other god-like personages, Oh worshipful one, obeyed heroically the orders of their father; and I shall do my father's welfare therefore, It is not I alone who am carrying out my father's command; those whom I have mentioned now, O worshipful one, have done so. I am not introducing some such righteousness, unfavourable to you, that has been never practised before. I am simply treading the path, that has been upheld and followed by worthies gone before. Surely shall I accomplish that which is worthy of being performed in this world and nothing else, one going by his father's behest's is not certainly degraded." Saying these words to his mother, that best of men versed in speech and best of archers, again spoke to Lakşmaņa all these words. I know full well, Oh, Laksmana, your affection towards me and your power, strength • and unconquerable force. Not knowing my settled conviction in regard to truth and peace, my mother, Oh beautiful Lakşmaņa, is so disturbed with incomparable sorrow. Righteousness is the prime object in this world and in righteousness is established truth, and this excellent utterance of my father is in keeping with righteousness. It does not become them, O hero, who abide in righteousness to fail to carry out the commands of father, mother or a Brahmin. While I have been, Oh warrior, ordered by Kaikeyi at my father's words, I shall not be able to transgress those behest's again. Do you relinquish therefore this unrighteous purpose of your consequent to the virtues of the Kșatriyas; do you abide by righteousness but not cruelty, and follow my decision. Saying these words to Lakşmaņa out of fraternal affection, spoke again Rāma to Kausalyā with clasped hands and with his head bending low. I do bind you with an oath of my life, Oh venerable one, to allow me to wander away hence into the wood. Do you perform benedictory ceremonies for my welfare. Like to the royal saint Yayāti, in the days of yore once falling on earth going again to the abode of celestials, I shall, fulfilling my vows, again return home from the forest. Do you, Oh mother, assuage your grief within your heart; lament not you, I shall return home again from the wood after making good my father's words. Myself, Laksmana, Vaidehi, Sumitra and yourself shall abide by father's words, and this is the virtue eternal. Desisting from the ceremonies of installation and allaying your sorrow in your heart do you, Oh my mother, follow my pious decision about retiring to the forest. Hearing those pious, sober and reasonable words of Rāma, the venerable mother, regaining her sense like to the dead, and casting her look upon him, spoke to him again the following words. I am equally worshipful to you, Oh my son, with your father, for like him have I brought you up with pains and like him do I love you. I shall not allow you to repair to the forest and it does not behove you to go leaving me behind sore distressed with grief. Without you, of what avail to me is my life, my relatives, the worship of the manes and the deities and the knowledge of divine truth on this earth? Prefer do I your company even for a moment to the presence of all creation. Hearing these sorrowful words of his mother, Rāma was again inflamed with ire, like to an clephant goaded with a fire-brand, when entering into darkness. He, abiding in righteousness spoke such pious words to his mother, almost insensible, and to the son of Sumitrā, bewailing and racked with sorrow, as he was justified to utter on that occasion. I know, Oh Laksmana, your deep respects to me and your power. It is not proper for you to pain me along with my mother, not being cognizant of my intention. Righteousness, wealth, and the objects of desire are looked upon with great esteem in this world of the created, but when the occasion for obtaining the result consequent upon the virtuous deeds of a prior life appears, all these three, I have no doubt, are doubt, are fulfilled in righteousness, as the wife alone, obedient, charming and having a son (fulfils them all). It is not becoming for us to perform all those things where these three do not combine, whence results righteousness that we should resort to. A man seeking wealth become despicable, and one subject to desires is not admired by any (why bereft of righteousness). Who of us, having no tendency to wickedness, shall not obey the command of our father knowing it to be righteousness, who is old, our monarch and preceptor in military training, be it an outcome of his desires, anger or joy. For this it is that I am unable to act against my father's vow, he is our father and therefore can command us both like a master; and he is the husband of this venerable one, therefore her stay and righteousness itself. The righteousness monarch is still living and continues in his own path when ready to redeem his vow-even by renouncing me, how can this worshipful one accompany me like other insignificant widows? Do you permit me therefore, to repair to the forest and perform benedictory ceremonies for me so that I may again return home like to Yayāti regaining heaven by truth. I cannot neglect eminent fame being impelled by avarice for kingdom alone. Life is but of short duration, Oh worshipful one, and as such I do not long for acquiring this nether earth by means unrighteous. Rāma, that foremost of men, with a view to range into the forest Dandaka after patiently propitiating his mother and instructing fully his younger brother the mysteries of righteousness, went round his mother with reverence and made up his mind to repair to the forest.