Upon seeing that foremost of these reciting mantras, the highly powerful and heroic Viśvāmitra, exceedingly delighted, bowed to him in humility. Having enquired as to the pleasantness of Viśvāmitra's journey, the high-souled and adorable Vasiştha ordered a seat for the former. And on the intelligent Viśvāmitra having been seated, that best of ascetics properly entertained him with fruits and roots. And having accepted Vasiştha's hospitality, that foremost of monarchs, the exceedingly energetic Viśvāmitra then enquired of Vasiştha as to the welfare of his asceticism, his Agnihotras, and his disciples, and his trees. Thereupon Vasiştha of fierce austerities communicated the welfare of all to that best of king, Viśvāmitra, seated at his ease. Then Brahma's son, Vasistha, the best of those reciting mantras, asked Visvāmitra, saying. O king, is it well with you? And, O king, do you rule your subjects pleasing them consistently with morality? O virtuous one, are your retainers maintained on salaries from the kingdom? Do they abode by your mandates? And, O destroyer of foes, hast you vanquished your enemies? And O repressor of foes, is it well with you as to, O most powerful of men, your forces; exchequer, and friends, and, O sinless one, sons and grandsons?' Thereupon the highly powerful king, Viśvāmitra, with humility communicated to Vasiștha his complete welfare. Having conversed for a long time, those virtuous ones, experiencing exceeding joy, ministered to each other's delight. Then, O descendant of Raghu, after the conversation had ended, the adorable Vasiştha, smiling, addressed Viśvāmitra, saying. O highly powerful one, I desire to properly entertain you of immeasurable power, as well as your forces, do you, therefore, accept my hospitality. Do you receive the hospitality which I extend to you. O king, you are the foremost of guests, and art worthy of assiduous homage.' Being thus addressed by Vasiştha, that mighty ascetic, king Viśvāmitra; said, 'Even by this word of your relative to receiving me, hast you in fact done so.' And, O worshipful one, even with the fruits and roots that are in your asylum, with the water for washing my feet, and for sipping, you, with the sight of your revered self, have I been. O profoundly wise one, excellently entertained by you, who art yourself worthy of homage. I how to you. I will go now. Do you regard me with a friendly eye.' As the king was speaking thus, the righteous souled and generous Vasiştha again and again pressed him to accept his hospitality. Then Gadhi's son answered Vasistha, Very well. O potent ascetic, let that be which find favour in your sight.' This having been said by him, Vasistha, the best of those reciting mantras, joyfully called his sacrificial dappled cow, capable of purging away sins. O Śabala! do you come soon; and hear my words. I intend to entertain this royal saint together with his forces. Do you enable me to entertain him, by yielding excellent viands. And, O divine one, O you that confer everything that is desired, do you grant everyone whatever be ask among edibles impregnated with the six tastes. And do you, O Śabala, speedily create sapid viands to be chewed, sucked, licked, or drunk.