Thus besought by the foremost of the celestials, that searcher of hearts, Visnu, although cognizant of the means whereby Rāvana was to be destroyed, asked the gods these amiable words,-What, you gods, is the means of compassing which I could slay that thorn of the ascetics? Nara means a multitude, and Ayana, dwellingplace. He whose dwelling-place is a multitude, is Nārāyana. Metaphorically, the word means evidently the Scorcher of hearts, worlds, and dreadful to ascetics! Thus addressed, the deities answered Visnu, incapable of deterioration, saying,-Assuming the form of a human being, do you in battle slay Rāvana! He, O repressor of foes, had for a long course of time performed rigid austerities; and thereat, that creator of all, the first-create Brahmā, was well pleased. And propitiated by his penances, the Master conferred a boon on the Raksasa to the effect, that, save man, no fear should come to him from the various beings. And in the matter of that boon-bestowing, man had formerly been disregarded (by Ravana). And puffed up with pride in consequence of the boon he received from the Grand-sire. He commits ravages upon the three worlds and carries away the fair sex by violence. Therefore, O subduer of enemies, we have even fixed upon man for bringing about his death. Hearing this speech of the celestials, Vişnu of subdued soul chose even king Dasaratha for his father. At that time, eagerly wishing to have sons, that destroyer of enemies, the effulgent king Dasaratha, who was sonless, was celebrating the sacrifice that confer male offspring. Then, having ascertained the course to follow, Visnu, having greeted the Grand-sire, vanished there, worshipped by deities and the Maharsis. And then himself bearing in his hands a capacious vessel made of burnished gold, with a silver cover, dear like that of a spouse, and resembling the divine Creative energy, filled with celestial Payasa, (A preparation of milk, rice, and sugar). from out the sacrificial fire of Dasaratha initiated into the ceremony, there arose a mighty being, of unparalleled prowess, high energy, and huge strength, black, and wearing a crimson apparel, with a red face, uttering the blares of a trumpet, and having a body covered with leonine hair, having whiskers and an excellent head of hair, furnished with auspicious marks, and adorned with celestial ornaments, and resembling a mountain-peak, and bearing the prowess of a flaming tiger, and like to the Sun or tongues of flaming fire. And with his eyes fixed upon Dasaratha. He addressed the king, saying, O monarch, take me as a person commissioned by Prajāpati. Hearing him speak thus, Dasaratha, with folded hands, said, Lord, you are welcomed? What can I do for you? Thereupon, that person despatched by Prajapati again spoke thus, O king, having adored the deities, you have to-day obtained this. O tiger of a king, accept this excellent and divinely-prepared Pāyasa, conferring sons, health, and affluence, which you are to give to your worthy consorts, saying, Partake it. Through them you will, O monarch, obtain sons, for obtaining whom you have performed this sacrifice. Thereupon, saying, So be it, the lord of men delightedly placed that divinely-bestowed golden vessel filled with the divine Payasa upon his head. And having saluted that wonderful being of gracious presence, he in excess of joy began to go round him again and again. Then Daśaratha, having received that divinely prepared Pāyasa, waxed exceeding glad; like that of a pauper attaining plenty. Then that highly effulgent being of a wonderful form, having performed that mission of his, vanished even there. And Dasaratha's inner apartment, being graced with the rays of joy, looked like the welkin flooded with the lovely beams of the autumnal moon. Then entering the inner apartment, he spoke to Kausalyā, saying, Take you this, Pāyasa; for this will make you bear a son. Having said this, the king offered to her a half portion of this Pāyasa.'Then he conferred upon Sumitrā a fourth of it. Then in order that she might have a son, king Dasaratha made over to Kaikeyi an equal portion of what remained. And then having reflected, the mighty-minded one gave to Sumitrā the remaining portion of the Pāyasa resembling ambrosia. Thus the king dispensed the Pāyasa to each and all of his wives. And those foremost wives of the king, having received that Pāyasa, became exceedingly delighted, and considered themselves as highly honoured. Then those excellent consorts of the lord of earth, having separately partaken of that choice Pāyasa, shortly bore offspring, resembling fire or the Sun. The king, beholding those wives of his bearing children, obtained his desire and became delighted; Vişnu, while being worshipped by the Siddhas and the ascetics. even as