And knowing (by virtue of his Yoga power) Vasiştha's sons together with Mahodaya as destroyed in consequence of his ascetic energy, the highly powerful Viśvāmitra said in the midst of the saints. This descendant of Ikşvāku, the famous Trišanku, is virtuous and munificent, and has taken refuge in me, with the view of attaining the celestial regions in his own person. Therefore do you engage with me in the sacrifice, so that he may bodily repair to heaven. Hearing Viśvāmitra's words, the pious Maharsis readily spoke in harmony with duty, saying, “This descendant of Kuśika is a highly irascible ascetic, therefore what he said should, without doubt, he performed.' The worshipful one is like to fire, and, if angered, may curse us. Therefore, let us engage in this sacrifice, so that Ikşvāku's descendant through the potency of Viśvāmitra way repair to heaven in person. Then let us engage in this sacrifice. Saying this, sages entered the upon the ceremony. And in that sacrifice the highly energetic Viśvāmitra acted as the priest. And Ritwijas versed in mantras performed every thing in order with mantras, in accordance with scripture and prescription. Then after a long time, Viśvāmitra of mighty austerities invoked thither all the celestials for receiving their respective shares; but the deities did not come to receive them. Thereupon, getting into a wrath, the mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra, lifting up a garland, wrathfully exclaimed. O lord of men, do you witness the prowess of my self-earned asceticism. And, O king, do you in person repair to heaven hard to attain. Something yet remains in me of the selfearned fruit of my asceticism; and, O king, through the energy of that asceticism, do you repair to heaven in person. And on the ascetic saying this, O Kākutstha, that lord of men, bodily ascended heaven in the very sight of the anchorets. And beholding Trisanku risen to heaven, the subduer of Indra, together with all the celestial said. O Trisanku, turn you back. You have not earned abode in heaven. O fool, you have been blighted by the curse of your spiritual guide. Do you therefore drop down headlong. The great Indra having spoken thus, Trisanku fell down, crying to the ascetic Viśvāmitra, 'Save me, save me.' Thereupon, hearing his distressful cries, Kausika waxed mightily wroth, and exclaimed, 'Stay, stay.' In the midst of the ascetics, like to another Prajapati, he created other seven Rsis* on the Southern way: and also, overwhelined with wrath created another set of stars. *Ursa major. And collied* with passion, that illustrious one in the midst of the ascetics created another system of stars in the southern direction. And, saying, 'I will create another Indra, or the world (that I create) shall be without an Indra.' And in anger, he went the length of creating celestials. *And passion having my best judgement collied. Thereupon, in trepidation, the saints and the celestials and the Asuras humbly addressed the high souled Viśvāmitra thus. 'This king, O highly exalted one, has been visited with the curse of his preceptor, therefore, O ascetic; he deserves not to ascend heaven in person. Hearing those words of theirs, that best of anchorets, Kausika, in company with the celestials, said these pregnant words. Good betide you, I have vowed to this king, Trišanku's bodily ascension unto heaven, therefore, I dare not falsify my vow. Let Trisanku evermore dwell in heaven in person, and let these stars created by me verily endure as long as the worlds. This it behove you, you gods, to ordain. Thus addressed, the deities answered that best of ascetics saying, 'So be it, good betide you! All these innumerable stars, O foremost of anchorets, shall remain in the firmament outside the path of Vaiśvānara (Zodiac); and shining in their splendour, Trisanku shall dwell with bended head, like to an immortal. And all these luminous bodies shall follow that best of kings, illustrious and successful, as if he had attained heaven itself.' And the virtuous and exceedingly energetic Viśvāmitra, thus assured by the celestials, said in the midst of the saints, 'You gods, excellent well.' Then, after the sacrifice had concluded, the high-souled celestials and the saints of ascetic wealth went to their respective regions, o foremost of men.