And, O puissant one, seeing those saints gone, the highly energetic Viśvāmitra addressed those inhabitants of the forest. A mighty disturbance has happened in regard to the southern quarter: let us therefore repairing to another region, carry on austerities. You high-souled ones, in the west there are extensive tracts; and there in Puşkara will we peaceably carry on our austerities. That asylum is really pleasant. Having said this, that exceedingly energetic and mighty Muni (Ascetic) began to perform terrible austerities, subsisting on fruits and roots. And it came to pass that at this time that mighty lord of Ayodhyā, Ambarışa, prepared for celebrating a sacrifice. And as he was sacrificing, Indra stole away his sacrificial beast. And on the beast being stolen, the priest said unto the king. O king, the beast has been stolen (away); and it has been lost through your dereliction. And, O lord of men, his own fault destroy the king that fail to protect (the beast).7 O best of men, even this is the expiation: do you, while the ceremony lasts, speedily bring back the beast, or bring a man in its stead. Hearing the priest's words, that highly intelligent king began to range various countries and provinces, cities, forests, and holy asylums, searching for the beast, with a thousand king (as the price thereof.) And, O child, it came to pass that arriving at Bhrgutunga, (A mountain peak) he beheld Řcīka seated there in company with his wife and sons. O descendant of Raghu. And bowing to that Brahmarşi flaming in asceticism, and propitiating him, the exceedingly energetic royal saint of unparalleled effulgence having enquired as to his complete welfare, addressed Rcika, saying, 'O highly pious one, O Bhrgu's son, if in order that I may have a substitute for my sacrificial beast, you sell your son, my desire I shall atain.' I have ranged every country; but the beast I do not find. Therefore, it behove you to part with one of your sons for price.' Thus addressed the exceedingly energetic Rcīka replied, “O best of men, my first-born I will in no wise dispose of.' Hearing the words of the high-souled Rcīka, their mother spoke to that foremost of men, Amvarisha, saying, The worshipful son of Bhțgu has said that his first-born cannot be disposed of-do you, O lord, also know that the youngest, Sunaka, is my favourite. Therefore my youngest son will I not give to you. O foremost of men, the eldest sons are generally the best beloved of their fathers; and the youngest, of their mother, therefore the youngest I would retain. And when the ascetic as well as his wife had spoken thus, the second son, Sunahsepa, O Rāma, himself said. My father would not sell the eldest; nor my mother the youngest,—therefore, I consider even the second as disposable. Do you then, O prince, take me. When that one versed in the Veda had ended, that lord of men, O mighty-armed descendant of Raghu, taking possession of Sunaḥsepa, by paying koțis of kine, and heaps of jewels, and gold and silver by hundreds and thousands, went away exceedingly delighted. That royal saint, the exceedingly energetic and highly famous Ambarīşa, placing Sunaḥsepa on his car, speedily set out.