When Vaideha had spoken thus, the mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra is company with Vasiștha addressed that heroic king, saying. O puissant one, the lines of the Ikşvākus and the Vaidehas are exceedingly noble and incomparable. No other race can by any means compare with them. O monarch, this youthful union of Rāma and Lakşmaņa with Sītā and Urmilā is fit by all means; and it is worthy of their wealth of grace. Now do you, O foremost of men, listen to my words. This youthful brother of yours, king Kusadhvaja, O you versed in morality, this pious-souled one, O king, has, O prime of men, a couple of daughters, unparalleled on earth in beauty, whom we would ask for, to become wives to the prince Bharata and the intelligent Satrughna; as we, O king, ask for your own daughters in the interests of those high-souled ones (Rama and Laksmana).4-6 And these sons of Daśaratha are endued with youth and beauty, resembling the Lokapalas, and possessed of the prowess of celestials. Therefore do you, O foremost of sovereigns, by this alliance with both the brothers, bind the Ikşvāku race. And in this may your mind never waver! Hearing Viśvāmitra's words embodying the sentiments of Vasiştha, Janaka with clasped hands addressed both the potent ascetics, saying, I consider my line as blessed; since such puissant ascetics wish for such a desirable alliance. Whatever you wish, even that shall be done, good betide you. Let these daughters of Kusadhvaja together become the wives of Śatrughna and Bharata. On the same day, O mighty Muni, let the four highly powerful princes espouse the hands of the four princesses. The learned consider bridal celebrated on the day succeeding those on which the Phalgunis are on the ascendant, and having for its presiding deity Bhagas-the most auspicious. Having said these amiable words, king' Janaka arose, and with clasped hands addressed both the foremost of ascetics, saying. I have reaped high religious merit (by these nuptials), and I also am your disciple. And do you, you anchorets, occupy these best of thrones, (belonging to us).15 And even as this kingdom is to Dasaratha is Ayodhyā to myself. Do you not therefore entertain any doubts as to your lordship. Do you therefore do as it behove you. And as Vaideha Janaka was speaking thus, Raghu's son, king Dasaratha, well pleased answered that monarch, saying, Countless are the excellences that pertain to you brothers, lords of Mithilā; and saints and sovereigns are honoured by you,* auspiciousness be yours. *The commentator here seems to be in fault. He ever explains-By you have your royal ancestors been honoured. Evidently an error. I differ from him. The particle ca (and) makes the point clear. Good betide you, I will repair to my own quarters, there to duly perform the Śrāddha ceremonies. Then having greeted that king of men, the illustrious Dasaratha, placing those foremost of ascetics in his front, went away. And reaching his quarters, the king performed the Srāddha according to the ordinance, arose the next morning, and made excellent gifts of kine. And to Brāhmaṇas the monarch severally gavę away kine by hundreds and by thousands, for the welfare of his sons. And that puissant one gave away to the regenerate ones four hundred thousands of kine furnished with horns plaited with gold, and each having her calf, together with bell-Mattel vessels for milking them. And that descendant of Raghu addicted to his sons made presents of various other valuables and the Brāhmaṇas, on behalf of his sons. And having given away kine, the surrounded by his sons looked like to the amiable Prajāpati surrounded by the Lokapālas.