And when they had raised to their heads their clasped hands resembling lotuses, the king responding to them addressed them in welcome words fraught with their good. Exceedingly pleased am I, and incomparable also is my influence, because you wish to behold my dear first born installed as heir-apparent. Having greeted them thus, the king in their hearing spoke to Vasiștha Vāmadeva, and other Brāhmaṇas saying This is the holy month of Caitra; and the groves look beautiful with blossoms. Do you now prepare for the installation of Rāma. When the king paused, there arose a mighty tumult from the multitude. And when it subsided, that lord of men, the king, addressed that foremost of ascetics, Vasiştha saying. It behoves you, O worshipful sir, to order for things, necessary for the installation of Rāma. Hearing those words of the monarch, Vasistha, chief of anchorets, ordered the counsellors staying before the king with clasped hands. “Do you early in the morning in the Agnihotrika hall of the monarch provide and store up gold, and gems, and articles for worship, and Sarvauşadhi* and white garlands, and fried paddy, and honey and clarified butter in separate vessels, and cloths fresh from the loom, and a car, every kind of weapons, and the fourfold forces, and an elephant with auspicious marks, and a couple of câmaras, and a sceptre and an umbrella, pale coloured, and an hundred furnished golden pitchers of water, and a bull with horns plated in gold, and an entire tigerskin, together with all other necessary articles. *Consists of Mura Valerian and such likedrugs., And do you embellish all the door-ways of the inner apartment as well as those of the entire city with garlands with sandal paste and fragrant Dhūpa. Do you on the morning of the morrow bestow upon the principal Brāhmaṇas goodly ard refined rice mixed with curds and milk, so that hundreds of thousands may be fed, and gratified, bestowing on them at the same time clarified butter and curds, and fried paddy, and more than sufficient Dakşiņās. To-morrow as soon as the sun will rise, the Svastivācana* will be finished. do you invite the Brahmanas, and prepare seats (for them.) *A religious rite, preparatory to any important ceremony, in which the Brāhmaṇas strew boiled rice on the ground, and invoke the blessings of the gods on the rites about to commence. And do you set up flags, and water the high ways, and let courtesans whose profession is music, adorning themselves stay in the second apartment of the king's residence. In the abodes of the gods and under the Caitya* trees, should be separately placed fragrant blossoms, together with boiled rice and other edibles, and with Daksinās. *The religious fig. And let the warriors properly arrayed, enter the courtyard of the monarch which is welling up with festal glee, mailed, and accoutred with leather fences and long-swords. Having issued these orders, those two Vipras entered upon their work (as priests;) and did what remained to be done after making that known to the lord of the earth. When everything had been got ready those foremost of the twice-born ones gladly and wellpleased presented themselves before the master of the earth, and said to him, Everything as ordered has been done. Then to Sumantra, the effulgent monarch spoke, saying, “Do you speedily bring the virtuous Rāma hither." Thereupon saying, "so be it” Sumantra at the mandate of the king brought thither in a car Rāma the foremost of car-warriors. The kings of the North, and the South and the East and the West, together with the Mlecchas and the Arya princes, with those inhabiting mountains and forests were then paying homage to him (Daśaratha) even as the celestials do to Vasava. Stationed in his palace, the royal saint Dasaratha in the midst of those princes, like Vasava in the midst of the Maruts, saw his son, resembling the king of the Gandharvas, approach, gladdening the subjects like a shower, when they were oppressed with the heat of summer, even Rāma of redoubtable prowess among men, long armed, and of mighty strength, and bearing the gait of a mad elephant, with a countenance fair as the moon, of presence prepossessing to a degree, and captivating men's sight and hearts by reason of his beauty generosity and other qualities. And as he was approaching, the lord of men eyed him steadily, without experiencing satiety. Making Raghava descend from that excellent car, Sumantra followed him with clasped hands as he proceeded to the presence of his father. Accompanied with Sumantra, Raghava, the descendant of the Raghus, for the purpose of beholding the monarch, began with rapid steps, to ascend the palace resembling a peak of the Kailasa hill. Rāma humbly approaching his father with clasped hands, and announcing his name bowed low and worshipped his father's feet. Thereupon seeing Rāma at his side with clasped hands, and in lowly guise, the king took hold of Rāma's clasped hands, and drawing his beloved son, embraced the latter. Then the king desired Rāma to seat him upon a seat prepared expressly for him, excellent, and flaming and garnished with gold and gems. Rāghava shed lustre on that noble seat, as the unclouded sun at his rising lighted up the Sumeru hill with his rays. That entire assembly looked beautiful in his presence, like the cloudless, autumnal sky crested with stars and planets, in the presence of the moon. The king experienced delight, beholding his dearly beloved son, like to his own image, richly adorned, reflected on mirror. And even as Kasyapa addressed Indra of the celestials, the king, the best of those possessing sons addressed his sons, well seated, in these words, saying. Born of my eldest wife worthy of myself, you crowned with the best qualities, are my worthy son, O Rāma dear to me. You have by your virtues drawn to yourself the hearts of the people, therefore do you during the conjunction of the moon with the Puşya constellation, receive the office of heir-apparent, You are by nature crowned with virtues. Notwithstanding your great virtues, I will, O son, from affection tell you what is for your profit. Practising greater humility, do you constantly restrain your senses. Do you renounce the ills that come through anger and lust. Replenishing your exchequer and arsenal do you, acquainting yourself with the state of things personally and otherwise, administer justice and thereby enlist the affection of the courtiers and other subjects; for the friends of him that sway the earth, pleasing the people to his satisfaction, rejoice even as did the immortals on obtaining ambrosia. Therefore, do you, O son, disciplining yourself thus address you to your task. Hearing this, Rāma's well wishers, ever doing his pleasure, speedily going out, acquainted Kausalyä with everything. Thereupon that foremost of her sex Kausalyā ordered gold and kine and various kinds of gems to be given to the tellers of the glad tidings. Then Rāghava, having been honoured by the multitude and saluted the sovereign, ascended a car, and repaired to his shining residence. And the citizens, hearing those words of the monarch, as if fraught with some speedy good fortune to them, made their obeisance to that lord of men, and repairing to their homes, with delighted minds, worshipped the gods. monarch, as if fraught with some speedy good fortune to them, made their obeisance to that lord of men, and repairing to their homes, with delighted minds, worshipped the gods.