Here after holding the equanimity of mind with patience self-possessed Răma spoke thus to the son of Sumitrā, his dear brother, and friend, who was greatly sorry, had lost his patience and was pressed down with this misfortune of Rāma, and had his eyes inflated with anger like to an infuriated elephant. Subduing this anger and sorrow, taking recourse to patience only, brooking the insult and resorting to joy, do you set aside all those things that have been collected here for my installation and make preparations speedily for my repairing to the forest. Oh son of Sumitrā, do you take that amount of trouble for preventing now the collection of materials for installation, as did you take beforehand for collecting them. Do you act therefore in such a way as will remove the apprehension from the mind of our mother (Kaikeyi), who is troubled at heart so greatly on hearing of my installation. Oh, son of Sumitra, I cannot neglect for a moment the trouble which has arisen in her mind on account of this fear. I do not remember to have done on any occasion wilfully or unwilfully any thing that is displeasing to my father or mothers. My father is of truthful words and vows and he has been greatly terrified by the fear of the next world; may his fear disappear now. If this work of installation be not stopped, my father shall be greatly pained at heart thinking that his vows shall not be fulfilled and his sorrow will also ache me. And it is for this reason, Oh Laksmana, that I purpose speedily to retire from this city to the forest, renouncing the preparations for my installation. On my wandering away to the forest to-day, the daughter of Kekaya shall have her ends attained and shall install Bharata on the throne without any disturbance whatsoever, Myself going to the forest, wearing. bark, tiger-skin and matted hair, Kaikeyi shall attain the happiness of her mind. That great One, who' has inspired Kaikeyi with this mode of mind and has kept it firm, I cannot offend. I shall repair hence without any delay. Do you regard, Oh Laksmana, destiny as the only cause of this transfer of the kingdom, although attained, and of my banishment. Had not destiny been instrumental; in bringing about this; determination in Kaikeyi, she would not have been so much persevering in the infliction of misery upon me. Do you know, Oh gentle Laksmana, that I have never made any distinction in my mind between my mothers, nor did Kaikeyi make any such thing before between me and her son; consequently it is destiny only that has made her press for the prevention of my installation and for my exile with harsh and cruel words, or else why should she, a daughter of a king and possessed of an excellent temper and high accomplishments, speak painful words to me in the presence of her husband like to an ordinary woman. That which is above comprehension is Destiny and it is beyond the power of creatures to avert its consequences; and evidently it is through this Destiny that have sprung up this distemper of Kaikeyi and my loss of kingdom. What man dares wiinstand Oh son of Sumitrā, this (terrible) destiny bidden from our view until known by the consequences of action destiny is the prime source of all those inconceivable causes which occur with reference to happiness misery, fear, and anger, profit and loss, birth and deliverance. Seers of great austerity being influenced by this Destiny, succumb to the attack of anger and desire, renouncing all their hard disciplines. The hindrance in this world to the completion of works taken in hand, and the origination of an unthought of event in its stead is nothing but the action of this Destiny. The mind being brought under discipline by this true rationale, there remains no cause of sorrow regarding my installation being put a stop to. Do you therefore assuage your grief and follow me and intercept speedily the collection of materials for my installation. The bathing ceremony, necessary before taking the vows of asceticism, shall be performed, Oh Laksmana, with all these jars full of water brought for my installation. Or what necessity have I with all these articles of installation; water drawn from the well by myself shall do for entering into the vow of exile. Do you not grieve, Oh Laksmana, for this loss of kingdom. Of kingdom and exile into the forest, exile is fraught with glorious results. Know you now the mighty power of destiny and do you not blame therefore my younger mother and my father labouring under the influence of Destiny.