Hearing Kaikeyi's fell speech, the monarch bewailed for a time, and then thought. Is this a day-dream to me or has bewilderment befallen my senses? Is this owing to influence of some evil spirit or has my mind been affected? Thinking thus, the king could not arrive at the origin of (this phenomenon); and then he swooned away. Then regaining his senses, he was filled with grief on recollecting Kaikeyi's words. And pained and woebegone, like to a deer at the sight of a tigress, he fetched a deep sigh, and sat down on the uncovered ground. Like a venomous snake confined by power of incantation within a circle, the lord of men, in indignation exclaimed. “O fie!" And deprived of his senses by grief, he again swooned away. After a long while, regaining his senses, he extremely aggrieved, wrathfully, and as if burning in energy, addressed Kaikeyi, saying. You cruel one! You of vile ways! You destroyer of this race! O wicked woman, what has been done by Räma to you; or what wrong have I done you? Rāghava ever serve you as a mother. Why you are then bent upon wronging him? It is to bring down destruction upon myself that through ignorance I brought to this house you like to a serpent of virulent poison. When all men show their regard for Rāma's virtues, for what transgression shall I forsake my dear son? I may renounce Kausalyā or Sumitrā or the kingdom, or life itself; but Rāma, filled with affection for his father, will I not renounce. I experience supreme delight on beholding my first-born and when I see him not, I lose my senses. The world may exist without the Sun; and corn without water; but this life does not exist in this body without Räma. Do you then that entertains unrighteous aims, abandon this intention of yours. I lay my head at your feet. Be propitious to me. Why does you, O sinful one, cherish in your mind such a frightful idea? You (often) asked me whether I love Bharata or not. Be that which you had formerly told me in favour of that descendant of Raghu. That blessed one is my eldest son, and the most righteous of them all even this, with the view of pleasing me, you sweet speeched one had said. Now hearing of the installation of Rāma, you yourself filled with grief, are making me exceedingly aggrieved. Or in this empty chamber having been possessed, you have come under influence not your own. And this signal lawlessness, O exalted lady, has befallen the race of the Ikşvākus, the cause of which, O You versed in moral laws, is your mental derangement. You did not formerly do to me aught that was improper or disagreeable; therefore, O you of expansive eyes, I cannot rely upon you (as sane). You did O girl, many a time tell me that Rāma was equal to you with the high-souled Bharata. Wherefore then, O bashful one, do you like that the illustrious and righteous Rāma, O exalted dame, should reside in the forest for five and nine years? Why do you like that the exceedingly tender Rāma with his soul established in virtue, should dwell in the woods, undergoing terrible hardship? Why do you, O you of graceful eyes, wish Rāma, captivating all creatures, and engaged in ministering to you, to be banished? Rāma verily serve you far more than does Bharata; and I do not find that Bharata regard you more than Rāma. Who will, save that foremost of men, so devotedly minister to you, regard you, enhance your influence, and do your will. Not one of the many thousands of females and the innumerable retainers (in the palace), has been able to fasten reproach upon Rāma for real or false misconduct. Soothing all creatures with a pure heart, that great soul by means of good offices secure the affections of the inhabitants of the kingdom, He conquers all the twice-born ones by gifts; and that hero conquers his superiors by ministrations; and his enemies by encountering them with the bow. For certain, in Rāghava are truth and charity, and asceticism, and self renunciation, and friendship, and purity, and sincerity, and learning, and the disposition to tend his superiors. How, O respected one, can you ask for this that will bring you sin, touching Rāma endowed with candour, and energetic like to a Maharsi, and resembling a celestial? I do not recollect to have heard Rāma, who ever speaks sweet words, to have used any unpleasant speech to any one; how can I then foi your sake unfold this disagreeable matter to the beloved Rāma. And what stay have I save him in whom abide forgiveness, and asceticism and renunciation, and verity, and righteousness, and gratitude, and harmlessness towards all creatures. It behove you, O Kaikeyi, to have pity on me, aged and on the verge of death, and afflicted with grief, and distressed, and engaged in lamentations. Whatever can be obtained in this earth bounded by the ocean I will confer on you, do you not bring about my death, O Kaikeyi, I clasp my palms, I fall at your feet, do you be the protector of Rāma, so that sin may not taint me. When the terrible Kaikeyī in still more terrible language addressed the mighty king, who was burning in grief, and bewailing, and deprived of his senses, and feeling a sensation of whirling, and overwhelmed with woe, and again and again beseeching for crossing this ocean of sorrow, saying. If, O monarch, having conferred the boon, you repent afterwards, how, O hero, will you speak of your righteousness in the world? When, O you versed in duty, the Rajarsis assembled around you shall ask you regarding this matter, what will you answer? Wilt you say, “by whose favour do I live and who had tended me, to that Kaikeyi have I broken my promise?' Surely, O lord of men, you will bring disgrace to all the monarchs (of your line), since having conferred the boons this very day, you speak otherwise. Śaibya granted his own flesh to the bird in the matter of the hawk and the pigeon.* And Alarka, having granted his eyes (to a blind Brahmin) attained excellent state. *The story goes that desirous of testing the charity of Saibya, Indra and Agni assuming the forms of a hawk and a pigeon respectively, went to the king, the former pursuing the latter. The pigeon in a fright asked the protection of the monarch, whereon he granted it. But the hawk urged, 'why do you retain the food that has been appointed by Providence?' But the king declined, and cut off his own flesh and gave it to the hawk. And the ocean, having bound himself by promise, never passes beyond his shores. Remembering these old stories render not your promise nugatory. O you of perverted understanding, renouncing righteousness, and installing Rāma in the kingdom, you wish ever to give yourself up to pleasure with Kausalyă. Whether what I have proposed be righteous or otherwise, whether you have promised truly or falsely, swerve not from your word. If you install Rāma, this very day drinking poison, I will surely die before you. If I for a single day behold Rāma's mother receiving homage rendered with clasped hands, I will consider death even as welcome. O lord of men, by Bharata's self dear to me as my own life, I swear that save the exile of Rama, nothing shall satisfy me. Having said this, Kaikeyi paused; and maintained silence disregarding the bewailing monarch. The king with his senses overwhelmed with grief, hearing Kaikeyi's exceedingly bitter words, reflected on Rama's abode in the woods, and the advancement of Bharata, and being bewildered for a while spoke not to Kaikeyi but gazed steadfastly at that exalted dame. a His beloved wife, who had uttered disagreeable things. And having heard that speech resembling thunder-bolt, and unpleasant to the heart, and surcharged with grief, the king was extremely pained. Then recollecting that revered lady's resolve, and his own terrible oath, he, sighing forth, “O Rāma," dropped down like a felled tree. And then that master of the earth being deprived of his sense, was like a mad man, or a patient with his faculties wildered, or a serpent whose energy has been exhausted. In sad and distressful words, he addressed Kaikeyi, saying, Who is it that has convinced you that this exceedingly heinous course is a proper one? Do you not feel shame to speak thus to me, like one whose faculties have been possessed by an evil spirit? I did not know before, when you was youthful that your nature was so perverted but now I find the very reverse of what I then thought. Whence proceed they fear that you ask for such a boon, the establishment of Bharata in the kingdom, and the banishment of Rāma into the woods? Do you cease to urge such a suit that is fraught with evil to your wifely virtue, and that will render my word untrue, if you wish for the good of your husband, of the people, and Bharata. O cruel woman; O you that intend sinfully, O base wretch 'o doer of impious deeds. How have I and Rāma conspired against your happiness; and what offence do you find in us? Bharata will by no means accept the kingdom, depriving Rāma of it, for I consider Bharata a still more grounded in righteousness than Rāma himself. when I shall say, “Repair to the forest, and Rāma's countenance will fall, like to the moon overwhelmed by Rāhu, how shall I behold it? How shall I, having in consultation with my friends come to this decision, retract the same, like to an army defeated by the enemy? And what will the monarchs coming from various quarters say concerning me, “Alas! how has this puerile descendant of Ikşvāku reigned so long?" And when many aged folks, endowed with virtues, and accomplished in various lore will ask me concerning Kākutstha, what then shall i say to them, 'Sore pressed by Kaikeyſ, have I banished Rama? Even if I speak this truly, yet none will lend credence to it. And what will Kausalya say to me, when Rāma shall have gone to the forest? Having done her this mighty wrong, what shall I say to her? Kausalyă serves me at the same time like a slave, and a friend, and wife, and sister, and mother. Ever studious of my welfare, dearly loving her son, and speaking every one fair, that exalted lady, although deserving of homage at my hands, has up to this time not been regarded by me, because of you. That I have so long sought your welfare, afflict me now, even like rice partaken by a sick person with curries that are unhealthful. Beholding Rāma deprived of his kingdom, and banished to the forest, why will Sumitrā alarmed believe in me. Ah! woe to me! Vaidehi will have to hear of two evil events, my death and Rāma's journey to the woods. Alas! my Vaidehi, indulging in grief, will renounce her existence, like a Kinnarī on the side of the Himavat, who has been forsaken by her Kinnara. When I shall witness Rāma repairing to the mighty forest, and Sītā weeping (in grief), I shall not hope for a long life; and you, becoming a widow, will reign along with your son. Like to a goodly liquor, which people having partaken it, subsequently find to contain poison. I have found you, who had passed for a chaste woman, to be now really unchaste. Having soothed me with soft but false words, you speak thus. You have killed me like a deer that has been entrapped by a hunter, having been allured into the net through the sound of a song. Surely gentle folks will on the high-way censure me as one lost to gentility, as one who has sold his son (for buying his wife's good graces), even like a Brāhmana given to drinking. Alas! alas! having promised you the boon, I have to bear these words of yours; and have come by this grief like to evil consequent upon misdeeds in a previous existence. Wretch as I am, like a halter set round one's neck, have I, O vile woman, cherished you through ignorance. Not knowing you for my death, I have sported with you, like an infant dallying in solitude with a venomous snake. Surely, people will be justified in condemning me wicked-minded that I am, for my son having been deprived of his ancestral kingdom by me; saying. Alas! king Dasaratha is foolish and lustful; for he sends his beloved son to the forest for the sake of his wife. Rāma has grown emaciated by studying the Vedas, leading the Brahmacarya mode of life, and serving his preceptors, will he again undergo this mighty toil at this time of enjoyment? My son is incapable of uttering a second word to me; and commissioned, he will repair to the words saying., 'Very well.' If ordered with 'Go to the forest. Rāghava does not consent, even that would conduce to my pleasure but he will do nothing of the kind. And Rāghava having gone to the forest, Death will surely summon me away to his abode who am of exceedingly reprehensible character, and who am universally execrated. And I having been dead and that best of men, Räma, having gone to the woods (I do not know) to what a plight you will bring my kindreds. And if Kausalyā loses me and Rāma, and Sumitrā loses her two sons and me and Rāma, then tormented with the extreme of grief, those exalted ladies will follow me. Do you, O Kaikeyi, casting inito hell Kausalya and Sumitrā and myself with our three sons, attain happiness. Renounced by me as well as Rāma, this Iksvaku line existing from a time immemorial, and ennobled by excellent qualities, and incapable of coming by grief, you will rule, when it shall have been overwhelmed with misfortune. If the banishment of Rāma, be agreeable to Bharata let him not, when I am dead, perform my funeral obsequies. When I am dead, and when that foremost of men has gone to the forest, do you, a widow, rule the kingdom along with your son. O daughter of a king, when by chance you reside in my mansion, I must come by signal infamy and discomfiture in the world, and meet with general disregard, like a sinful person. How having always gone on cars and elephants and horses, will dear Rāma range in the forest on foot? How will my son, at the approach of whose meal-time, cooks wearing ear-rings and emulating each other prepare excellent meats and drinks, pass his days, living on fare furnished by the woods, of astringent, or bitter, or pungent taste? How will he, who has always been clad in costly attire, and who has always enjoyed happiness, will dwell on the bare earth, wearing a piece of red cloth? From whom had you received this inconceivable and dreadful advice, Rāma's journey to the woods and installation of Bharata? Fie upon women, crafty and selfish! But I must not name all women, I mean only the mother of Bharata. O you that is intent upon doing mischief to all, O you addicted to selfishness, O cruel one, has God made your mind so very vile, only to torment me? What wrong have you come by either through me, or Rāma ever engaged in your welfare? On beholding Rāma plunged in sorrow, fathers will forsake sons, and wives attached to their husbands will forsake them, and the entire earth will be affected with ill-humour. When I hear him coming, adorned like to a son of the celestials, I rejoice on casting my eyes on him, and I feel as if I had regained my youth. Men may do without the Sun, and the wielder of the thunder-bolt not raining, but none, I apprehend, can live, on witnessing Rāma repairing hence. I have kept in my mansion, like to my own death, you that desire my destruction, and are intent upon doing me wrong, and are my foe. I have for a long time held you on my lap, like to a she-snake of virulent poison; therefore in consequence of my folly, I now meet with destruction. Now dissevered from me, and Rāma together with Lakşmaņa, let Bharata govern the city and the kingdom along with you. Destroying your relatives, do you enhance the joy of my enemies. O you cruelly-disposed, O you bringer on of calamities, since banishing all sense of the relation in which we stand to each other as husband and wife, you have spoken thus, why reduced to thousand fragments your teeth drop not from off your mouth down to the ground? Rāma has not used any harsh speech towards you. Indeed Rāma knows no harsh speech; why then do you seek to inflict upon Rāma (ever) pleasant spoken, and endowed with agreeable qualities, such wrongs. O you that render infamous the king of the Kekayas, whether you become miserable, or enter into fire, or kill yourself by taking poison, or dive into the bowels of the earth opened at thousand places, I will not execute your fell intention that is fraught with evil to me. I do not wish, that you, like to a razor, and ever speaking pleasant falsehoods, and possessed of a vile heart, the destroyer of your own race, you that wish to burn my heart and life, you un-beautiful one, may remain alive. My life itself is in jeopardy, where then is my happiness? Where is the happiness of parents without their sons? It behove you not, O noble dame, to do evil to me. I take hold of your feet; do you be propitious to me. As bewailing thus like one forlorn the ruler of earth whose heart was captivated by Kaikeyi on account of her supreme beauty proceeded to take hold of her feet, who having banished all self respect, sat with her legs stretched, he, without being able to come at them, fell down in a swoon, like one enfeebled with disease.