Hearing the narration of the intelligent Viśvāmitra, Gautama's eldest son, the exceedingly energetic Śatänanda of rigid austerities, highly effulgent by virtue of his asceticism, with his down standing on end wondered greatly at the sight of Rāma. And seeing the king's sons seated at their ease, he said to that foremost of ascetics. Visvamitra. O most powerful of anchorets, by you was my illustrious mother, grown old in asceticism, shown to the king's son. Did my famous and exalted mother entertain with the produce of the woods this one worthy of every one's homage? O highly energetic one, has that old story relative to my mother having been wronged by that celestial, been communicated to Rāma? O Kausika good betide you, has my mother, in consequence of beholding Rāma, been united with my revered sire? And, O son of Kusika, has the highly energetic Rāma come hither, after having been rendered homage by my high-souled revered sire? And, O Kusika's son, was my revered sire of quiescent soul, saluted by Rāma when he arrived there? Hearing those words of his, the mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra, skilled in speech, replied to Śatānanda, cognizant of words, saying. O best of ascetics, nothing necessary was omitted by me, but everything has been done. And the ascetic's wife has been united with him, even as Renuka with Bhrgu's son. (Jamadagni, father of Paruśurāma). Hearing the speech of the intelligent Viśvāmitra, the exceedingly energetic Satānanda said to Rāma. Art you well come, O chief of men? It is by our luck that, O descendant of Raghu, you have come to us, headed by the respected Maharși Visvamitra. This highly energetic. Viśvāmitra, Brahmarşi is of prowess measureless; and deeds inconceivable, by virtue of his asceticism. Him you know as the prime way. O Rāma, there exist of this earth not one that is more fortunate than thyself. Your protector is even Kusika's descendant, by whom mighty austerities have been performed. Do you listen as I faithfully describe to you the ascetic power of the high-souled Kausika. Do you listen to me relating this. This righteous one was for a long time a king, subduing his enemies, cognizant of morality, accomplished, and intent upon the welfare of his subjects. And there was a king named Kuša, the son of Prajāpati. And Kuśa's son was the powerful and pious Kušanābha. And Kušanābha's son was Gadhi. And Gādhi's son is the highly energetic and mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra. And that king reigned for thousands of years. And it came to pass that once with his four fold forces marshalled, he set out for ranging the earth. The king went on by turns ranging cities and kingdoms, rivers and mountains and asylums. And at length that foremost of conquerors, the mighty Visvāmitra, came upon Vasistha's asylum furnished with various blossoming plants and trees; abounding in animals; inhabited by Siddhas and Cäraņas; graced by celestials and Dānavas and Gandharvas and Kinnaras; and filled with mild dear; frequented by the feathered tribes; crowded with Brahmarşis; with Devarsis inhabiting it aye teeming with-souled ones of accomplished ascetic success and resembling fire; like an other region of Brahmā; graceful; and adorned on all sides with high-souled saints and Valakhilyas and Vaikhanasas resembling Brahmā, feeding on water or air, or living on withered leaves, or subsisting on fruits and roots, and self-controlled, and free from faults, and of vanquished senses, and engaged in reciting mantras and performing homas.