Then after a long while, when the charming spring had appeared on the earth, the king conceived the desire of celebrating the sacrifice. Then bowing down the head before the Vipra effulgent like a celestial, he appointed him to undertake the ceremony, for the purpose of obtaining offspring to perpetuate his line. Then that Brāhmana said to the lord of the earth, the king, So be it! Get order the necessary provisions procured, free the horse set, and prepare a sacrificial ground on the north bank of the Sarayd. Then the king spoke to Sumantra, saying, O Sumantra, do you summon speedily Brāhmaṇas versed in the Vedas and priests professing the Vedānta philosophy, Suyajña, and Vāmadeva, and Jabali, and Kasyapa, and the priest Vasistha, together with other excellent twice-born ones. Thereupon Sumantra eridowed with activity, bestirring himself, summoned all those versed in the Vedas. Then, honouring them duly, the virtuous king Dasaratha spoke to them these amiable words, consistent with duty and interest. Aggrieved on account of a son, I have no happiness on earth, and, therefore, I have intended to celebrate a horse-sacrifice. So, I would like to perform a horse-sacrifice. And by the grace of the saint's son, I shall obtain my desire. Thereupon, the Brāhmaṇas with Vasiştha at their head honoured the words that fell from the king's lips, saying, Well! The Brāhmaṇas headed by Rsyaśộnga addressed the king, saying, Do you arrange for the provisions, loose the horse, and prepare the sacrificial ground on the north bank of the Sarayū river! Since you purpose so virtuously for obtaining offspring, you shall obtain four sons of immeasurable prowess. Hearing those words of the regenerate ones, the king was exceedingly delighted. And cheerfully he spoke these auspicious words to his courtiers. In accordance with the directions of my spiritual guides, do you speedily procure these provisions, loose the horse well protected, and followed by a priest. And prepare the sacrificial ground on the north bank of the Sarayu. And perform the ceremonies capable of securing the rites from disturbance. Surely every king is competent to perform this sacrifice yet care must be taken that no default occurs in it. For flaws in this foremost of sacrifices are watched by learned Brahma-Rākşasas. And should it come to be celebrated in violation of the ordinance, ihe performer thereof shall meet with instant destruction. And do you so order that this sacrifice of mine may be completed according to the prescribed ritual. Thereupon honouring those words of the king, the ministers did as ordered. And having eulogised the king knowing duty, the twice-born ones, with the Monarch's leave, departed for their respective quarters. When the Vipras had gone, the mightyminded lord of men dismissing his counsellors, entered his place. When the Vipras had gone, the mightyminded lord of men dismissing his counsellors, entered his place.