Then those princes, repressors of foes, cognizant of place, and time, and words, thus spoke to Kuśika's son agreeably to time and place, saying, O adorable one, do you tell us as to the time when we should oppose those rangers of the night! Let not that hour pass away! Upon the two Kākutsthas' saying this, and finding them prompt for the encounter, those ascetics well-pleased, fell to extolling the sons of the king. For six nights from to-day, you should protects us. This ascetic has been initiated into the sacrifice, and must, therefore, observe taciturnity. Hearing these words of theirs, those illustrious princes, renouncing sleep, began to guard the hermitage day and night; and those heroic and mighty archers protected that best of ascetics and subduer of enemies. When time had thus gone by and the sixth day had arrived, Rāma said to Sumitrā's son. Being well equipped, be you vigilant! When Räma, manifesting emotion, and being eager for encounter, had said this, the priests and spiritual guides lit up the altar. And along with Viśvāmitra and the family priests, they lit up the altar furnished with Kusa, and Kasa, and ladles, and faggots, and flowers. And as reciting mantras, they were about to duly engage in that sacrifice, there arose a mighty and dreadful uproar in the sky. And as in the rains, masses of clouds appear enveloping the firmament, the Rākşasas, displaying illusions in that wise, began to rush onward. And Mārīca and Subāhu together with their followers coming in dreadful forms, began to shower down blood upon the altar. And on seeing the altar deluged with gore, Rāma suddenly rushed forward, and behold them in the sky. And suddenly seeing them rushing in amain, the lotus-eyed Rāma fixing his gaze at Laksmana, said. Behold O Lakşmana, by means of a Mānava weapon, I shall, without doubt, drive away the wicked; flesh-eating Raksasas, even as the wind drive away clouds before it. Surely I cannot bring myself to slay such as these. Saying this, that descendant of Raghu, Rāma, in vehemence fixing on his bow an exceedingly mighty and gloriously-dazzling Mānava weapon, discharged it in great wrath at Mārīca's chest. And wounded by that foremost of Mānava weapons, Mārīca carried off a sheer hundred Yojanas, dropped in the midst of the ocean. And finding Mārica senseless, and whirling, and afflicted by the might of the weapon, and overcome, Rama addressed Laksmana, saying. Behold, O Laksmana, this Manava weapon first used by Manu, depriving him of his senses has carried him off, and yet has not taken his life! But these shameless, wicked, and blooddrinking Raksasas, delighting in wrong-doing, these disturbers of sacrifices, will I slaughter. Having said this, anon showing to Lakşmaņa his lightness of hand, Raghu's descendant took out a mighty Āgneya weapon, and discharged it at the breast of Subāhu. Thereat being pierced with that shaft, he fell down upon the ground. Then taking a Vāyavya weapon, the illustrious and exceedingly generous Rāghava, bringing delight to those ascetics, slew the rest. Having destroyed all those Rākşasas disturbing sacrifices, Raghu's descendant was honoured by the saints, even as Indra in day of yore, after having vanquished the Asuras. When the sacrifice had been completed, the mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra, beholding all sides cleared of Rākṣasas, spoke to Käkutstha, saying, O mighty-armed one, I have obtained my desire; and you have executed your preceptor's mandate. And, O illustrious hero, you have truly made this a Siddhāśrama. Having thus extolled Rāma, he took Rāma and Lakşmaņa, to perform his evening devotions.