Upon Vasistha's representing this, king Dasaratha himself, with complacent countenance, summoned to him Rāma and Laksmana. And when the auspicious rites had been performed by both Rāma's father and mother, and when the priest Vasiştha had uttered mantras, king Dasaratha, smelling his son's crown, with a glad heart, made him over to the descendant of Kusika. Then there blow a Breeze free from dust and of delicious feel, on witnessing the lotus-eyed Rāma at the hands of Viśvāmitra. And as the high-souled one was about to set out, blossoms began to shower down copiously, accompanied with the sounds of celestial kettle-drums and the loud blares of conch. Viśvāmitra went first, and next the highly famous Rāma with the side-locks, holding the bow. And him followed Sumitrā's Sun And equipped with quivers, and with bows in hand, gracing the ten cardinal points and resembling three-hooded serpents, they followed the high-souled Viśvāmitra, like the two stalwart Asvins following the Grand-sire. Those effulgent ones of faultless limbs went in the wake of the ascetic, illumining him with their grace. And like to those sons of him Skandha and Višākha following the incomprehensible deity, Sthāņu, those youthful brothers of comely persons and faultless limbs Rāma and Lakşmana, highly effulgent, carrying bows in hand, adorned with ornaments, and equipped with scimitars, with their fingers encased in Guana skin, flamingly followed Kusika's son, beautifying him with their splendour. And having proceeded over half a Yojana, and arriving at the right bank of the Sarayū, Viśvāmitra addressed these sweet words to Rāma, O Rāma! do you, O child, take of this water: let no delay occur. Do you receive the mantras Bala and Atibala, and you will not feel fatigue or fever or undergo any change of look, and whether asleep or heedless, the Rākşasas will not be able to surprise you. And, O Rāma, the might of your arms will be unequalled in this world,-nay, in all the three worlds. Do you, O Rāghava, recite Bala and Atibala, O child! And, O sinless one, when you have secured these two kinds of knowledge, none in this world will equal you in good fortune, or in talent or in philoscphic wisdom, or in subtle apprehension, or in the capacity of answering a controversialist; for Bala and Atibala are the nurses of all knowledge. And, O Rāma, O foremost of men, if you recite Bala and Atibala on the way, neither hunger nor thirst will exercise you, O descendant of Raghu! And if you recite these, you will attain fame on earth. Those sciences fraught with energy are the daughters of the Grandsire. I intend to confer them upon you, O Kākutstha; and, O lord of earth, they are worthy to be conferred upon you; and they are possessed of various virtues. You need not entertain any doubt about it. And if you bear them in consonance with the precepts, they will prove of manifold good to you. Thereat Rāma with a cheerful countenance sipning water with a purified body received those sciences from the Maharși of subdued soul. And furnished with the sciences, Rāma of dreadful prowess appeared resplendent, even like the adorable autumnal Sun invested with a thousand rays. Then Rāma having rendered to Kuśika's son all the duties pertaining to a spiritual guide, the three happily spent that night on the banks of the Sarayu. And although those excellent of Dasaratha lay down on an unbeseeming bed of grass, yet in consequence of the sweet converse of Kusika's son, the night seemed to pass pleasantly away. sons