When Viśvāmitra had ended, hearing his words, Rāma exceedingly pleased, spoke to that ascetic resembling flaming fire, saying, I am anxious to hear in detail, good betide you, how, O Brāhmaṇa, my ancestor arranged for the sacrifice. Hearing those words of his, Viśvāmitra, smiling, eagerly spoke to Kākutstha, saying, Do you, O Rāma, hearken to the story of the high-souled Sagara's sacrifice. Sankara's fatherin-law is the far-famed Himavat. And approaching each other, the Himavat and the vindhya behold each other. And on the region lying between them took place, O foremost of men, that sacrifice of Sagara's. And that country, O best of men, is excellent as a sacrificial ground. And, O Kākutstha, equipped with a powerful bow, that mighty carwarrior, living under Sagara's sway, Ansumat, O child, followed the horse, for the purpose of protecting it. It came to pass that with the intention of disturbing the sacrifice of that monarch, on a certain day Vasava, assuming the, form of a Raksasi, stole away the sacrificial horse. us O Kākutstha, on the horse of that high-souled one being stolen, the priests said to the king engaged in the ceremony, 'On this auspicious day, has the sacrificial horse been stolen by violence. Do you, O Kākutstha, slay him that steals the horse, and bring it back. Otherwise the sacrifice will be defective, bringing misfortune. Therefore, do you, O king, act so, that the sacrifice may not bemired with defects.' Hearing the words of the priests, the king addressed his sixty thousand sons in the midst of his court, saying, 'l'eing, as this great sacrifice is, presided over by eminently pious Brāhmaṇas sanctified by mantras, I do not, you foremost of men, you sons, see how Raksasas may find entrance into it.' Therefore, repair you, and seek for the horse, you sons. Good betide you! Do you search the entire earth engarlanded with oceans; and do you search Yojana after Yojana, you sons. And do you delve the earth till you light upon the horse, by my command following the track of that stealer of the horse. I have been initiated into this sacrifice with my grand-sons and priests.' I will stay here till you light upon the horse. And thereat the mighty princes, enjoined by their father, breathing high spirits, began to range the earth. O Rāma. Then, they each fell to delving the bowels of the earth for the space of a Yojana in length and breadth, with their hands resembling thunder-bolts in feel, and with darts like to thunder-bolts, and with gigantic ploughshares. And being thus rived, the earth, O descendant of Raghu, began to send forth loud cries. O Rāghava, O you hard to repress, there arose an uproar from serpents, and Asuras, and Rāks asas, and other creatures, that were being slaughtered. O descendant of Raghu, they excavated the earth, O Rāma, for sixty thousand Yojanas, you, as if they had intended to reach the lowest depths underground. Thus, O foremost of kings, those sons of the monarch dug all around Jambūdvīpa, filled with mountains. Thereat, the gods together with the Gandharvas, and Asuras, and Pannagas, in trepidation appeared before the Grand-sire. And propitiating that high-souled one, they with melancholy countenances and in exceeding agitation, spoke these words to the Grand-sire, O adorable one, the entire earth is being excavated by the sons of Sagara; and many are the high-souled ones as well as the aquatic animals that are being slain in consequence. This one is the disturber of our sacrifice, and by him has the sacrificial horse been stolen, saying this Sagara's sons are committing havoc upon all creatures.