Hearing those words of the intelligent Kusanābha, his hundred daughters touching his feet with their heads, said, O king, that life of all, the Air, was desirous of overcoming us, having recourse to an improper way; nor did he regard morality. We have a father, good betide you; and we live at ease. Do you ask our father about it, if he consent conferring us on you. But that wicked wight did not listen to our words; and as we were saying this, were we roughly handled by him.' Hearing those words of theirs, the highly pious and puissant king addressed his hundred beautiful daughters, saying You have displayed a signal example of that forgiveness which is fit to be followed by the forbearing; and that you have unanimously regarded the honour of my house, also conduces to your praise. Alike to men and women, forbearance is an ornament. And difficult it is for one to exercise that forbearance, specially in respect of the celestials. And may every descendant of mine possess forbearance like to yours! Forbearance is charity; forbearance is truth; forbearance, O daughters, is sacrifice; forbearance is fame; forbearance is virtue, you, the universe is established in forbearance; Then dismissing his daughters, the king endowed with the prowess of celestials, and versed in counsel, began to consult with his counsellors about the bestowal of his daughters, in respect of time and place and person and equability of lineage. It came to pass that at this time, an ascetic named Culi, highly effulgent, with his vital fluid under control, and of pure practices, was performing Brāhma austerities. And as the saint was engaged in austerities, good betide you, Urmila's daughter named Somada-a Gandharvi-ministered to him. And in all humility that virtuous one for a definite period was engaged in ministering to him. And thereat, her spiritual guide was gratified with her. And, O descendant of Raghu, once he said to her, I am gratified, good betide you! What good shall I render you? Thereupon, concluding that the ascetic was gratified, the Gandharvi, cognizant of words, exceedingly delighted, sweetly addressed that one versed in speech. You are furnished with the Brāhma marks, art sprung from Brahmă, and art of mighty austerities. I desire of you a righteous son endowed with the Brāhma ascetic virtues. I am without a husband, good betide you, and I am no one's wife. Upon me who is your servant you should confer such a son by help of Brāhma means. Thereupon, well pleased with her, Cūlina conferred upon her an excellent Brāhma mindbegotten son, named Brahmadatta, And that king, Brahmadatta, founded the flourishing city of Kampilya, even as the sovereign of the celestials founded the celestial regions. And, O Kākutstha, the righteous king Kusanābha finally decided on conferring his hundred daughters upon Brahmadatta. And inviting Brahmadatta, that highly energetic lord of earth, with a glad heart conferred his hundred daughters upon him. And O descendant of Raghu, king Brahmadatta resembling the lord himself of the celestials, by turns received their hands in marriage. And as soon as he touched them, the hundred daughters were cured of their crookedness, and became free from anguish, and were endowed with pre-eminent beauty. And upon beholding them delivered from (the tyranny of) the Air, the monarch Kušanābha became exceedingly delighted, and rejoiced again and again. And he dismissed that lord of earth, king Brahmadatta, in company with his consorts and the priests. And the Gandharvī Somadā rejoiced exceedingly at the completion of the nuptials of her son; and embracing her daughters-in-law again and again, and extolling her son, she expressed the fullness of her joy. And he dismissed that lord of earth, king Brahmadatta, in company with his consorts and the priests. And the Gandharvī Somadā rejoiced exceedingly at the completion of the nuptials of her son; and embracing her daughters-in-law again and again, and extolling her son, she expressed the fullness of her joy.