When the citizens had gone away, the king versed in the time and place of ceremonies, after deliberating with his counsellors fixed the time (of the installation.) And his conclusion was even this: "To-morrow the Pusya will be in; and to-morrow should my son, Rāma of eyes like lotus-leaves be installed as heir-apparent." Then entering the inner apartment king Dasaratha said to the charioteer Sumantra, "Do you again bring Rāma here.' In response to those words, the charioteer again speedily went to Rāma's residence, for bringing him thither. His fresh approach having been announced to Rāma by the warders, the latter, filled with apprehension, became anxious. And bringing Sumantra in, Ráma with eagerness said "Tell me fully the reason of this your fresh visit." Thereupon, the charioteer told him, "The sovereign wish to behold you. You have known the occasion; and now decide whether you will go thither or not.” Hearing the charioteer's speech, Rāma also in haste repaired to the king's palace, with the view of again beholding the lord of Man. And on hearing of Rāma's arrival, king Daſaratha inade him enter his own chamber, with the view of communicating to him something exceedingly agreeable. And immediately on entering his father's residence, the graceful Rāghava seeing his father from a distance, bent low with clasped hands. Thereupon raising Räma as he was bending down, and embracing him, and pointing out a seat, the protector of the earth again spoke to him. O Ráma, enjoying at my will the good things of life, I have grown old; and have attained great age. I have worshipped the deities by celebrating hundreds of sacrifices with numerous Dakşiņās and gifts of boiled rice. And incomparable on earth, you have been born to me for a son after my heart. I have given whatever had been wanted (by others); I have finished my studies. O foremost of men. I have, O hero, acted and enjoyed. I have been emancipated from my obligations to the celestials and saints, and the Pitris, and the Vipras, and myself.* *Sacrifice, study, son, gift, enjoyment are the five means of, clearing the debts one owes to the celestials, the saints, the pitrs, the vipras and self. And naught now remain to be done by me save the installation. Therefore it behoves you to do even what I say to you. To-day the subjects in a body have expressed their desire of having you for their sovereign. Therefore, O son, I shall install you as the heir-apparent. O Rāghava, tonight I have dreamt inauspicious dreams. Stars with tremendous sounds, shoot by day, accompanied with thunder-claps. The astrologers say that the star of my life has been invaded by those terrible planets, the Sun, Mars, and Rāhu. It generally happens that when such signs manifest themselves, the king comes by a terrible calamity, and may meet with death itself. Therefore, O Raghava, my thoughts change, be you installed (in the kingdom), for fickle is the mind of all creatures. To-day, before meeting Pusya, the moon has entered the Punarvasu asterism; and the astrologers say that to-morrow it will certainly be in conjunction with Pușya. My heart urges me to install you during the Pusya conjunction, so Oh! afflicter of foes, I shall install you to-morrow as heir-apparent. Therefore do you along with my daughter-inlaw, commencing from sun-set, serving the prescribed restrictions, and lying down on a bed of Kusa grass, spend the night in fast. And let your friends vigilantly protect you all around, for many are the impediments that happen in affairs like this. In my opinion, during the interval that Bharata is away from the city, should your installation be effected most opportunity. Even though your brother Bharata ever stayed entirely by the course of the honest; he followed his elder brother; and is righteous-souled; tenderhearted; and of subdued senses. But in my opinion, the hearts of men are inconstant, and, O Rāghava, the hearts even of the virtuous change by the action of the natural impulses. Having been thus addressed in the matter of his coming installation in the next day, Rāma, with the King's permission embodied in "Go you," greeting his father, repaired to his quarters. And entering his residence in the interests of the installation ordered by the monarch, he immediately issued out, and went to the inner apartment of his mother. There, Rāma found his mother in the temple, clad in silk, adoring the gods, and silently praying for his royal luck. There, hearing of the welcome installation of Råma, had already come Sumitrā, and Lakşmaņa and Sītā summoned (by Kausalyā). Hearing of the installation of his son in the office of heir-apparent during the influence of the Puşya at that time, tended by Sumitrā and Sita and Laksmana, there stood Kausalya, meditating the (triune) person Janārdana, through suspension of breath. Rāma, approaching and saluting her engaged in auspicious observance, addressed her in excellent words, cheering her up, O mother, by my father have I been appointed to the task of governing the people. And, agreeably to the desire of my father, to morrow will take place my installation; To night Sītā will fast along with me, the priests have said thus, and this also has been declared by my father. Do you therefore even today provide those necessary auspicious things that will be required Hur myself and Vaidehi on the occasion of the coming installation. Hearing of that for which she had ever wished, Kausalya, her voice choking with the vapour begot of delight, addressed Rāma, saying. Rāma, my child, be you long-lived, and may your enemies find destruction! Furnished with this good fortune, do you gladden Sumitra's as well as my own relatives. Oh! you was born under an auspicious star: you have, O son, by your virtues gratified your sire Dasaratha. Ah! not unfruitful has proved my disinterested observance of vow to the lotus-eyed person, for this royal fortune of the Ikşvāku race shall rest upon you. Having been thus addressed by his mother, Rāma looking at his brother(Lakşmaņa), seated in humble guise with clasped hands, with smile spoke to him, saying. O Lakṣmaṇa, do you together with me rule this earth. You are my second self; and this good fortune has taken possession of you (as well). Do you, O Sumitrā's son, enjoy every desirable thing and the privileges pertaining to royalty. My life and this kingdom I covet for your sake alone. Having said this to Lakşmaņa, and paid reverence to his mother, Rāma with their permission went with Sītā to his own quarters.