Then facing his whole court, that lord of earth, the king, resounding all sides as if with thunder, in a mighty voice, echoing, and solemn, and like to the sounds of a kettle-drum, spoke words fraught with welfare, and capable of creating high rapture, and worthy of the attention of all. And in tones overflowing with royal signs; and mellifluous; and peerless; and surcharged with the sentiment of surprise, the monarch addressed the princes, saying. It is known to you that the (people of this) spacious empire now governed by me was governed like to children by those sovereigns that were my predecessors. Now it is my intention to bring welfare to this entire earth worthy of being rendered happy, which had been governed by all those sovereigns, Ikşvāku and the rest. Following the path trod by my predecessors, I have, heedless of my own happiness, to the best of my power, always protected the people. And under the shade of the white umbrella, I effecting the good of the entire community, have brought decrepitude upon my body. Having attained an age extending over many thousands of years, and lived for a long period, desire rest for this decrepit frame. Bearing in the interests of the people the heavy burden of duty, incapable of being borne by even those that have controlled their senses, and requiring (in the bearer) right royal qualities, I have become fatigued. I therefore wish for rest, after in the interests of the subjects installing my son, with the permission of all these excellent twice-born ones around me. My worthy son, like to Purandara himself in prowess, Rāma, the conqueror of hostile cities, had been born, endowed with all my virtues. Him, like to the moon while in conjunction with the Puşya constellation, the foremost of those maintaining righteousness, the chief of men, will I, in the morning with a delighted heart, install as the heir-apparent to the throne. And that auspicious elder brother of Laksmana* will make a fit ruler for you, yea, the very three worlds might consider themselves as having a lord, by possessing him, through his agency I shall this day bring about the welfare of the world; and shall renounce my toil by reposing in him the task of government. *There is an alliterative beauty here in the original: Laksmīvān Laksmanāgraja; which of course is impossible to be retained in the translation. If what I have devised be meet, and also recommend itself to you, do you accord approval to it, proposing what I am to do besides this, together with the how of effecting it. If I have thought thus solely because I find delight in it, do you look about any other way to welfare. For different is the thought of the dispassionate; and by friction becomes far more efficacious.* *This is Mill's principle of free and equal discussion so lucidity upheld in his Liberty. The meaning in the text is obscurely expressed. The thought of the dispassionate is different from that of the passionate; and truth comes out from the friction of the two opposite forces. As the king had said this, the princes, exceedingly delighted, seconded him even as peacocks dance at sight of a mighty mass of clouds showering down rain. Then there arose a pleasant resonance (from the assembly of the potentates;) and next from the vast concourse inspired with high rapture arose an echo generated by their voices, which seemed to shake the earth. Then being in complete possession of the views of that one (the king) versed in morality and interest, the Brāhmaṇas and the principal personages of the army, in company with the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces, took counsel together, and became unanimous, and, having again revolved the mater individually in their mind, spoke to the aged king Dasaratha, saying. O king, being many thousand years old, you have become aged. Do you then install Rāma as the heir-apparent to the throne. We wish to behold the exceedingly strong and mighty-armed hero among the Raghus, riding a huge elephant, his countenance underneath an umbrella. Hearing those welcome word of theirs, the monarch, as if not knowing their mind, asked them, saying. You have wished for Rāghava, soon as you have heard my speech. This, you kings, raise my doubts. Do you, therefore, speak out your minds truly. Why, while I am righteously governing the earth, do you wish to see the highly powerful Rāma as the heir-apparent? And those high-souled ones together with the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces said to him, O king, many are the virtues of your son, having for their object the welfare of the people. To-day we will recount to you in detail the merits making even enemies happy of the meritorious and intelligent (Rāma) resembling a celestial. O monarch, furnished with the choicest qualities, Rāma having truth for prowess is like to Sakra's self; and he towers above Ikşvāku and all. Rāma is the one excellent person among men; and is true and devoted to truth. And in very Rāma is established morality with prosperity. Touching the good of the subjects, he is like to the moon, and in the quality of forgiveness, he is like to the Earth; in intelligence like to Brhaspati; and in prowess like Saci's lord. He is cognizant of duty, and true in promise, and honest; and not given to detraction. He is forgiving, and soothing, and sweet-speeched and grateful, and of subdued senses. He is pliable to entreaties and staid, and of agreeable carriage, and un-calumniating. Rāghava speaks everyone fair, and is of truthful speech. He ministers to variously-versed aged Brāhmaṇas. It is for this that in this world his fame and renown and energy go on increasing. He has mastered all the weapons that are extant among the gods, the Asuras, and human beings. He has performed his ablutions after having acquired learning; and knows the Vedas with their branches. And Bharata's elder brother is a proficient in music. He is the home of the good, and is saintly, and has conquered his grief, and is magnanimous. He is lowly to those twice bom ones that are worthy and are conversant with morality and interest. And when in company with Sumitra's son he wended to the fight with the view of protecting a city or a province, he came not back without conquering the foe. on or And even as a father enquired after the welfare of his sons, he, returning from the field horse or elephant, exhaustively and consecutively enquired after the weal of the citizens, concerning their sons, their (sacrificial) fire, or their wives, or their servants, or their disciples. And that tiger-like Rāma always asked the Brāhmaṇas, 'Do your disciples tend you' and the Kșatriyas, 'Do your disciples always remain mailed?' When calamity befallen the people, he experienced excess of sorrow; and on their festal occasions, he rejoiced ever like their own father. He speaks the truth, and is a mighty bowman. He ministers to the aged, and has controlled his senses. He preludes his speech with a smile, and is established in righteousness with his whole soul. he entirely brings about good, and he takes no delight in bandying words after a quarrel. In reasoning in chain, he is like to the lord of speech himself. His eye-brows are graceful; and his eyes expansive and coppery; and he is like to the very Vişnu Like Kāma he is charming to all by virtue of his heroism, prowess and might. He is ever engaged in protecting the people: and the desire for the good things of the world cannot perturb his inind. He is capable of bearing the burden even of the three worlds, what then is this Earth? Neither his pleasure nor his displeasure even goes for naught. He slays those that deserve to be slain; but he is never enraged with those that ought not to be slain (i.e. the un-offending), with whom, he is pleased, he bestows wealth upon. In virtue of his self-control and other qualities, dear to the subjects and capable of exciting the delight of mankind, Rāma shines even like the effulgent Sun surrounded by his rays. And even that Rāma, crowned with such qualities and having truth for his prowess, like a Lokapāla, the Earth wishes to have for her lord. By our good luck it is that your son has acquired competence in the task of administration; and also by your good luck it is that Rāghava has been born endowed with sonly qualities, like to Marici's son Kasyapa. The gods, and the Asuras, and men, with the Gandharvas, and the Uragas, and the inhabitants rural and urban, pray for the strength, health, and long life of self-knowing Rāma. And whether inmates or outsiders, citizens or natives of provinces, everyone speaks high of him. Women, old and young, in both the morning and evening, with intent minds, bow down to all the gods on behalf of the intelligent Rāma. Let their desire, O worshipful one, be fulfilled, through your grace. And we would behold the son of the foremost of monarchs, the foe-destroying. Rāma dark-blue like a lotus, installed as the heir-apparent to the kingdom. Therefore, O bestower of boons, it behoves you, for the sake of our well-being, with a delighted mind to speedily install your son furnished with noble qualities resembling the god of gods, and every intent upon the welfare of the entire community.