When Rāma had departed, Dasaratha's son the illustrious Rāma, of serene soul, made over the bow to the hands of Varuna of immeasurable strength. Then saluting the saints headed by Vasiștha, Rāma, the descendant of Raghu, seeing his son stupefied, addressed him, saying, Now that Jamadagni's son has gone away, let the fourfold forces maintained by you as their lord, march in the direction of Ayodhyā. Hearing Rama's words, king Dasaratha embraced his son with his arms, and smelt Rāghava's crown; and hearing that Rāma had gone, the monarch became exceedingly delighted, and considered himself and his son as having attained a second birth. He urged on his army, and speedily arrived at the city, graced round with standards bearing pennons, and lovely to behold, and resounding with the sounds of trumpets, with its high-ways watered, and beauteous, and sprinkled around with flowers, crowded with citizens looking cheerful on account of the king's approach, bearing auspicious articles in their hands, and beautified with the vast concourse of people. And received by the citizens as well as the regenerate ones inhabiting the city coming forward a long way, and followed by his graceful son, the handsome Majesty of illustrious name entered his own dear residence, like to the Himavat. And entertained by his own relatives with all objects of enjoyment, the monarch rejoiced exceedingly. And Kausalya and Sumitră and the slender waisted Kaikeyi, together with other wives of the king, were busy, receiving the brides, with the necessary ceremonies. And the royal spouses received the exalted Sītā and the famous Urmilā and both the daughters of Kusadhvaya, graced with silken apparel, with homas performed and blessings invoked, on their behalf. And having paid reverence at the abodes of the gods, and rendered homage to those that deserved the same, the daughters of the kings, well pleased, in private, took joy with all the brothers. And having attained brides, and arms, with wealth and friends, those foremost of men, engaged in ministering to their father. And once on a time that descendant of Raghu, king Dasaratha addressed Bharata, saying, O son, this son of the king of the Kekayas your uncle, Yudhājit stay here, that hero, having come to take you over. Hearing these words of Daśaratha, Kaikeyi's son, Bharata; prepared for the journey, together with Satrughna. Having greeted his father, and Rāma of unflagging energy, and his mother, that foremost of men, the heroic (Bharata) departed with Satrughna. And having Bharata as well as ſatrughna, the heroic Yudhājit, with a delighted heart, entered his own city; and his father rejoiced exceedingly. And on Bharata having departed Rāma and the exceedingly mighty Laksmana, tended their sire resembling a celestial. And paying the utmost regard to the command of his father, Rāma discharged all the duties of the city, having for his object the pleasure or welfare (of the citizens).21 And heedfully rendering every service to his mothers, he on proper occasions observed the duties pertaining to his superiors. Dasaratha was exceedingly delighted; as also the Brahmanas, and the traders, and the inhabitants generally, at the conduct and behaviour of Rāma. Rāma having truth for prowess, by virtue of his excellence appeared to everyone the most meritorious of (Dasaratha's son) like to the self create Himself to all being. In the company of Sītā, the wise Rāma, bending his mind to Sītā, with his heart dedicated to her, passed many a season in delight. Rāma's beloved Sītā, as having been bestowed upon him by his sire, by her loveliness, and her perfections as much as by her loveliness, went on enhancing his joy. And her lord came to exercise a double influence on her heart. And by her own heart, the daughter of Janaka, Mithila's lord, resembling a goddess in grace, and like to Śrī (goddess of wealth) herself in loveliness, completely read his inmost sentiments. And experiencing delight, Rama, receiving the Rājarși's daughter, exercising her own will the excellent princess-looked graceful, even like the lord Vişņu the chief of celestials on being joined with Śrī. BĀLAKĀŅDA