Having passed that night, the illustrious Viśvāmitra, smiling complacently, sweetly spoke to Rāghava, saying, Pleased am I with you. Good betide you, O highly famous prince! With supreme pleasure, do I confer upon you all the weapons. By means of which subduing such antagonists as celestials and Asuras backed on carth by Gandharvas and Uragas, you will in battle be crowned with victory. All those celestial weapons, good betide you, I will confer upon you. And I will confer upon you, O Rāghava, the celestial and mighty Dandacakra,* and Dharmacakra, and also Kalacakra. And, ) foremost of men, I will confer upon you the fierce Vişnucakra, and Indracakra. *Cakra means discus. These enumerations specify different kinds of the discus. The Vajra, and Siva's Sūlavara, and the weapon Brahmasiras, and Aisika, O mightyarmed descendant of Raghu! And, O tiger among men, I will, O king's,son, bestow upon you the matchless Brahma weapon, and, O Kākutstha, the two excellent maces, the flaming Modaki and Sikhari. And, O Rāma, I will confer upon you Dharmapasa,* and Kalapāsa, and the excellent Varuņapāśa. * Pasa means noose O descendant of Raghu, I will bestow upon you the two Asanis, Suska and Ardra, and the Pināka weapon, and the Nārāyaṇa, and the Āgneya weapon called Sikhara, and the Vāyavya, called Prathama. O sinless one! And, O Rāghava, I will confer are upon you the weapon called Hayasiras, and the Krauñca weapon, and, O Kākutstha, a couple of darts. And I will confer upon you Kankala, and the dreadful Musala, and Kapāla, and Kinkiņi-all those that intended for slaughtering Rākşasas. And, O mighty-armed one, O son of the best of men, I will confer upon you the mighty weapon Vidyadhara, and that excellent scimitar named Nandana, and the favourite Gandharva weapon, Mohana, and Prasvapana, Pasamana, and Saumya, O Rāghava! And, O tiger among men, do you accept Varsana, and Sosana, and Santapana, and Vilāpana, and Mādana hard to repress, beloved of Kandarpa, and that favourite Gandharva weapon, Mānava, and the favourite Piśāca weapon, O highly famous prince. You, O mighty-armed Rāma, speedily accept the Tamasa, O tiger among men, and the exceedingly powerful Saumana, and the irrepressible Saſvarta and Mausala, O son of the king, and the Satya weapon, and the supreme Māyāmaya, and the Saura. Tejaprabha, capable of depriving foes of energy, and the Soma, and the ſisira, and the Tvāştra, and the terrible Daruna belonging to Bhaga, and Silesu, and Manava. O long-armed king's son, Rama! receive instantly all powerful, highly exalted forms that can be modified at will. Then with his face turned towards the east, that foremost of ascetics having purified himself, gladly conferred the mantras upon Rāma. And the Vipra also bestowed upon Rāghava those weapons, of which even the celestials are incapable of holding all. As that intelligent ascetic, Viśvāmitra, recited mantras, all those invaluable weapons appeared before that descendant of Raghu. And with clasped hands, they well-pleased, addressed Rama,-These, O highly generous one, are your servants, O Rāghava. And whatever you wish, good betide you, shall by all means be accomplished by us. Thus addressed by those highly powerful weapons, Kākutstha Rama, with a delighted soul, accepting them, touched them with his hand, and said, Do you appear before me as I remember you! Then the exceedingly energetic Rāma, well pleased, paying reverence to the mighty ascetic, Viśvāmitra, prepared to set out. pleased, paying reverence to the mighty ascetic, Viśvāmitra, prepared to set out.