A woman, brought up with Kaikeyī, who formerly served as a maid-servant the family of her maternal uncle, at her own will, ascended the palace resembling the moon. Mantharā beheld from the palace the highways of Ayodhyā well watered all round, and strewn with lotuses, and adorned with standards bearing gay pennons. With thoroughfares and roads leading along undulating lands; sprinkled with sandal water, and crowded with men who had performed their ablutions, and echoing with the accents of regenerate ones bearing garlands and sweetmeats in their hands; and resounding with the sounds of musical instruments; and filled with many folks; and singing with Veda chantings; and with its horses and elephants delighted, and cows and bulls emitting roars. And with standards displaying flags erected by the exhilarated citizen. Upon seeing Ayodhyā (in such excitement) Manthară was seized with exceeding surprise. Mantharā, seeing a nurse hard by clad in white silk, with her eyes expanded with delight, asked her, saying. What for Rāma's mother although closefisted, is cheerfully and with the greatest possible alacrity dispensing wealth to the people? And what for is the general overflow of joy? And what does the delighted monarch purpose to do. There upon bursting with very great delight, the nurse communicated to the hump-backed woman the high fortune awaiting Rama, saying, To-morrow under Pusya, king Dasaratha will install the sinless Rāghava having his anger under control, as heir-apparent to the throne. Hearing the words of the nurse, the humpbacked one, speedily growing angry, descended from the edifice resembling a summit of the Kailasa hill. Burning in ire, the sin-seeking Mantharā addressed Kaikeyi, lying down, saying. Up, you senseless one! What for are you down? A great danger approaches you. You understand not that a mighty grief overflow you. You boast of good fortune while misfortune is yours in the shape of luck. Your good fortune is surely unstable like the tide of a river during summer. Thus addressed by the sin seeking humpbacked (hag) in exceedingly harsh language, Kaikeyi became afflicted with great grief. And Kaikeyi said to the hump-backed one, Is any evil present, O Mantharā? I do find you with countenance fallen and sore distressed with grief. The hump-backed Mantharā, skilled in speech, who really sought Kaikeyi's welfare, hearing the latter's sweet-accented words, displaying sorrow greater than Kaikeyi's own, lamenting, and enlisting Kaikeyi's feelings against Rāma, uttered words inflamed with anger, saying. O worshipful one, an enduring and terrible destruction is imminent to you. King Daśaratha will install;; Rama as heir-apparent. I have been sunk in a fathomless fear; and afflicted with grief and heaviness. And as if burning I, seeking your welfare, have come to you. For, O Kaikeyi, great wax my grief on witnessing your sorrow; and my advancement progress along with you there is no doubt about this. Born in a race of king you are the queen of this lord of earth. Why did not you then realise the sternness of royal morality. Your maintainer speaks most morally; but is crafty for all that: he speaks blandly, but has a crooked heart. Him you take as of blessed condition, and therefore are gulled. Speaking to you soft words bare of substance, he will, his heart on the alert, to-day compass the welfare of Kausalyä. Having sent Bharata to the home of your relatives, that wicked-minded one will establish Rāma in his ancestral kingdom rid of its thorn. You O girl, in consideration of your welfare, have like to a mother taken to your lap a venomous snake in the form of your husband, Even what is done by an enemy or a serpent left alone, is being done by Dasaratha of wicked ways and false soothing speech, to you and your own son. And, O girl, deserving as you are of happiness, the king having established Rāma in the kingdom; you will be annihilated along with your own. The time has come, 'O Kaikeyi, do you on the spur enter upon that which would turn to your advantage. And, O you, influenced by surprise, do you deliver yourself, me and Bharata also. Hearing Mantharā's words, that one of graceful countenance filled with delight, and looking like the autumnal moon light, rose up from her bed. Inspired with exceeding joy, Kaikey7, struck with surprise, made to the hump-backed woman a present of an excellent and elegant ornament. And having given her the ornament, the paragon among the fair Kaikeyi joyfully, addressed Manthara, saying, O Manthara! highly welcome is the that you have communicated to me. And surely you have told me what is dear to my heart, what shall I do for you? Difference find I none between Rāma and Bharata. Therefore, delighted am I that the king purposes installing Rāma in the kingdom. There is no other ambrosial speech that is excellent and acceptable to me, compared with the installation of Rāma. Therefore do you ask of me whatever reward do you want and I shall give you. news