Sumantra, well versed in legends, after passing by the gateways crowded with people, reached the solitary apartment (of Rāma). Having youthful warders, carrying dares and bows, wearing ear-rings, cautious, attentive and devoted and saw (seated at the gate) several old men commanding female warders, mindful of duty, wearing red cloths and excellent ornaments, and having rattans in their hands. They all seeing Sumantra, ever wishing good to Rāma, approach, rose suddenly up from their seats with due respect. The humble minded charioteer then said to them, Go and speedily communicate to Rāma that Sumantra is waiting at the gate. At this the warders, desirous of doing good to their master, nearing Rāma, speedily communicated these words to him who was in the company of his wife. Rāma hearing of the arrival of his father's charioteer, ordered him to enter into the apartment, having his father's pleasure in view. He (on entering) saw Rāma resembling Vaiśravaņa, will adorned and seated on a rolled sofa, with a beautiful coverlet on. Having his body sprinkled with holy and fragrant sandal of the best kind, red as the blood of a hog; and having by him Sītā with a chowry in her hand, like moon himself in the company of citra. Whereupon Sumantra, acquainted with decorum, humbly saluted him (Rāma), the conferrer of great boons, and resplendent like the mid-day sun. And he well honoured by the king, seeing the king's son seated on the sleeping sofa with a delighted countenance, spoke these words to him with clasped hands. Oh, Rāma, great son of Kausalyā, your father and the queen Kaikeyi want to see you; so it behove you to go there without delay. Being pleased with these words the mighty hero of great effulgence, honoured his father's behest and spoke to Sītā thus. Oh, darling, doubt there is none that my father, going to Kaikeyi. is parleying with her regarding my installation. Conceiving the king's intention that clever lady, of dark eyes and desirous of doing good to the king, that mother, the daughter of the king of Kekaya, pleased and intent upon king's welfare as will as upon that of mine, is hastening the monarch for my installation. Fortunately for me, the monarch in the company of his queen has despatched Sumantra, intent upon my welfare. Worthy of the meeting at the inner apartment, the messenger has come, and I doubt not that the monarch shall install me to-day as the heirapparent of his throne. Therefore I shall speedily go hence and see my father. Do you remain and enjoy here the company of your friends. Regarded by her husband, Sītā of dark eyes and intent upon her husband's welfare, followed him to the entrance and said. May the great monarch bestow upon you first the heir-apparentship, and afterwards the dignity of the Paramount power like Brahma granting kingdom to Vāsava. I shall be ministering to you, seeing you initiated, engaged in ceremonies, wearing excellent deer skin for cloth and carrying horns in the hands. May Indra protect you on the East, may Yama (Death) protect you on the South and Varuņa (god of water) on the West and Kuvera (God of wealth) on the North. Being greeted with benedictory ceremonies, Rāma, bidding farewell to Sītā, issued out of his house like to a lion, living in the den of a mountain. He saw Lakşmaņa standing at the gate with clasped hands. And met all his friends assembled at the middle apartment. Then that great son of the king, casting a glance upon them all who were present there to see him and pleasing them with sweet words ascended, like to the thousand-eyed Indra. The splendid chariot, made of silver and coated with tiger-skin, and bright like the fire itself, making a noise (when going) like the roaring of clouds. defying all obstacles, adorned with jewels, and gold, dazzling the eye-sight and bright like the golden peaks of Sumeru. It had two excellent horses tied to it like to two young elephants, and was of quick motion, resembling that of Indra's chariot carried by his horses. Ascending the car, Raghava, of great effulgence, went speedily on, making (the space) resounded like to the muttering cloud on the sky. He issued out of his abode like the beautiful moon passing through a huge cloud. Lakşmaņa, the younger brother of Rāghava, standing behind him on the car with a splendid Chowry in his hand, began to guard his body. And there was caused a great tumult by the crowd gathering around on the issuing out of Rāma. Then followed in his train many hundreds and thousands of beautiful horses and elephants resembling hills in their appearance; and went before him hundreds of heroes, well accoutred, and having their bodies sprinkled with sandal and Agaru and holding swords and arms in their hands, and other persons uttering benedictions. He heard on the way sounds of musical instruments, eulogy of the panegyrists and lionlike roars of the heroes. Exquisitely beautiful damsels, adorned with various ornaments and dresses, standing by the windows began to shower flowers upon the head of the foedestroyer Rāma, and those spotless beauties with a view to please Rāma, some standing on the buildings and some on the ground, began to praise him: Oh you, delight of your mother, surely has mother Kausalyā become exceedingly gratified, on seeing you of successful journey to accept the heir-apparentship of the throne. Those ladies thought that Sītā, the captivater of Rāma's heart was surely the best of all women and for certain had she performed some great austerities in her past life or else she would not have been the companion of Răma, like to Rohini, the companion of Moon. That best among men heard these pleasant words from those ladies standing on the buildings and on high ways. Rāghava then heard the people coming from different quarters and the well-pleased citizens, talking amongst themselves regarding him in the following strain. This Rāghava going shall obtain through the grace of the king great wealth, and all our desires will be gratified when he will become our governor. It is a great gain to the subjects that he is going to get for ever the entire empire at once; he being the lord of the people no body shall witness any misfortune or unpleasant thing. Like to Vaisravana he began to proceed, being dignified by the horses and elephants going before sending forth great sound, and eulogised in various metres by persons singing his glory, by the panegyrists and by men tracing his noble ancestry. He saw the courtyard thronged with young and old elephants, horses, chariots, and the high ways crowded all over with people, many pearls and various merchandises.