Then seeing that the night in which had been performed the auspicious preliminary ceremonies, was about to be spent, eulogists and genealogists hymned Bharata with consecrated hymns. And then sounded the kettle-drum, beaten by a golden stick, announcing the departure of the night; and people sounded conchs and other instruments by hundreds furnished with soft and loud sounds. And as if filling the heavens, those powerful blasts of the trumpet repeatedly rendered Bharata burning in grief the more aggrieved. Then awaking and silencing those sounds with saying, “I am not the king," he said to Satrughna. Behold, O Satrughna, in what a mighty wrong the people are engaged, on account of Kaikeyi. The king Dasaratha has gone away throwing down on me (the burthen of) this misery. The royal grace founded in righteousness of that magnanimous and virtuous monarch is wandering even like a boat on water having no helmsman. And he who is our mighty master has been banished into the woods by this mother of mine, who had (in doing so) renounced virtue. Seeing Bharata lamenting thus senseless, the ladies afflicted with sorrow began to wail in winsome accents. As Bharata was mourning thus, the highly famous and virtuous Vasistha accompanied by his disciples entered the court of the Ikşvāku king: built of entire gold, charming, dazzling with gems and gold: like to Sudharmä its. Sitting down on a golden seat furnished with a elegant cover, that one versed in all the Vedas commanded the envoys, saying. Do you speedily with collected minds bring hither Brāhmaṇas and Kștriyas and warriors and counsellors and generals of forces and Satrughna with the other princes, and the famous Bharata and Yuddhajit* and Sumantra and others that are engaged in our welfare. *One of the counsellors. Then there arose a mighty hubbub occasioned by people coming up in cars, horses and elephants. When Bharata arrived, the subjects rejoiced as they used to rejoice on Daſaratha's arrival; and as rejoiced the immortals on the arrival of him of an hundred sacrifices. And then the court resembling a moveless ocean containing whales and serpents,* and gems and conchs and gold-mines, being graced with the presence of Dasaratha's son, looked splendid as it formerly did with that of Dasaratha himself. *Nāga may also mean hypopotamus.