Not having seen his father in his father's quarters, Bharata went to his mother's apartment for seeing her. *The text is evidently corrupt. From the sequel it appears that Bharata has not seen the king at that time. That commentator, however, passes over the point in silence, which is to be accounted for by the slovenliness of the way of though characterising the Sanskrit commentators in general. An English commentator would have considered the matter as of very great importance, but his Hindu brother takes it quietly, and passes on with indifference. On seeing her son before her after his sojourn from home, Kaikeyi delighted, rose up from her golden seat. On entering his own quarter which he found deprived of grace, the virtuous Bharata took hold of his mother's auspicious feet. Then smelling the crown of his head and embracing him and taking that illustrious one on her lap, Kaikeyi addressed him, saying. How many days hence did you leave the residence of the revered one? Have you felt any fatigue on the way incident to the car proceeding swiftly? And is the revered one will, and your maternal uncle, Yuddhajit? And, my son, have you passed your time pleasantly during your sojourn? It behoves you to tell me all this. Thus asked that son of the king, Bharata, furnished with eyes resembling lotuses, told his mother that all was well. Seven nights hence I took leave of that revered one's residence. My mother's sire is well, as also my maternal uncle, Yuddhajit. My vehicles had got tired in consequence of bearing the wealth and jewels which that subduer of foes, the king, had bestowed on me. And it is for this reason that I have come in advance of them. Urged by the royal emissaries, I have come here so swiftly. But it behoves my mother to tell me what I wish to ask. This sleeping bedstead of yours adorned with gold is empty. I do not see the race of Ikşvāku in their usual good spirits. The king generally remains in this apartment of my mother. But coming here with the desire of seeing him, I do not today find him at this place. I would take the feet of my father. Do you tell me who ask you. Is he in the apartment of my eldest mother, Kausalya? Blinded by the lust of dominion, and looking upon that as desirable (to Bharata) which was exceedingly disagreeable (to him), Kaikeyi replied to him, who did not know what had transpired. That high-souled and energetic one ever engaged in sacrifice, the refuge of the good, your father, the king, has come by the state which pertains to all creatures. Hearing these words, Bharata of pure ways sprung from a righteous race, smite with the vehemence of sorrow on account of his father, suddenly fell down to the earth. And exclaiming in the anguish of spirit and in the excess of grief, the words, "Ah me! I am undone!" that mightyarmed one endowed with prowess, fell down, tossing about his arms. Then, overwhelmed with and distressed at the death of his father, that highly sorrow energetic one, with his senses distracted, indulged in lamentations. This bed of my father used to look like the speckless welkin at night crowned with the moon, after the clouds have gone off. But to-day, deprived of that intellignet one, it ceases to shine, like the firmament without the moon or the sea devoid of its waters. Exclaiming with tears trickling down, that foremost of victorious ones, extremely afflicted at heart, wept, muffling his graceful countenance. Seeing that one resembling a celestial fallen to the earth, stricken with sorrow, like to a bough of the Sāla that had been severed in the wood by an axe, his mother raising up he distressed son like a mad elephant or the sun or the moon, addressed him. Arise, arise. Why do you lie down, O illustrious son of the king? Persons like you having their senses under perfect control, and approved by men of culture, do not grieve. O you endo!. ed with understanding, like the halo of the Sun in the solar disc, your sense, entitled to dispensing gifts and celebrating sacrifices, ever follows morals your Śruti and asceticism. Having wept for a long while with his body rolling on the earth, Bharata afflicted with manifold grief, answered his mother, saying. The king will install Rāma and celebrate a sacrifice' concluding this for certain, I had joyfully gone from hence. But it has fallen out otherwise. That I do not behold my father ever engaged in the dear welfare (of his subjects) cleaves my heart mother. Of what ailment has the king breathed his last during my absence? Blessed are Rāma and others who have personally performed my sire's last rites. Surely the renowned monarch does not know that I have come. (If he had done so), pressing down my head, my father would at once have smelt it. Where is now the soft hand of that energetic one which used to rub my person when it was covered with dust? Do you now without delay convey the news of my arrival to the vigorous Rāma, who is at once my father, brother and friend, and whose beloved servant I am. The eldest brother of one that is noble and cognisant of morality, becomes his father. I shall take hold of his feet: he is now my refuge. And, O noble lady, what did that virtuous one cognizant of virtue, that pre-eminently pious one, firm in his vow, and having truth for prowess, even my father, say? I wish to hear news concerning us relative to the last moments of the monarch. Thus asked, Kaikeyi related all as it had happened, saying, “Bewailing 'Ah Rama!' 'Ah Sita!' “Ah Laksmana!' that magnanimous one, the foremost of those that have attained to excellent state (after death), has gone to the next world coming under the law of time. Your father like a mighty elephant fast bound with a cord, said to me these words during his last moments, "Blessed are they that shall see Rāma and the mighty-armed Lakşmaņa returned along with Sītā.” Hearing this, Bharata apprehending a second misfortune was deeply moved; and with a sad countenance, he again asked his mother. Where has gone that righteous-souled one, the enchancer of Kausalya's joy, along with Laks maņa and Sītā? Thus questioned, his mother at the same time duly said in words which although highly unwelcome, she took as agreeable to Bharata. O son, that son of the king wearing bark has repaired to the forest of Dandaka, along with Vaidehi and followed by Lakşmaņa. Hearing this, Bharata apprehending some moral lapse on the part of his brother from the dignity of his race, asked in agitation. Has Rāma deprived any Brāhmaṇa of his wealth? Or has he wronged any innocent person, whether rich or poor? Has the fancy of the prince gone after the wife of another? For what reason has brother Rāma been banished? Thereat his volatile mother, influenced by her feminine nature, related faithfully to him her own doings. Thus asked by the magnanimous Bharata, Kaikeyi vainly pluming herself on her wisdom, joyfully said. Rāma has deprived no Brāhmaṇa of his property, nor has any innocent person rich or otherwise been wronged by him, nor does he ever with his eyes look at the wife of another. O son, as soon as I heard of Råma's (coming) installation, I asked for the kingdom to be conferred on you, and Rāma to be banished. Thereupon, he, staying by his promise, did accordingly: Rāma has been banished along with Sumitrā's son and Sītā. Not seeing his beloved son, the illustrious lord of earth, stricken by grief on his account, has breathed his last. Do you now, O you cognizant of duty, take charge of the kingdom. I have done all this in your interests. Do not give way to sorrow. O son, assume patience. This city is subject to you, as well as this peaceful kingdom. Having with the help of the principal Brāhmaṇas headed by Vasiştha, duly performed the funeral obsequies of the king, do you, without suffering your energy to depart, install yourself in the kingdom.