Hearing this conversation, Laksmana, who had gone there before, with tears in his eyes and being unable to bear this terrible sorrow, took hold of his brother's feet and spoke thus to that greatly renowned Sītā and Rāghava. If you are resolved to repair to the forest filled with deer and elephants, I shall accompany you, always going before with bows in my hands. You shall range with me in that charming pare of the forest which resounds with the music of the birds and the humming of the bees. Alienated from you I do not long for the abode of the celestials, nor for eternal life, nor for the wealth of the three regions. The son of Sumitrā, who spoke thus and was determined upon going to the forest, being repeatedly requested by Rāma with consoling words to desist from his purpose, spoke to him the following words. Formerly you did order me to follow you; and why do you prevent me now from accompanying you to the forest. I want to learn, Oh sinless one, why you do prevent me now from following you. I entertain a grave doubt in this. Then the highly effulgent Rāma spoke thus to that sedate Lakşmaņa, who stood praying before him with clasped hands. You are sedate, fond of virtue, of peaceful temper, and you walk always in the paths of righteousness. I hold you dear as my life and you are obedient to me and are my friend. If you do accompany me to you forest, O son of Sumitrā, who shall serve Kausalyā and the highly renowned Sumitrā. That highly effulgent lord of earth who will satisfy the world with the fulfilment of its desires like to rain spreading in showers over the earth, is himself now shackled with desires to Kaikeyi. That daughter of Aśvapati obtaining this kingdom from the monarch, there will be no end of the miseries of these co-wives. Bharata attaining the throne and siding his mother, Kaikeyī will never think of Kausalyā or Sumitrā sore distressed with grief. Do you therefore, Oh son of Sumitrā, live here of your won accord or by the favour of the monarch, and maintain these worshipful ones. If you do act thus, it will be showing your best regard in me. O you, versed in the knowledge of religion, real virtue consists in the adoration of superiors. Do this oh son of Sumitrā, for my sake; if we all go away leaving her aside, she will not be happy in any way. Accosted thus by Rama, Laksmana, well versed in speech, spoke to him the following humble words. Being afraid of your power, O hero, Bharata shall adore. Kausalyā and Sumitrā, there is no doubt about this. If that wicked Bharata obtaining this excellent kingdom, does not maintain and take care of them, being impelled by haughtiness and wicked impulses, surely shall I kill him, that wickedminded one, though he be assisted by the entire population of the three regions. Besides that worshipful Kausalya, who has made grants of many thousand villages to her servants, can maintain thousands of people like us, and has enough to maintain herself as well as my mother. Do you therefore-permit me to follow you; there will be no breach of virtue in this, and I shall have my desires attained and your interests shall be secured. I shall go before you pointing out your course, with stringed bows, a hoe, and a basket in my hands. I shall bring for you every day various roots and fruits and other that grow in the forest and which the ascetics use in their sacrifice. You shall amuse yourself with Vaidehī on the sides of the hill, and I shall perform everything for you whether you are asleep or awake. Being extremely gratified with these words, Rāma spoke to him, saying, Do you follow me, O son of Sumitrā, obtaining permission from all your relatives. The high-souled Varuņa himself offered two terrible-looking bows of ethereal temper, two sets of weapons at the great sacrifice of the royal Janaka, namely, impenetrable mail, two quivers, two inexhaustible arrows, two swords burnished with gold and bright as the sun. These things were offered to me as bridal presents, and I have kept them at the house of my preceptor. Do you, O Lakşmaņa, paying homage to my preceptor, taking all those weapons, swiftly bring them hither. Determined upon going to the forest, Lakşmaņa, taking leave of his friends, went to the abode of the spiritual preceptor of the Ikşvākus and took from him those excellent weapons. And that best of princes, the son of Sumitrā, showed Rāma those heavenly arms worshipped and well adorned with garlands........... Seeing Laksmana arrive there, Rama, having control over his ownself, greatly pleased, spoke to him the following words. "You have arrived, O Laksmana, just when I wanted you." I want to distribute with you these my riches amongst the Brāhmaṇas and the ascetics. There are many excellent Brāhmaṇas having firm reverence in their preceptor. I want to distribute my wealth amongst them and many other personages who depend upon me for their maintenance. Bring here speedily the worshipful Suyajña, the son of Vasiştha; want to repair to the forest after duly adoring him and other excellent Brahmanas.