Having passed that night, Bharata having been entertained along with his family, appeared before Bharadvāja, desirous (of seeing Rāma). Seeing that foremost of men (standing) with joined hands, Bharadvāja, who had just finished his fire-sacrifice, said. Have you passed the night pleasantly at our place? And have all your men been pleased with our hospitality? Do you tell me this O sinless one. we Thereupon, Bharata bowing down, with joined hands said to that ascetic of excellent energy, as he had issued out of his hermitage. O reverend Sire, I along with all my forces and vehicles have passed (the night) happily. I have been full well entertained by you, o worshipful one possessed of power. And with our languor and heat removed, all sumptuously feasted and comfortably quartered, have passed (the night) agreeably along with our servants. Now, O best of ascetics, I beseech you to look with a propitious eye on me who am bound for my brother's place. And tell me, O you cognizant of morality, how far is it to that high-souled righteous one's asylm, and by what way (shall I reach there)? When Bharata eager to see his brother had asked thus, the highly energetic Bharadvāja of rigid austerities answered. O Bharata, two and a half Yojanas hence, embossed in a tenantless wood is the mountain Citrakuta, charming with rocks and woods. On its northern border flows the river Mandākinſ, covered with flowering trees and with blossoming woods. Beyond the stream is the mountain Citrakuta. There is their thatched cottage, my child; there they abide for certain. Proceeding by the southern way, do you with your forces composed of elephants and horses, O master of the army, turn to the left, O exalted one, and go southwards. By doing so, you will be able to see Rāghava. Hearing of their departure, the wives of that king of kings, leaving their cars, albeit worthy of them, gathered round the Brāhmaṇa. Lean and trembling and in woeful guise, Kausalyā along with the noble Sumitrā, with her hands took the feet of the ascetic. Depised universally because of her unrighteous desire, Kaikeyi also bashfully took hold of his feet and, having circumambulated the mighty and venerable anchoret, stood near Bharata in dejection of spirits. Then the mighty ascetic Bharadvāja asked Bharata, “O descendant of Raghu, I wish to know particularly about your mothers." Thus accosted by Bharadvāja, the pious Bharata deft in speech said with joined hands. O reverend sir, she whom you behold depressed and emaciated through grief and fasting, resembling a very goddess, is the noble Queen of my father. This one, Kausalyā, it is that gave birth to that chief of men, having the powerful gait of a lion, Rāma, even as Aditi gave birth to Dhātā. She that stands at her left hand, in dejected guise, is the noble Sumitrā afflicted with sorrow, the second wife of the monarch, like a Karņikāra bough in a forest, with all its blossoms shrivelled up. The sons of this exalted lady are the youthful and heroic Lakşmaņa and ſatrughna, having truth for their prowess, and resembling celestials in shape. And her in consequence of whose act those foremost of men have come by crushing misfortune, and the king Dasaratha has gone to heaven, deprived of his son, wrathful and proud of her good fortune, setting her heart of wealth, Kaikeyi, dishonourable, although endowed with the semblance of honour, do you know this wicked one intent on sin as my mother. In her do I perceive the root of my mighty misfortune. Having said this, with his words choked with emotion, that best of men with his eyes reddened, sighed like an enraged serpent. As Bharata was speaking thus, the great ascetic Bharadvāja gifted with high understanding and knowing interest, answered Bharata, saying. O Bharata, you ought not to cast any blame on Kaikeyī. This banishment of the king (Rāma), shall be for the good (of all). The banishment of Rāma shall surely be for the welfare of the gods and the Asuras and sages of concentrated souls. Thus blest, Bharata saluted the ascetic and went round him, and then summoning the soldiery, said, “Yoke," Thereupon, getting ready excellent steeds and cars decked with gold, many people mounted, with the intention of departing. And male and female elephants with golden chains round their necks, and furnished with banners, with the sounds (of bells), proceeded, like clouds at the end of the summer season. And then proceeded various kinds of cars great and light of movement and of high value; and the infantry went on foot. And on a magnificent car went the ladies headed by Kausalyā, with delighted hearts, eager to see Rāghava. And ascending an elegant car resembling the infant sun or moon, driven by charioteers, went the graceful Bharata well attired. And that mighty host abounding with horses and elephants proceeded, blocking up the southern quarter, like a colossal cloud arisen (in the sky), leaving behind on the other bank of the Gangā woods inhabited by birds and beasts, and coursing by rivers mountains. And composed of numbers of elephants and horses in high spirits, that army of Bharata, frightening multitudes of beasts and birds, dived into that mighty forest.