When Şītā, having a husband although seeming as if she had none, was putting on the ascetic guise, the people got into a wrath and exclaimed, “O Dasaratha, fie on you!" Aggrieved at the uproar that arose there in consequence, the lord of earth banished from his heart all regard for life, virtue, and fame. And sighing hot, that descendant of Ikşvāku spoke to that wife of his, saying, O Kaikeyi, Sītā deserves not to go in a Kuća dress. Tender, and youthful, and worthy of happiness, she is by no means capable of living in the forest. My spiritual guide has spoken the truth. Whom has this one injured that, being the daughter of the foremost of kings, she like a female ascetic, wearing a meagre garb in the presence of all, will (repair to the woods and) remain there like a beggar destitute of everything? Let Janaka's daughter leave off her ascetic guise. This is not the promise that I had made to you before. Let the princess go to the forest in comfort, furnished with all sorts of gems. My sands run out; by me has this cruel promise been made with an oath. But this (exile of Sītä) has been thought of by you through your ignorance. Let it not, however, consume you like a bamboo flower destroying the bamboo. If, O wicked woman, Rāma has happened to do you something unbeautiful, what wrong, O base wretch, has Vaidehi done you in the world? Of eyes expanded like those of a doe, endued with a mild temperament, and virtuous, what harm has Janaka's daughter done you. Surely, O nefarious one, the banishment of Ráma is enough for you. Why then do you bend your mind to perpetrate these atrocious sins? O noble dame, having heard you asking for the banishment of Rāma, who had at first been intended by me for being installed, and who came here afterwards, I had promised you (his exile alone.) But since, going beyond that promise of mine, you behold Mithala's daughter dressed in mendicant garb, surely you wish to find your way to hell. Thus commissioned to the forest, Räma who was seated sealing his lips, said. O righteous one, this my mother is aged and famous and of lofty spirit. May she not meet with improper treatment at your hands! It behoves you, O bestower of boons, to show greater honour to her when she shall be deprived of me and be plunged into a sea of grief and afflicted with unprecedented woe. O you comparable to the mighty Indra, you should so behove with my mother smitten with my separation, that exercised by grief in consequence of my residence in the forest, she may not, renouncing life, repair to the mansions of Yama.