Being consoled thus by Rāma, Maithilī, the daughter of Janaka, fearing separation, lovingly and haughtily laughed at Rāghava of spacious breast, and spoke to him, her husband, the following words with a view to follow him to the forest. What thought of you, O Rāma, my father, the king of Mithilā, accepting you as his son-in-law, who was a man if form but (in deeds)a woman? Henceforth, if people through ignorance say that the sun has not that burning flood of light which in Rāma does shine forth, woe is them, it is falsehood. Why are you so dejected and whence is your fear that you are willing to leave behind your wife who has none else but you? Know me to be perfectly under your influence like to Sāvitri, following her husband Satyavān, the son of Dyumatsen. I have not, like one bringing stigma on her line, ever in my life thought of a second person, but of you whom I must follow into the forest. Do you, like to an ordinary actor, wish to hand me over to others, who am chaste, pure as a virgin, and long held in conjugal affection? O, sinless one, do you become subservient and serviceable to him whose pleasure you bid me seek, and for whom you have suffered yourself to be impeded (in the installation). It does not behove you to repair to the forest without taking me along with you. Be it the austerity of an ascetic, the forest or heaven, with you will I be everywhere. No toil shall I suffer on the way, as if lying on a bed of luxury, while following you in they footstep. When with you, the various thorny grasses, the Kuśa, the Käsa, the Sara, and the Işika, and the thistles and brambles on the way, shall be to me in touch like to linen and deer-skin. The dust that will cover me, thrown up by the gush of wind shall be, O ravisher of my heart regarded by me as the finest sandal dust. When I shall lie down on the bed of green grass in the forest, it shall appear to me more pleasant than one covered with a coloured blanket. Fruits, roots and leaves which you will bring yourself and give me, be they great or small in quantity, shall be to me like to the ambrosiajuice. I shall never think of my father, mother, or my abode; I shall enjoy fruits and flowers growing in various seasons. You shall not witness any thing disagreeable there; for me you shall not experience any sorrow, no shall I be a burden to you; do you take me with you. O, Rāma, conceiving with pleasure that your company is a heaven to me and your absence a hell. If you do not take me to the forest which I count freed from all evils, surely I shall drink poison and never come under the influence of my enemies. When through affliction I shall not live after separation, better it is, O Lord, that I die immediately at the time of my being forsaken by you; I cannot bear this grief even for a moment. How shall I be able to live without you for fourteen years? Thus lamenting, Sītā, racked with sorrow, embraced her husband and began to cry aloud. Like to a she-elephant, she being pierced by the poisonous shafts of Rāma's words, began to shed tears, long kept off, as an Araņi wood emits fire continually. Tears caused by her sorrow and white as the crystal began to trickle down from her eyes, like to water falling in drops from lotus petals. And that beautiful face having expansive eyes and resembling the full moon in its splendour, with tears became pale and parched, like to a lotus taken out of its watery bed. Finding her almost insensible with sorrow, Rāma flung his arms round her and reviving her (with consolation) spoke the following words to her. I do not long for, Oh worshipful one, even the abode of celestials gained through your affliction; fear there is none for me like to the self-create Brahma. Not apprised of your full intention, O you of beautiful countenance, I could not, though capable of escorting you, desire your abode in the forest. When you are determined O Maithili, repair to the forest with me, I cannot leave you behind, as one possessing self-knowledge cannot renounce munificence. O you, having thighs resembling the trunks of an elephant, I shall resort to that virtue which was exercised by great and good men going before, do you follow me therefore like Suvarcalā following the Sun. I cannot but go to the forest, O daughter of Janaka, as the truthful word of my father leads me thereto. Obedience to his parents is the virtue of a son. Disobeying the command of my father I am not eager to live. we Why should with meditations and adorations worship Destiny, which is not cognizable to the worshippers, neglecting our parents, who are ever present to our senses? In the worship of the parents are fulfilled the triple object of religious pursuit, and the adoration of the three regions, there is nothing equal to it, conducing to purity; so do I, O you of excellent-look , resort to it. Truth, almsgiving, honour, and sacrifices with profuse gifts are not so strengthening (in life to come) as the service rendered to the parents. Heaven, wealth, grains, learning, son, and happiness, nothing remains inaccessible to us. Great souls following the desires, and resorting to the service of their parents, get at the abodes of celestials, Gandharvas, the seats of Brahma and Vişnu, and other excellent regions. Therefore do I desire to follow what my father commands me, treading in the path of truth, and this is the virtue eternal. My resolution of not taking you, O Sītā, to the forest of Dandaka is now rent asunder, as you have prepared yourself to live in the forest and follow me. Permitted by me, O fair one of exquisite beauty, to repair to the forest, do you follow me, O you timid one, and be the partner of my righteousness. Your determination to follow me, O beautiful one, is very excellent and is in perfect keeping with myself and my family. Do you address yourself to repairing to the forest, for without this now even heaven itself does not please me. Do you give away jewels to the Brāhmaṇas and edibles to the beggars longing for them, and make haste without delay. Confer upon the Brāhmaṇas, valuable ornaments, excellent clothes, pleasant toys, beds, conveyances and other fine things in your possession and then what remains do you distribute amongst the servants. Convinced that her going to the forest was desired by her husband, Sītā began to distribute them speedily with a delighted heart.