On Rāma having gone to the forest, my horses as I turned away, did not proceed vigorously on the way, and shed warm tears. And having (done homage) to both the princes by joining my hands, I turned my back, bearing as best I could that load of sorrow. Indulging in the hope that Rāma might again summon me by any of the envoys (of Guha left there), I stayed there with Guha for many days. In your dominions, O monarch, exercised by the calamity that has befallen Rāma, even trees bearing blossoms and buds and sprouts look sad; the rivers and pools and liquid lapses have their waters dried up; and the woods and groves have their foliage withered. Creatures do not move and beasts of prey cease to range about; and the forest appears to be dumb, stupefied by grief on account of Rāma. Streams containing lotuses with their leaves shrivelled, have their waters stained; and lotuses have their leaves burnt; and fished and (aquatic) birds have grown lean. And flowers both on land and water have been deprived of their freshness and fragrance; and they no longer retain their former condition. The gardens are idle with their birds drooping. And, O best of men, I do not find the bowers beautiful (as before). When I entered Ayodhyā, none greeted me. And not seeing Rāma, the people sigh momentarily. And, O revered one, seeing the royal car returned hither without Rāma, the people on the highways from grief appear with tearful countenance. And from mansions, cars, and lordly edifices, ladies seeing the car come back, set up a chorus of 'Ah' and 'Alas,' afflicted with the absence of Rama. And becoming more distressed that ever, the fair sex with their expansive and clear eyes filled with tears, began to eye each other indistinctly. And in consequence of the general grief that prevailed, I could not perceive any difference between friends and foes and persons indifferent. O mighty monarch, distressed in consequence of the exile of Rāma, men appear sunk in dejection, and elephants and horses are spiritless; and seized with cheerlessness, they utter doleful sounds and heave profound sighs. Ayodhyā appears to me joyless like Kausalyă deprived of her son. Hearing the words of the charioteer, the king like an exceedingly forlorn, addressed the former in words lost in the vapour of sorrow. Exhorted by Kaikeyi of a sinful country, born in a sinful race and cherishing sinful designs, I did not take counsel with aged people capable of offering advice. Without consulting with friends or courtiers or persons versed in the Vedas, I have in the interest of a woman rashly done this thing through ignorance. Meseems, O charioteer, for the purpose of destroying this line entirely, this mighty disaster has surely befallen us through the influence of Destiny. O charioteer, if I have ever done you any good do you immediately take me to Rāma: my life urges me on (in this direction). Or let my command make Rāghava turn back. I cannot live for a moment without Rāma. But if that mighty-armed one has proceeded far, do you placing me on a car speedily show me to Rāma. Where is that elder brother of Lakşmaņa of a mighty bow, furnished with teeth resembling Kunda flowers? If I live so long, I will behold him in company with Sītā. What can be sadder than this, that reduced to such a pass, I cannot see here that descendant of Ikşvāku, Rāghava? Ah Rāma! Ah you younger brother of Rāma! Ah you unfortunate Vaidehī! You do not know that I am through grief lamenting like one deserted. Deprived of his consciousness through that sorrow of his, the king said. I have plunged myself into this ocean of woe hard to cross, with grief for Rāma as its mighty tide; separation from Sītā, its other shore; sighs heaved, its furious billows and whirlpools; tears, rivers that rush into it; tossing of the arms, its fishes; lamentations it roar; my hair flung about, its moss; Kaikeyi, its submarine fire; my fastflowing tears, its current; the words of the humpbacked one, its terrific ravenous animals; the boon, its continents; and the exile of Rama, its expanse. And, O Kausalyā, without Rāghava, I shall sink in this ocean. O exalted dame, living, it is hard for me to cross over this ocean. It is surely owing to my sin that to-day wishing to behold Rāghava and Lakşmaņa, I do not get them (before me). Having thus lamented, the illustrious king all of a sudden dropped to the earth in a swoon. On the king swooning away lamenting, that exalted lady, Rāma's mother, hearing his words doubly bitter and more piteous than ever uttered for Rāma, was seized with fresh apprehension. On the king swooning away lamenting, that exalted lady, Rāma's mother, hearing his words doubly bitter and more piteous than ever uttered for Rāma, was seized with fresh apprehension.