As for the purpose of protecting his brother, Lakṣmaṇa was watching him out of sincere affection, Guha burning in grief addressed that descendant of Raghu, saying. This O child, is the easeful bed that has been prepared for you. O prince, do you as you listen, lie down upon it. These (foresters) are inured to this hardship; but you are worthy of ease. We will wake up during the night for guarding Kākutstha. There is none on earth dearer to me than Răma. This I tell you truly and I swear by truth itself. Through his grace I hope in this world to attain high fame, and great religious merit as well as completely secure profit and pleasure. I will bow in hand in company with my kindred adequately guard my dear friend reposing with Sītā. Always ranging in this forest, nothing herein is unknown to me. I shall vanquish even any mighty body of fourfold forces (that may come up against us.) Thereupon Laksmana said, O sinless one, protected by you ever having your sight fixed on virtue, we do not fear to live in this place. But how with Dasaratha's son lying down on the ground along with Sītă can I indulge in sleep or what is the use of my living and enjoying happiness? Him do you behold with ease asleep on the grass in company with Sītā, who was incapable of being borne in fight by the gods and the Asuras, and who obtained through Mantras and austerities and various endeavours, Dasaratha crowned with every auspicious mark, is the most meritorious son of the king. Rāma being banished, the king will not live long and the earth will shortly be widowed. Having bewailed aloud, the women have, methinks, (by this time) ceased through fatigue, and the king's residence is still. I can not hope that Kausalyā, the king, and my mother (Sumitrā) all those are yet alive. If they are, it is for this night only. Even if my mother live looking up to Satrughna, yet this is my grief that that mother of a hero, Kausalyā will breathe her last. And that palace filled with people attached to Rāma and flooded with the light of delight, will, visited with the calamity that will befall the king meet with destruction. How will the life of that high-souled king not seeing his magnanimous son, his eldest son, remain in this body? When the king is dead, Kausalyā will die after him and then my mother will depart this life. Frustrated in his desire, my father, foiled in his endeavours to confer the kingdom on Rāma, will, exclaiming 'All is lost,' 'All is lost,' give up the ghost. Surely they are blessed that when the time shall come when the king will die, will perform the funeral rites of that descendant of Raghu. They will happily range the capital of my father, furnished with fair looking terraces, with its highways laid out orderly, having lordly edifices and palatial residences, graced with excellent courtezans, abounding with cars, elephants and horses, resounding with the notes of trumpets, the abode of all auspiciousness, filled with portly and contented folks, rich in gardens and villas, and celebrating popular festivites. If Dasaratha live we shall returning from the forest, behold that high-souled one observing noble vows. If we remain in peace, we shall returning from the forest with that one firm in promise, enter Ayodhyā? As the high-souled son of the king oppressed with grief was thus lamenting sitting up, the day broke. When that son of the foremost of men, intent on the welfare of the subjects had spoken thus truly, Guha, out of extreme affection for (Rāma), shed tears afflicted with grief and hurt like an elephant suffering from fever.