Thus harshly addressed by the indignant mother of Rāma, the king aggrieved was plunged in thought. Having thought for a long while, that repressor of foes, the king, who had lost his senses through grief, regained consciousness. Having regained his senses, he sighing hot and hard, seeing Kausalyā beside him, was again lost in thought. As he was thinking, the sinful act which he had through ignorance formerly committed by means of the shaft which hits by sounds, rose up in his recollection, Afflicted with this grief as well as that on account of Rāma, that lord, the king, burned in these two several griefs. Burning in grief and distressed, he trembling and with joined hands, with his head hanging down, addressed Kausalyā, with the view of pacifying her. I deprecate your displeasure. O Kausalyä with joined hands. You are ever affectionate and did not treat harshly even enemies. Verily to women cognizant of virtue, a husband, whether he has any merits or not, is a very deity. Ever virtuous, you, that have seen both the virtuous and the vicious, although aggrieved, ought not to say anything unpleasant to me who am weighed down with woe. Having heard these piteous words of the distressed king, Kausalyā uttered words even as a water-way lets out fresh accession of rain. And weeping, she drew on her head the joined hands of the king resembling lotuses; and then flurried spoke these words hurriedly informed with extreme affection. Be you propitious; I beseech with (bended) head. I bow to you, falling on the ground. O reverend one, besought by you, I shall be undone. I do not deserve to be forgiven by you. She cannot be reckoned a gentlewoman, who is propitiated by her intelligent husband, worthy of being extolled in both worlds. I know duty, O righteous one; I know that you are truth-telling. And it is because I was exceedingly distressed on account of my son that I spoke harshly to you. Sorrow destroys patience, sorrow destroys knowledge of the scriptures, sorrow destroys every things; there is no enemy like to sorrow. One can falling down bear ever beating from an enemy; but one cannot falling down bear ever so little sorrow. This is the fifth night of the banishment of Rāma, as calculated by me; and to me rendered cheerless by sorrow, this interval has assumed the proportions of five years. And fostered by thought on my part, this grief increases in my bosom, like the mighty waters of the ocean increased by the vehement discharge of rivers. As Kausalyā was thus speaking auspiciously, the rays of the sun grew milder, and the night arrived. Cheered up by the words of Kausalya, the king overcome by grief, felt the influence of sleep.