Having spent the night there on the banks of the Gangā, that descendant of Raghu rising early in the morning, said these words to Satrughna. O Śatrughna, arise! Why sleepest you? Bring you at once that lord of the Nisādhas, Guha, Good betide you! he will take the army (over the stream.) Thus urged by his brother, Śatrughna said, "Thinking of that noble one (Rāma), I have not slept, but have remained awake in a like manner. *i.e., as you have done. As those chiefs of men were thus conversing with each other, Guha appearing in time with joined hands, remarked. O Kākutstha, have you spent the night happily on the banks of the river? And is it continuous good fortune with you along with your forces? Hearing Guha's speech fraught with affection, Bharata ever obedient to Rāma, spoke on his pare, saying. "Happily have we spent the night; and we have also been well received by you. Now let your servants take us over by means of many boats." Thereat, hearing Bharata's mandate, Guha, bestirring himself, re-entered the city and addressed his kinsfolk, saying. Arise you! Awake! May good always attend you! Do you draw up the boats; I shall ferry the forces over. Thus asked, they arising and bestirring themselves in consequence of the king's command, brought up five hundred boats around. Others also known by the name of Swastika, bearing large bells on their prows, and banners, well decked out, furnished with oars, and manned by bargemen, with their joints firmly constructed, (were brought up). And Guha himself brought a graceful barge called Swastika, covered with pale woollen cloth, and resounding with music. On this boat ascended Bharata, the mighty Śatrughna, Kausalyā, Sumitrā, and other wives of the king. The priests, and preceptors belonging to the Brāhmaṇa order, has already ascended. After (Bharata and others had got up), ascended the wives of auxiliary princes, and cars and provisions were got on board. And the uproar consequent of the troops burning down dwellings, pressing down descents to the river, and loading goods, spread on all sides. Then those boats hung with pennons, managed by the kinsfolk (of Guha), set off at speed with the teeming folks that had got on board. And some of these were filled with women, and some with horses, and some conveyed cars and cattle of great value. And going to the other bank and landing the crowds on the shore, the friends and slaves (of Guha) while returning, movements (of the boats). And elephants graced with flags ing spurred on by their riders, began to cross the stream, appearing like (so many) winged hills. Others ascended boats, and others crossed on rafts, others crossed by means of reversed pitchers, and others by their arms alone. Ferried over the Gangā by the servants (of Guha), that beautiful army graced with streamers, at the third Muhurta arrived at the romantic woods of Prayāga. Having made the army take rest at its ease, and encamped it (at the woods of Prayāga), that magnanimous one, Bharata, for the purpose of seeing the asylum of the ascetic Bharadvāja, went thither, accompanied by Rtvijas and Sadasyas (members).