Observing the meeting of the two brothers of unparalleled energy, capable of making one's hair stand on end, the Maharsis struck with surprise came to the scene. And remaining invisible, the ascetics, Siddhas and prime saints admired those brothers, the virtuous Käkutsthas. Blessed is he whose sons these, two cognizant of virtue and having truth for prowess are. Having heard their converse, we are delighted. Then the saints, desirous of the destruction of the ten-headed one, having become unanimous, speedily addressed that foremost of monarchs, Bharata, saying. Born in an illustrious line, endued with high wisdom, of high character and high fame, you should accept Rāma's words, in you have a care for the happiness of your sire. We wish that Rāma may always act truthfully in respect of his father. By virtue of this truth connected with Kaikeyi, Dasaratha has gone to heaven. Having said this, the Gandharvas, Maharsis, and Rājarșis each went to his proper quarter. Having paid homage to those saints, Rāma possessed of a gracious presence, hearing their words, was filled with joy, and looked lovely with his delightful countenance. But with his frame agitated (with emotion), Bharata with joined hands again addressed Rāghava in words faltering (with feeling). O Rāma, taking into account the morality of this race, it behoves you to act in accordance with the solicitations of my mother (and yours). I do not venture to govern this vast kingdom alone, or please the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces attached to you. And as husbandmen remain expecting rain, our kindred, and warriors and friends and adherents wait in expectation of you. O exceedingly wise one, accepting the kingdom, do you place it in the hands of some person. O Kākutstha, whomsoever you will chose for performing this office, will surely prove strong enough to govern the people. Having said this, Bharata fell at his brother's feet; and sweetly addressing him, O Rāghava, solicited him once again. Taking on his lap that sable-hued on furnished with eyes resembling lotus-leaves, Rāma with a voice like that of a mad swan, spoke to (Bharata). You have at length attained the mental attitude that is natural and that also comes of the training one receives at the hands of his preceptor. And brother you venture greatly to protect the earth. Taking counsel with courtiers, adherents and intelligent ministers, do you achieve grand tasks. Even if beauty forsake the moon, or Himavat his snow, or the ocean overleaps its shores, I shall not forsake the promise of my sire. My brother, you ought not to cherish in your mind what your mother incited by covetousness or affection for you has done; and you should act by her as one should by one's mother. When Rāma resembling the sun in energy and like the moon of Pratipat in appearance, had said this, Bharata said to the son of Kausalya. O noble one, do you take off your feet your sandals adorned with gold. These shall protect what the people have got and secure to you what they lack. Thereupon taking off his sandals, that highly energetic one gave them to the magnanimous Bharata. Bharata, bowing down to the sandals, said, O hero, for, four and ten years shall I, wearing matted locks and bark, and subsisting upon fruits and roots, O scion of the Raghu race, expecting your arrival, remain outside the city, having, O subduer of foes, made over the task of government to your sandals. O foremost of Raghus, if after the completion of the fourteen year, I do not see you, I shall enter into fire. Promising, “So be it,” and affectionately embracing Bharata, and also embracing Śatrughna, Rāma said, Do you protect your mother Kaikeyi. Do not be angry with her. Both Jānaki and I conjure you to do this, O descendant of Raghu. Having said this, he forsook his brother, with tears in his eyes. Then accepting those burnished and garnished sandals, Bharata versed in morality circumabulated Rāghava, and placed the sandals on the head of an excellent elephant. Then having one by one honoured that assembly, and his preceptor and the counsellors, and the subjects and his younger brothers, perpetuator of the Raghu race, steady in his own duty like. Himavat itself, took leave of them. His mothers with their throats invaded by the vapour of grief could not from distress of heart say ought to him. And Rāma also having paid homage to all of them, weeping entered his own cottage.