The people, who yarned after Rāma having truth for prowess, followed him repairing to the forest. Even when the king in the interests of his son had with much ado restrained himself, these, following Răma's car, did not desist. That illustrious one crowned with every perfection was dear to the inhabitants of Ayodhyā like to the full moon himself. Although besought by the subjects, the truthful Käkutstha having pledged his word to his father, kept on going to the forest. And affectionately eyeing them as if drinking them with his sight, Rāma touchingly addressed those subjects as if they were his own, The love and regard which the inhabitants of Ayodhyā have for me, let them, for pleasing me, extend in full measure towards Bharata. That enhancer of Kaikeyi's delight bearing an auspicious character, will duly compass your happiness and welfare. Aged by virtue of his wisdom, although young in years, and mild albeit furnished with heroic virtue, that remover of fear will make a fit ruler for you. son Crowned with every regal virtue and selected as the heir-apparent (by the monarch), he is more meritorious by far than I am. I behove you to obey the order of your master. And seeking my good, it beloves you to act so that when I shall have gone to the forest, the king may not grieve. But as Daśaratha's son was bringing home to the people that their duty lay in obeying the royal Mandata, they desried that even Rāma should rule them. Rāma in company with Sumitrā's attracted the inhabitants of the city subdued by his virtues, who stood with tears in their eyes. The three kinds of the twice-born ones, viz., those old by virtue, respectively, of age, wisdom, and ascetic energy, the old folks with their heads shaking through length of years, cried from a distance. O you fleet coursers boasting of exalted extraction that bear Rāma away, do you desist, do not go; do you do even what is for the good of your master. And more pareicularly being creatures furnished with ears, do you, your horses, knowing our prayer, desist. Pure of spirit and heroic and ever firm in noble promises, that master of yours should in justice be carried (to the city) and not to the forest away from it. Suddenly seeing those old Brāhmaṇas thus lamenting distressfully, Rāma speedily descended from his car. Along with Lakşmaņa and Sitā, Rāma bound for the forest, began to walk near them on foot. Endowed with kindness, that friend of the good, Rāma, could not by proceeding on his car bear to pare with the Brāhmaṇas that were following on foot. Seeing him thus going, the Brāhamaņas with agitated hearts, and burning in grief, addressed Rāma in these words. The Brāhmaṇas in a body are following you ever seeking their good, and mounting on the shoulders of the regenerate ones, the (sacrificial) Fires are walking in your wake. And behold these raised umbrellas of ours got from the Vājapeya sacrifice, that like to autumnal clouds follow at your back. With these umbrellas got at the Vājapeya sacrifice, we will afford shade to Rāma destitute of his own white umbrella, when he shall feel the heat of the (solar) rays. That intelligence of ours which ever follows the Vedic Mantras, is now, O child, ready to follow you to the forest in your interests. That best of treasurers, the Vedas, resides in our bosoms; and our wives protected by their chastity shall abide in our homes. As we have already made up our minds to follow you, it is useless to fix our hearts afresh. But if you overlooks virtues, what becomes of abiding by righteousness?* *Another reading is; What becomes of the virtue that we expect at your hands? O you that are ever firm in virtue, we beseech you by humbling to the dust our heads covered with hair white-hued like cranes, do you desist. These numerous Brāhmaṇas that have come hither have entered upon many a sacrifice. The completion of these, O child, depends upon your return. All creatures mobile and immobile cherish you with high regard. All these beseech you. Do you show consideration to those that regard you. Tall trees deprived of motion in consequence of being fast rooted to the earth and incapable of following you, are prohibiting you by sounding with the wind. And birds staying upon trees and neither manifesting any motion nor seeking for their food, beseech you to have compassion upon all creatures. While the Brāhmaṇas were loudly demanding the return of Rāma, he found the darkness to descend as if forbidding him. Then Sumantra unyoked the fatigued horses from the car, which at once fell to rolling in the dust. And then bathing and making them drink, he soon as the dusk set in, set fare before them.