Having spent the night there, those princes, repressors of their foes, after paying their obeisance to the Maharși, set out for the mountain. Seeing them about to set forth, that Maharși performed a propitiatory ceremony for them, even as a father does on behalf of the sons begot from his own loins. And that mighty ascetic, Bharadvāja having truth for his prowess, addressed them, saying. O best of men, do you coming to the confluence of the Gangā and the Yamunā proceed along the Kalindi river flowing westwards. Arriving at the Kalindi running in a contrary direction, you will, O Rāghava, behold a goodly bathing place well-worn by foot-passengers. There constructing a raft, do you cross over the river who is the daughter of the Sun. Next coming to a gigantic banian tree with green foliage, named śyāma, surrounded by various trees and inhabited by ascetics of accomplished purposes, let Şītā with joined hands offer humble supplications to it. Having come to the tree and, whether staying under it or proceeding along, after passing only a Krosa, you will, O Rama, see a wood abounding in Sallakis, Badaris, and other wild trees belonging to the Yamuna. I went to Citrakuța many a time by that road, which is beautiful, sandy, and free from forestfire. Having directed the way, the Maharsi paused. Thereupon Rāma, saying, “So be it," asked him to stop. On the ascetic turning away, Rāma spoke to Lakṣmaṇa, “We had surely acquired religious merit, good betide you, since, the ascetic has shown compassion to us. Having thus conversed with each other, those foremost of men endowed with intelligence, place Sītā in their front, proceeded towards the rive Kalindi. Having arrived at the Kālindī of rapid currents, they desirous of crossing over, began to think (as to the means). Then with heaps of dry wild wood covered with grass, they constructed a large raft. And the puissant Lakşmaņa tearing twigs from the ratan and the rose-apple, made a comfortable seat for Sita. Then Dasaratha's son, Rāma, made his bashful wife (in power) inconceivable like to Śrī herself, ascend the raft, and carefully laid beside Vaidehī her attires and ornaments as well as the hoe and the basket. And first having placed Sītā on the raft, those sons of Daśaratha ascended themselves, and with glad heares began carefully to cross (the stream).. Having come near the middle of the Kalindi, Sītā prayed to her, saying, 'Hail to you, O goddess! I cross you. If my husband can successfully perform his vow, I will worship you with a thousand cows and an hundred vessels of wine, hail to you, upon Rāma's return to the city ruled by Ikşvāki Having thus prayed to Kālindī with joined hands, that virtuous lady, Sītā, reached the southern bank thereof. And by means of that raft they crossed that fleet-coursing daughter of the Sun, heaving with billows, the river Yamunā with her banks abounding with innumerable trees. Then renouncing the raft, and passing by the woods adjoining the Yamunā, they came upon a banian Syāma by name, of cool shade and verdant foliage. On coming to the banian, Vaidehī saluted it saying, “O mighty tree, I bow to you. May my husband fulfil his vow; and may we behold Kausalyā and the illustrious Sumitrā.” Having thus prayed with joined hands, the intelligent Sītā went away. Seeing the blameless and beloved Sītā ever conducting herself properly, praying, Rāma said to Laksmana. Do you, O younger brother of Bharata, taking Sītā with you, go forward. O best of men, furnished with weapons, I will go in your wake. Do you procure Vaidehī with whatever fruits or flowers may please 'her and she may wish to have. Seeing every tree and shrub crowned with blossoms unseen before, that one belonging to the softer see questioned Rāma about it. And hearing Sita's words, Laksmana brought to her (fruits and flowers) of beautiful and flower-scattering trees of divers kinds. And beholding streams with water flowing over glittering sands and resounding with cranes of various kinds, the daughter of king Janaka felt exceeding delight. And having proceeded just a Krosa, those brothers, Rāma and Lakşmaņa, having killed many a sacred deer, began to range in the woods of the Yarnunā. And having disported in the beautiful woods resounding with multitudes of peacocks and inhabited by elephants and monkeys, they looking as lively as ever, coming to the level banks of the river, took up their quarters there.