Knowing that Rāma was wroth, Vasiştha said, Jābāli knows the departure of the creature to the next world and their return thence. Anxious of making the turn back, he had spoken thus. Do you now, O lord of the world, learn the genesis of creatures from me. Water was everywhere. The earth was constructed therein. Then sprang the self-create Brahmā along with all the celestials. Having become a boar, he raised up the earth, and along with his sons of subdued souls created everything. Brahma eternal, existing through all time and incapable of decay, sprang from the sky. From him Marici came into being, and Kaśyapa is Marici's son. Vivasvat drew his birth from Kaśyapa, and Manu from Vivasvat. Manu was formerly known as Prajāpati. Ikṣvāku is son to Manu; and this world was first conferred upon Ikşvāku by Manu. Do you know Ikşvāku as the first kind in Ayodhyā. The graceful Kukşi is known as the son of Iksvāku. And, O hero, Kuksi's son was Vikuksi. Vikukși had the powerful Bāņa possessed of exceeding energy for his son. Bāna had the mighty-armed Anaranya of high austerities for his son. During the time of that foremost of righteous person, the monarch Anaranya, drought or famine did not occur (in Ayodhyā); nor were there any thieves at that time. O mighty king, from Anaranya sprang king Pșthu. From Pệthu sprang Trišanku of mighty energy. This hero by virtue of his truth telling went to heaven in person. Trisanku had the famous Dhundhumāra for his son; and from Dhundhumāra Yuvanāśva born. Yuvanāśva's son was the handsome Māndhătā; was and from Māndhātā Susandhi came into being. Susandhi had two sons; Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit. Dhruvasandhi had the illustrious Bharata, destroyer of foes (for his son) From Bharata sprang Asita, to whom sprang these hostile kings as foes, Haihayas, Tālajanghas and Sasabindus, heroes all. Having engaged with them in battle, the king was excited (by them). And on the romantic Himavat, he become engaged in asceticism. It is said that at the time, his two wives were gone with child. There one of the exalted ladies having eyes resembling lotus petals saluted Bhrgu's son furnished with the splendour of a celestial, desirous of having an excellent son. Another administered poison to the other for destroying her foetus. Bhrgu's son named Cyavana was at that time staying in Himavat. Appearing before the sage, Kalindi saluted him. Thereupon he returned the greeting that had been made by that lady anxious to secure a boon for the birth of a son. You, shall, O lady get a son of mighty soul, who shall be celebrated among men; and who shall be pious and powerful, the perpetuator of his race and destroyer of enemies Hearing this, that noble lady having gone round him and paid in respect to the ascetic went to her home and gave birth to a son furnished with eyes resembling lotus petals, and of sheen like that of the inside of a lotus. And because her co-wife, had given her poison for destroying her foetus, and as in consequence of this, he had come in contact with poison, he came to be allied Sagara. The name of that king is Sagara, who having been initiated in a sacrifice excavated the ocean, frightening the people with the vehemence of his operations. Asamañja is known to have been the son of Sagara. This wicked man while yet in life, was banished by his father. Asamanja's son was the puissant Ansumat. Dilipa is the son of Ansumat and Dilipa's son is Bhagiratha. From Bhagiratha sprang Kakutstha; from whom the Kākutsthas came to be well known. Kakutstha had Raghu for his son; after whom have been named the Rāghavas. Raghu's son is the energetic Pravědha, who are human beings. He is known on earth under such names as Kalmāşapāda, Saudāsa. We have heard that Kalmāșapāda's son was Śarkhaņa, who having been endowed with prowess, found destruction along with his forces. Sarkhana's son was the beautiful and heroic Sudarśana. Sudarśana's son was Agnivarṇa and Agnivarna's, Sighraga. Śighraga's son was Maru, and Maru's Praśuśruva. Praśuśruva's son the magnanimous Ambarisa. Ambarīşa's son was Nahuşa having truth for his prowess. Nahușa's son was the exceedingly virtuous Nābhaga. Nābhāga had two sons, Aja and Suvrata. Aja's son was the virtuous king Dasaratha. His eldest son are you celebrated under the name of Rāma. Do you receive your own kingdom and look after the world. Among the Ikșwākus, the first born becomes the sovereign. The first born existing, an inferior son cannot be installed in the kingdom. It therefore does not today behove you to depart from the ever existing morality of the descendants of Raghu. Do you rule this earth filled with gems, and furnished with high fame, do you like to a father govern her containing many kingdoms.