Having passed the auspicious night underneath that might tree, they, when the sun had risen in unclouded splendour, went away from that place. Then dividing into a mighty forest, they proceeded in the direction in which the Bhāgirathi Gangå meets with the Yamunā. Those illustrious ones went on, viewing at intervals various fields and delightful lands which they had never seen before. And going on beholding various kinds of blossoming trees, Rāma when the day had declined, spoke to Sumitrā's son saying. O son of Sumitrā, do you behold the beautiful wreath of smoke that rises in front of Prayāga, sign of the worshipful Fire, and I infer some ascetic to be near. For certain we have arrived at the confluence of the Gangā and the Yamunā; and it is for this that we hear the roar of the waters produced by the rushing of them. All these various trees with their wood hewn away by foresters are seen in the asylums. Thus having proceeded at ease, you bowmen when the sun stood aslant, arrived in the vicinity of the ascetic's residence on the delta of the Yamunā and the Gangā. Proceeding awhile on the way, Rāma, in presence of the asylum, came up to Bharadvāja's place, frightening beasts and birds. Arriving at the hermitage, the heroes desirous of seeing the ascetic, stood at a distance with Sītā behind them. And as soon as entering in, that exalted one saw that high-souled anchoret of accomplished vows, who had attained spiritual insight through austerities, sitting surrounded by his disciples after having finished the Agnihotra, Rāma with joined hands saluted him along with Sumitra's son and Sita. Then Lakşmaņa's elder brother imparted to Bharadvāja a knowledge of himself. “O worshipful one, we are the sons of Dasaratha, Rama and Laksmana. This is my wife, the auspicious daughter of Janaka. This blameless one follows me to the solitary forest; and my dear younger brother, the son of Sumitrā too, observing the vow, follows me, who have been exiled by my father, O revered one, commissioned by my father, I will enter the forest of asceticism, and there subsisting on fruits and roots will practise virtue. Hearing those words of the intelligent prince, that righteous (ascetic) brought a bull* as well as Arghya and water and divers kinds of edibles consisting of wild fruits and roots. *When an eminent guest came to a person's house, as he offered madhuparka, with a bull which was killed for his entertainment And that one of fiery austerities assigned quarters, along with beasts and birds as well as ascetics, for Rāma. Then paying homage to Rāma he proceeded by short stages, and asking him, Has your journey been a pleasant one?, the ascetic sat down. And when Rāghava had sat down after receiving the homage, Bharadvāja spoke to him these words fraught with virtue. O Kākutstha, I behold you come after a long time. I have heard of your causeless exile. This spot at the meeting of the mighty rivers is lonely, sacred and charming. Do you dwell here happily. Thus addressed by Bharadvāja, that descendant of Raghu, Rāma intent on the welfare of all, answered in auspicious words. O reverend one, I apprehend that, living hard by, the inhabitants of the city and the provinces, thinking me as easily to be seen, will come to this asylum desirous of beholding me and Vaidehī. It is for this reason that living at this place does not recommended itself to me. Do you, O worshipful one, hit upon a retired and agreeable asylum where Janaka's daughter worthy of happiness, will pass her days pleasantly. Hearing this auspicious speech of Rāghava, that eminent anchoret Bharadvāja said these words calculated to serve Rāma's purpose. Ten Krosas hence, my child, is the mountain where you shall dwell. it is inhabited by maharsis, and is sacred, and picturesque throughout, abounding in Golāngulas, monkeys, and bears, known by the name of Citrakuta, resembling Gandhamädana. On beholding the peaks of Citrakuța, one reaps welfare, and ignorance does not envelope one's mind. There innumerable saints with the hair of their heads rendered white like skulls, having spent hundreds of years, have through austerities ascended heaven. That solitary spot I deem as one which will make a happy residence for you. O Rāma, do you, for living out the term of your banishment, dwell either here or with me. Bharadvāja entertained his welcome guest, Rāma, along with his wife and brother by extending towards them every rite of hospitality. At Prayāga Rāma having obtained the company of that Maharși, and discoursing on a variety of sacred topics, the night came on. And with Sītā for the third, Kåkutstha brought up in luxury, being fatigued, pleasantly spent that night at the romantic hermitage of Bharadvāja. When the night had passed away and day dawned, (Rāma) approached Bharadvāja, and that chief of men addressed that ascetic of flaming energy. O reverend sire of truthful character, we have here in your asylum spent the night. Do you now permit us to set forward (for Citrakuta). On Rāma having passed the night there, Bharadvāja spoke to him, “Do you race your steps to Citrakuța filled with delicious fruits and roots. I deem that, О mighty Rāma, as a fit abode for you, being, as it is, furnished with various kinds of trees, inhabited by crowds of Kinnars, resounding with the cries of peacocks, and frequented by gigantic elephants. Do you repair to the famed Citrakuţa, holy, fair to the view, and abounding in countless fruits and roots. And in those forests range herds of elephants and deer; and these, O Rāghava, you will behold. And ranging with Sītā rivers and rills and plateau's, caverns and fountains, your mind will experience delight. Delighted with the notes of joyous Koyastivas and coels, and the cries of deer and coundess mad elephants, do you, arriving at the auspicious mountain, reside at the romantic asylum.