Having thus addressed Rāma, the royal priest Vasiștha again spoke to him words fraught with righteousness, saying. To a man born there are three superiors, viz, the preceptor, O Kakutstha, and father and mother, O Raghava. Oforemost of men, the father begets a person, the preceptor imparts wisdom and therefore is he called a superior. I, O subduer of foes, have been the preceptor of both yourself and your father. By doing what I say, you will not lose the state of the righteous. These courtiers of yours, these relatives, and these kings;, by protecting them virtuously you will not lose the state of the righteous. It does not behove you to disregard the words of your aged and virtuous mother. By doing her bidding you will not lose the state of the righteous. O Rāghava, by acting as Bharata, who is soliciting you, says, you having the morality of truth for your prowess, will not be frustrated of the state of the pious. Thus sweetly addressed by his preceptor personally, that foremost of men, Rāghava, replied to Vasistha, seated with him, saying. What his father and mother always do in behalf of their son, and what they effect by way of provision and sleep and clothing and constant sweet speech, and sport, is difficult of being repaid. Therefore, what my father, king Dasaratha has commanded me to do, must not be falsified. Rāma having said this, the broad-breasted Bharata, extremely depressed spoke to the charioteer who was by, saying. O charioteer, do you speedily spread Kuša on the ground here. I will remain near the noble one until he be kindly disposed (towards me). Even as a twice born one deprived of his wealth Leith down (at the door of an unrighteous person), eschewing food and in darkness, will I lie down in front of this cottage, until he betakes himself back (to Ayodhyā) Then with a dispirited heart finding Sumantra looking up to Rāma, Bharata himself spread Kuśa and lay down upon it. To him spoke that foremost of Rājarşis, the highly energetic Rāma, O Bharata, my dear brother, what have I done that you have down by me? It is a Brāhmaṇa who alone can obstruct a person by lying down beside him; but there is no rule by which a member of the military class* can lie down (in this wise). *Murdhabhisikta, Murdha, the head; Abhisikta, sprinkled; kings being consecrated by having poured on their heads, while seated on a throne, prepared for the purpose, water from some sacred stream, mixed with honey, clarified butter, and spirituous liquor, as well as two sorts of grass and sprouts of corn; the term applies to the Kșetriya as identified with the king, the duties of royalty belonging specially to the military caste. O best of men, arise, renouncing this difficult vow; and, O descendant of Raghu, do you from hence take yourself to that best of cities, Ayodhyā, Being seated, Bharata, eyeing the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces, remarked, What for do you not solicit the noble one? Thereupon the citizens and the dwellers of the provinces answered that high-souled one, saying, We perceive that the descendant of Raghu says to Kākutstha what is fit; and this exceedingly virtuous one stay by the words of his sire. Therefore we are incapable of suddenly saying anything. Hearing their speech, Rāma said, “Listen to the words of these friends having morality for their vision." And, O scion of the Raghu race, hearing their utterances as regards both yourself and me, do you decide. Arise, you mighty-armed one. Touch me and then water. Thereat arising, Bharata, having touched water, said, You courtiers, and you ministers, listen to me! I did not wish for my paternal kingdom; nor did I sway my mother (towards obtaining the same); nor did I know that the exceedingly righteous Rāghava was to seek the woods. But if he must dwell here, and thus act out the mandate of our father, I also will abide in the forest for fourteen years. Astonished at the determination of Bharata, the righteous Rāma eyeing the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces, said. Neither Bharata nor I can annual any sale or pledge or purchase effected by our father during his life. Therefore I ought not to accept any substitute for living in the woods, who can but contribute to my censure. Kaikeyi has spoken what is proper; and my father has acted well. I know Bharata to be forgiving, and given to serving superiors. Everything in that high-souled one intent on truth appear beneficial. Having returned from the forest, I will in company with this brother of virtuous character become the worthy master of this earth. The king having been made by Kaikeyi to consent (to her proposal, I have done as she told me. Do you by acting in the way calculated to free that lord of the earth, our father (from the debt of promise), do so. company with this brother of virtuous character become the worthy master of this earth. The king having been made by Kaikeyi to consent (to her proposal, I have done as she told me. Do you by acting in the way calculated to free that lord of the earth, our father (from the debt of promise), do so.