So long as he could see the dust raised by the car of Rāma setting out for the forest, so long that best of the Ikşvāku race did not turn his eyes from that direction. And so long as the king could discover his exceedingly virtuous and favourite son, so long he raised himself (on his toes) on the earth with the view of beholding him. When the ruler of earth could no longer perceive even the dust raised by Rāma's car, then pierced with sorrow, and in heaviness of heart, he fell down to the ground. Then (raising him up), Kausalyā held his right arm and walked with him, while the slenderwaisted Kaikeyi walked by his left. Endowed with a sense of justice and with virtue and humility, the king with afflicted senses steadily eyeing Kaikeyī, thus spoke to her. O Kaikeyī, that have decided for following sin, do you not touch my person, nor do I wish to see you. You are no wife of mine, not even a maid-servant of a friend sharing his good graces. I am none to those that subsist on your favour, nor are they anything to me. I renounce you who solely seek your interest and have abandoned virtue. I renounce all the advantages pertaining either to this world or the next which I am entitled to by virtue of having obtained your hand and having made you circumambulate the sacrificial fire. If Bharata is satisfied with receiving this entire kingdom, let not what he spends on account of my funeral obsequies find its way to me. Then raising the lord of men covered with dust, the noble Kausalyā pierced with grief, stopped (along with the monarch.) The righteous one remembering Rāghava repented himself, as if he had slain a Brāhmaṇa through inordinate desire, or as if he had placed his hand in fire. Having stopped again and again, the visage of the monarch lamenting on beholding the track of the car, appeared dim like the Moon invaded by Rāhu, And stricken with grief, he lamented, remembering his beloved son, and thinking that by this time he had reached the precincts of the city, he broke out into the following. On the way are traced the foot-prints of those foremost of bearers that are carrying my son away; but that magnanimous one I do not find. And that meritorious son of mine, who, daubed with sandal, used to rest his head pleasantly upon a pillow, fanned by beauteous damsels decked in ornaments, will to-day surely take refuge underneath a tree, and lay his head on a wooden plank or a stone. Covered with dust, he heaving sighs will rise from the ground in sad guise, like a leader of she-elephants rising from the side of a mountain. The rangers of the woods will now see the long-armed Rāma resembling the lord himself of the worlds, rising from the ground and going like one forlorn. That one so dearly loved by Janaka, worthy of being constantly ministered to with comforts, is to-day going to the forest, fatigued in consequence of having been pierced with thorns. Unacquainted with the forest, she is certainly afflicted with fright on hearing the deep roars of ferocious beasts, capable of making one's hair stand erect. O Kaikeyi, do you realise your desire, do you becoming a widow, rule this kingdom. Without that best of men I cannot live. Thus lamenting, the king surrounded by the multitude, like one that had performed his bath after death, entered that best of cities filled with people enfeebled and smitten with grief, with its streets thinned of men and its stalls closed. And beholding that entire city, with his mind fixed upon Rāma, the king lamenting, like to the sun entering clouds, entered that city like to an unagitated sea rid of serpents by Suparna,* the city without Rāma or Lakşmaņa or Sītā. *Fair-feathered, a name of Garuda. Then with tears in his eyes, the lord of earth, lamenting, in unintelligible accents said these sad and broken words. Do you speedily take me to the room of Rāma's mother, Kausalyā; for in no other place shall I find rest for my heart. When the king had spoken thus, the ushers taking him to Kausalyā's chamber, made his lie down in lowly plight. Having entered Kausalyā's apartment, the king having laid himself on the bed, was overwhelmed with emotion. The king surveyed the mansion deprived of his two sons as well as his daughter-in-law, like to the welkin deprived of the Moon. Beholding this, the puissant sovereign raising up his arm, burst out into lamentations, saying, “Ah! Rāma, you forsakes us both! Ah me! surely those blessed people are happy, who having passed this gap of time, will behold Rāma returned and will embrace him." Then when the night had come like to his own fatal night, Dasaratha at mid-night addressed Kausalyā. I do not perceive you, O Kausalyā. Do you touch me with your hand. My sight having followed Rāma does not return yet. Then seeing that foremost of men absorbed in the contemplation of Rāma, that noble dame sat by him, and afflicted with greater grief, began to indulge in sorrow,* sighing heavily. *Another text reads vinisvasantam, joining it to narendram, foremost of men.