Having taken refuge under the tree and performed his evening devotions, that foremost of those capable of charming others. Rāma, addressed Laksmana, saying. To day is the first night (which we must spend) outside the inhabited tracts without the company of Sumantra.. You ought not to suffer your mind to be uneasy on that score. From to night forth, we shall have to guard her vigilantly, for, O Laksmana, the preservation of what she has as well as the securing to her of what she has not, rests with us. We will, O son of Sumitrā, anyhow pass the night; let us ourselves procuring (leaves) and spreading them on the ground, anyhow lie down on it. Saying this, Rāma lying down on the ground although worthy of a costly bed, spoke these excellent words to Sumitrā's son. O Lakşmaņa, surely the king sleeps uneasily to day, and Kaikeyi having attained her end ought to be satisfied. Will not that revered lady, for the purpose of having Bharata established in the kingdom, take the king's life, when she shall see Bharata arrived? Forlorn and old and deprived of me. I do not know what he will do, his soul possessed by desire, and having come under the influence of Kaikeyi. Viewing this calamity that has overtaken us) and the disorder that has taken place in the senses of the monarch, I deem even lust as more potent than either virtue or interest. O Lakşmana, what man is there ignorant though he be, who for the sake of a female forsake as my father has done me, his son following his foot-steps? Ah! Kaikeyi's son Bharata with his wife is really happy, he that enjoys the sole sovereignty of the delighted Kosalas. Now that our father has grown old and I have taken refuge in the forest, he will alone experience the supreme felicity in the kingdom. He that renouncing interest and virtue, follows lust, speedily gets himself involved in troubles even like king Dasaratha. O amiable one, I think that Kaikeyi has been born for making an end of Dasaratha, sending me into exile, and conferring the kingdom on Bharata. At present for impareing me pain, Kaikeyi intoxicated by the tide of good fortune, will afflict Kausalya and Sumitrā. Your mother, the reversed Sumitrā, will be smitten with grief on our account. Do you, Laks maņa, tomorrow morning repair to Ayodhyā: I alone will go to Dandaka along with Sītā. You will be the protector of the helpless Kausalya. Kaikeyi is surely mean-minded, she perpetrates wrongs from malice. O you cognizant of virtue, she may administer poison to my mother. Surely, O child, in a former birth, women were bereft of their sons by my mother, O son of Sumitrā; and it is for this that this misfortune has befallen her. Having been brought up and reared with great pains by Kausalyä, I have left her at the time when her labours ought to have borne fruit, Fie on me. Let on woman, O son of Sumitrā, gibe birth to a son like me who have imparted such infinite pain to my mother. O Laksmana, I consider my mother's female parrot as more sharing her affection, since she is heard to say, 'O Śuka, do you bite the foot of the foe? What am I, O repressor of foes, now to do for her, bewailing, of slender fortune, she that has not profited in the least by her son, and who stands in no further need of his good offices ? Surely my unfortunate mother, Kausalyā, bereft of me, lies down on the ground, overwhelmed with woe, and plunged in an ocean of grief.. O Laksmana, enraged, I alone without doubt, can rid Ayodhyā, the Earth herself, by means of my arrows. But improper is the display of prowess for no reason, O sinless one, I am afraid of unrighteousness and of the next life; and for this it is that, O Lakşmaņa, I do not install myself in the kingdom. Having in solitude for a long while piteously bewailed thus and in other ways, Rāma sat silent in the night with tears in his eyes. Thereupon Lakşmaņa consoled Rāma spent with lamentation, like to fire deprived of its radiance or the ocean of its tide. Surely, O Rama, O foremost of warriors, on your having come out, the city of Ayodhyā is shorn of its splendour like the night deprived of the moon. This is not fit that you should grieve; for thereby, O foremost of men, you make both Sītā and myself grieve. O Rāghava, deprived of you neither Sītā nor I can live for a moment, like fish taken out of water : without you. O repressor of foes, I wish to see neither my father, nor Satrughna, nor Sumitrā, nor heaven itself. Then viewing from where they sat at ease their well-laid bed under the banian tree, those virtuous ones (Rāma and Sītā) went to it. Hearing Lakşmaņa's excellent and appropriate words with which he gladly assumed a life in the woods, that subduer of foes, Rāghava, in the name of righteousness, at once fully granted him the permission to dwell with him for the entire fourteen years. Then like to a couple of lions dwelling on a mountain-summit, at that lone spot of the extensive forest, those powerful perpetuators of the Raghu race, began to dwell without fear.