Hearing these words of Rāma, Sītā greatly sorry, with tears in her eyes, spoke gently to him the following words. The evils, thus enumerated by you of living in the forest, do you know, appear as so many good qualities to me, who have been made forward by your affection. Deer, lions, elephants, tigers, sarabhas, camaras, srmaras, and other animals which have not seen you before, seeing you, O Rāghava, will stand off, for they all fear you. 1. A fabulous animal supposed to have eight legs and to inhabit particularly the snowy mountains. 2. A kind of deer, or rather the Bos Gruriniens erroneously classed by the Hindu writers amongst the deer. 3. A young deer. I shall follow you, taking the permission of the respected ones, without you, O, Rāma, I will renounce my life. If I live by you, O Rāghava, Sakra, the lord of celestials, shall not be able with his mighty power to defeat me. 'A woman, without her husband, cannot live' this truth has been pointed out by you. O Rāma, to me. Besides, I heard before, O you of great intelligence, in my paternal house from the Brāhmaṇas that I should live in the forest. I have heard this from the Brāhmaṇas versed in palmistry, and I have all along been anxious. O mighty hero, to go to the forest; I shall therefore obtain permission and go, O dearly beloved to the forest with you; nothing can make it otherwise. I shall secure permission and follow you; the time has arrived; may the Brāhmaṇas be of truthful words. I know, O great hero, that there are many evils incident to living in the forest; but they generally befall those men who have not their senses subdued. I heard, when I was a girl, that an ascetic woman of well-disciplined character, came to my mother and apprised her of my future abode in the forest. I had requested you, O my lord, many times before in this house to take me to the forest with you for enjoyment, and you ware pleased to agree. For your welfare, O Raghava, having received your permission to follow you, I like to serve you, O great hero, while living in the forest. O you, pure-hearted one, surely shall I become sinless if I follow my husband, out of affection; for my husband is my Divinity. I have heard this pious report from the Brāhmaṇas of great fame that even in after life your company is greatly beneficial to me. She, who has been given away as wife by her father to one, with due rites of gift peculiar to each class, touching holy water, shall be his, even in her after life. For what reason then did you not wish to take your wife with you who is of good character and devoted to her husband? Do you take me. O Kākutstha, who am poor in spirit, devoted to my husband, ever given to your service, and participating equally in your joy and sorrow. If you do not purpose to take me with you, surely will I do away with my life by drinking poison, entering into fire, or drowning myself in water. She begged Rāma in these and various other means to take her with him, but that mighty hero did not consent to lead her into the lonely forest. Being accosted thus, Maithili was wrapt up in thought and bathed her breast with tears trickling down from her eyes. And Kākutstha having control over his ownself, with a view to dissuade her who was angry and engrossed in anxious thoughts, began to console her in divers way.