Thus addressed, the exceedingly wise Bharata answered the lord of the Nişādas, in words fraught with sense and reason. Your great desire, O friend of my superior, is surely as good as attained; since you of mighty energy have set your heart on entertaining my army. Having said these fair words to Guha, the graceful and highly energetic Bharata again addressed the lord of Nişādas. By what way shall I go to Bharadvāja's hermitage? These lands watered by the Gangā are dense and hard to track. Hearing these words of the intelligent son of the king, Guha well acquainted with the forest, said with joined hands. My servant well acquainted with the place shall attentively follow you; and, O prince possessed of mighty strength, I myself will also walk in your wake. But do you go after Rāma of energetic acts with some evil intention? This vast force of yours raise my apprehension/ When Guha had asked this, Bharata with a presence unclouded like the sky, spoke to Guha these sweet words. May a time never come when I shall do wrong to Rāghava! It behoves you not to fear me. Rāghava is my eldest brother dear to me even as my sire himself. I go to make Kākutstha dwelling in the woods, turn back. Other intention cherish I none. O Guha, this I tell you truly. Having heard Bharata's speech, Guha with a countenance lighted up with delight, again cheerfully addressed Bharata, saying. Blessed are you! Your like find I none on earth, inasmuch as you wish to resign a kingdom that comes to you without search. Your eternal fame will certainly range this world, since you wish to bring back Rāma passing through misfortune. As Guha was speaking thus to Bharata, the sun became shorn of his splendour and night fell. Thereupon having disposed his troops, the auspicious Bharata gratified by Guha, went to bed along with Śatrughna. Then arose thoughts of Rāma in the mind of the magnanimous Bharata ever having his gaze fixed on virtue and undeserving (of hardship). Then even as a tree already heated by a forestfire burns with a fire hidden in its cavity that descendant of Raghu began to burn with the fire of grief inflamed in his heart. Perspiration produced by the fire of sorrow issued out of all his limbs, as the Himavat heated by the solar warmth generates water. And Kaikeyi's son was overpowered and drowned by the mountain of grief, having thoughts (of Rāma) for its entire crags, sighs for its mineral substance, disgust with the avocations of life, for its trees, mental feebleness through grief for its summits, stupor for the animals inhabiting it, and burning for its annual shrubs and bamboos. And sighing heavily with a heart oppressed with sorrow, well nigh deprived of consciousness, and involved in high peril, that best of men, oppressed by the fever of his heart, like to a mighty leader of a herd, separated from it, did not attain peace of mind. Meeting with Guha, the magnanimous Bharata accompanied by his people, engrossed with the thoughts of Rāma, became oppressed with grief. (Seeing this), Guha by and by encouraged Bharata concerning his elder brother.