Having thus reproved his mother in great wrath, Bharata said again. Do you bear yourself from this kingdom, O heartless and wicked Kaikeyī. Having been lost to righteousness, do not you lament me dead. What qualities of yours were taxed by the king or the exceedingly virtuous Rāma, that both of them simultaneously have come by death and exile respectively through your agency? O Kaikeyī, you have been guilty of homicide in consequence of the destruction of this race. Do you go to hell, never to the world attained by my father. Since, renouncing Rāma dear to all, you have committed this sin by your grim act and brought me into fear. Through you has my father met with his end, and Rāma has taken refuge in the woods; and it is through you that I have come to ignominy among all creatures. O you enemy of mine in the guise of a mother! O fell one! O you that covetest the kingdom! do you not speak to me, O wicked wretch! O slayer of your husband! it is because of you, stainer of your race, that Kausalyā, Sumiträ, and other mothers of mine have been overwhelmed with a mighty sorrow. You are never the daughter of the pious and intelligent Aśvapati, you are a Rākṣasī born in that race, you that have destroyed my father's race, inasmuch as the virtuous and heroic Rāma ever observing truth has been sent to the woods and my father has ascended heaven through your agency; inasmuch as you that have perpetrated this arch offence, have laid this sin on me, who have been forsaken by my sire, renounced by my brothers, and come by universal disfavour. O you of sinful ways, having separated the virtuous Kausalya (from her son), what world, O you that repairest to hell, shall be your portion? Does you not, O tortuous one, know that that one sprung from Kucalya's, self, my eldest brother Räma, who is like a father to me, has ever been the refuge of his friends? A son born from all the limbs of his mother, comes out from her heart, and therefore it is that he is far dearer to his mother, albeit her friends are dear to her.* *Angapratyangaja: at., born from the limbs principal and minor. The commentator recounts the face, the breast, the abdomen, the hands and the feet as constituting the former; and eyes, fingers, etc., as the latter. Once on a time, it is related by persons cognizant of morality, Surabhi regarded by the celestials, beheld two of her sons toiling on earth and seeming to be deprived of their senses. And, when the day had been half spent, seeing her sons fatigued on earth, she stricken with grief for them, began to weep with tears flooding her eyes. And it came to pass that as the magnanimous sovereign of the celestials was passing below, her fine and fragrant tear drops fell on his person. Turning his eyes up, Śakra found Surabhi stationed in the sky, distressed and weeping in extreme anguish of spirit. Seeing that illustrious one burning in grief, the wielder of the thunder-bolt, Indra the lord of the celestials, waxing anxious, with joined hands said. Is there any great danger in any quarter? Do you, O you that are intent on the welfare of all, say, whence is this grief of yours? Thus addressed by the intelligent king of the celestials, that one well skilled in speech, the sedate Surabhi answered. Auspiciousness, O lord of celestials ! No sin is yours. But I mourn my sons fallen into evil plight, having seen them lean, distressed, and burnt by the rays of the sun, Balivardas afflicted by the wicked-minded ploughman. Seeing those that have been born of my body, cast down and in trouble, I grieve: there is none that is dear like to a son. Seeing her the whole earth is filled with whose sons by thousands, weeping, Indra understood that none is an object of greater affection than a son. And that lord, Indra, also considered Surabhi of a person breathing a sacred odour, whose tears had dropped on his body, as the foremost being on earth. Even that one yielding whatever is asked, auspicious, crowned with the choicest virtues,। although having all natural functions, showing equal kindness to all, and of unequalled character, who maintain all creatures, she who has a thousand sons, grieves (for her sons). How can then Kausalyā carry on existence without Rāma? Chaste and having an only son, that lady has through you been separated from her son, (like a cow separated from her calf). For this, you will always have to suffer misery alike in this world and the next. I shall for my part completely minister to my brother and father, and shall without doubt, increase my fame. Bringing hither the mighty-armed lord of Kosala endowed with immense strength, I myself will repair to the forest inhabited by ascetics. O you that have delivered yourself over to iniquity, I, looked at by the citizens with their throats oppressed with the vapour grief, cannot bear this (burden of) sin heaped on my by you. Do you enter fire, or dive into Dandaka, or wound a cord round your neck: other desirable way there is none for you. On Rāma having truth for prowess, obtaining the earth, I, my disgrace removed, shall be blest. Grieving thus, Bharata, like an elephant in the forest afflicted with a tomara or ankusa,* fell to the earth sighing like an enraged snake. *Names of instruments. With his eyes reddened, and his cloth falling off, and his ornaments cast away, that subduer of foes, the king's son fallen on the earth, resembled a banner of Sakra after the festival is over.