Then that descendant of Ikṣvāku afflicted because of his promise, sighing and his heart filled with the vapour begot of sorrow, again addressed Sumantra, saying. O charioteer, do you speedily Marshall the army consisting of the four kinds of forces for following Rāghava. Let sweet-speeched courtesans and opulent traders grace the extensive army of the prince. Giving them immense wealth, do you also send with him those that depend on Rāma, as well as those with whom he delights to wrestle. Let the foremost weapons, and the citizens, and cars, and fowlers well acquainted with the forest go in the wake of Käkutstha. Killing deer and elephants, and drinking wild honey, and beholding various rivers, they will ultimately forget this kingdom. And let our granary and treasury follow Rāma who is to reside in the forest. Performing sacrifices at holy spots, and dispensing the prescribed Dakşiņās, let Rāma happily reside in the forest in the company of saints. The mighty-armed Bharata will govern Ayodhyā. Therefore, do you furnish the auspicious Rāma with every object of enjoyment. When that descendant of Kākutstha said this, Kaikeyi was inspired with apprehension: her countenance became blank, and her utterance was choked. Losing her complexion and agitated with fear, with her countenance fallen, Kaikeyi faced the king and said. O righteous one, like to a liquor whose lees alone have been left, Bharata will not receive the kingdom tasteless and denuded of all substance. While the shameless Kaikeyi was speaking thus sternly, king Dasaratha said to that one of expansive eyes. O worker of mischief, why having laid the load upon me, do you torment me? O ignoble one, why did you not ask for this, when you did first solicit the boon? Hearing these wrathful words of the king, that beauteous one, Kaikeyi, waxing doubly wroth, addressed the monarch, saying. Even in this line of yours, Sagara deprived his eldest son Asamañja by name of the enjoyment of the kingdom. In this way this one deserves to go to the forest. Thus addressed, king Dasaratha said, "O fire!" and all present were afflicted with shame: but Kaikeyi feigned not to understand all this. Then a notable, aged, pure-spirited personage held in high esteem by the monarch, named Siddhartha, addressed Kaikeyi, saying. Asamañja by way of sport catching people on the way, used to throw them into the waters of the Sarayū, and that wicked-minded wretch made merry over the same. Seeing him do so, the citizens in a body, waxing wroth spoke to the monarch, 'O enhancer of the kingdom's prosperity, do you either banish Asamañja or us.' To them he replied, 'Whence is this fear of yours?' Thus asked by the monarch, the subjects said. “Through his impudence this one of perverted sense by way of diversion throwing our sons into the Sarayū, finds extreme delight.' Hearing these words of his subjects, that lord of men, with the intention of doing good to them, forsook that mischievous son of his. Then swiftly causing a car to be yoked, he said to his men, “This one is to be banished for life in proper garb along with his wife. Thereupon that worker of iniquity went to the forest and went about seeing mountain fastnesses. Thus did the virtuous king Sagara renounce his son. But what offence has Rāma committed that he is to be banished? We do not find any fault whatever in Rāghava. Rare is his fault even like the spot on the Moon. Or it may be, O exalted lady, that you perceive some fault in Rāghava. Do you, if so, unfold it; and then let Rāma be banished, But the renunciation of the honest ever constant in a righteous course, in consequence of its being opposed to virtue, destroys the splendour of Sakra himself. Therefore, O noble one, cease to persevere in this, for what good would the marring of Rāma's good fortune bring you? And, O you of a fair countenance, you will by such a course, escape odium. Hearing Siddhārtha's words, the king, his voice waxing exceedingly feeble, addressed Kaikeyī in words surcharged with emotion. O Personation of sin, you relish not this speech. You know not either your own good or mine. This wicked endeavour of yours, O you that strive after harm, which you put forth adopting a narrow path, is surely divorced from the course of the good. Forsaking my kingdom, forsaking happiness and treasures, I will to-day follow Rāma. Do you with Bharata for the king, forever enjoy dominion according to your heart's desire.