Then exceedingly distressed, Rāma, Sītā and Lakşmaņa, bowing down to the king, circumambulated him. Then with the king's permission, the righteous Rāghava, stupefied with sorrow, in company with Sītā, paid respects to his mother. Following his brother, Lakşmaņa saluted Kausalyā; then he again took hold of his mother Sumitrā's feet. As the son of Sumitrā was thus engaged in honouring his mother, his mother smelling the crown of his head, thus spoke to the mightyarmed Laksmana. Although attached to your friends here, you have my permission to go to the forest. When Rama shall have gone (to the woods), do not, O son, show any negligence to him. O sinless one, whether in prosperity or in adversity, even this one is your way. That a younger brother should follow his elder is in this world the duty of the righteous. These are the legitimate duties ever observed by this race, charity, initiation into sacrifice, and renunciation of the body in the field of battle, Do you consider Rāma as Daśaratha, and Janaka's own-begotten as myself; do you regard Ayodhyā as a wilderness, go my son, at your sweet pleasure. Having thus spoken to that dear descendant of Raghu, who had made up his mind (to journey to the forest), Sumitra again and again said to him, “Go! Go!" Then like to Mātali addressing Väsava, that one understanding humility, Sumantra, with joined hands humbly said to Kākutstha. O illustrious prince, good betide you: do you ascend the car. O Rāma, I will speedily take you to wherever you will tell me. You will have to spend fourteen years in the forest, and your stay must commence from this very day. So the noble lady has ordered. Then having adorned her person, that best of her sex, Sītā, with a glad heart ascended the car resembling the sun. Counting the term of their stay in the woods, her father-in-law furnished Sītā following her lord with attires and ornaments. And then he placed in front of the car various weapons, coats of mail, a basket bound in hide and a hoe, At length the brothers Rama and Laks maņa swiftly ascended the flaming car garnished with gold. And seeing them with Sītā for the third, mounted, Sumantra drove the car yoked with goodly horses resembling the wind in celerity. On Rāghava having left for the forest to stay there for a long period, the men and beasts within the city were deprived of their senses (by grief). And in the city there arose a mighty tumult in consequence of the hurrying of people, the elephants waxing mad and furious, and the neighings of horses. And the entire city containing, young and old, extremely afflicted, rushed after Rāma, like persons oppressed with the heat of the sun rushing towards water. As his side and back, the people bending forward with their faces covered with the vapour of grief, and sighing hard, said to he charioteer. O charioteer, rein in the horses, do you proceed softly. We will see the countenance of Rāma, which we shall never see again. Surely the heart of Rāma's mother is made of iron, for it does not burst on witnessing her son resembling Skanda repairing to the forest. Vaidehī, attaining her desire, follows her husband, like a shadow, attached to virtue, she does not forsake him, even as the Sun forsakes not Meru. O Laksmana, you are blessed, since you will serve your god-like brother ever speaking fair. This design of yours is great; this is your mighty good fortune; this is the way to heaven that you are following him. Saying this; they could not suppress their fears; and the men followed the beloved descendant of Ikşvāku. Then the king, his sense overcome by grief, surrounded by his distressed wives, went out of his house, saying, “I will behold my dear son.” He heard before him a mighty noise proceeding from weeping women, like to the roars of she-elephants, when a great elephant has been taken captive. Thereupon Rāma's father, the graceful Kākutstha, became shorn of his splendour, like to the full-moon enveloped at the appointed time during the eclipse. Then the auspicious son of Daśaratha of soul incapable of being comprehended, ordered the charioteer, saying, "Do you proceed more speedily." Rāma saying to the charioteer, “Go," and the people, "Stay,” Thus desired on the way, the charioteer could not act both ways at once. As the mighty-armed Rāma proceeded, the dust of the earth raised by the car-wheels were laid by the tears of the citizens showering down. And in consequence of Rāghava's departure, the entire city filled with despair, and uttering with their senses lost exclamations of "Oh" and "Alas," became exceedingly afflicted. And the tears begot of heart's grief that flowed from the eyes of the females, resembled rain-drops scattered around from lotuses shaken by the movements of fish. And beholding the citizens absorbed in one thought, the auspicious monarch fell down in grief like a tree whose roots have been severed. Then seeing the sovereign senseless and stricken with exceeding sorrow, the multitudes at the rear of Rāma broke out into a loud tumult. And seeing the king weeping aloud with the inmates of the inner apartment, some exclaiming "Oh Rama," and others, “O Rāma's mother," began to be-wail. Then turning back, Rāna saw that his sorrowstricken and bewildered father along with his mother, was following his track. As a colt fastened in a snare cannot see its mother, so Rāma fastened in the bonds of virtue could not look at his mother openly. And seeing his parents deserving of comfort and worthy of going in a carriage, going on foot, Rāma said to the charioteer, "Go you swiftly.” And that foremost of men was incapable of bearing the looks of his father and mother, like to an elephant afflicted with the hook, (not being able to look at what is placed on its back.) Rāma's mother rushed after him like a cow having a calf which has been fettered, rushing towards the fold, for the purpose of seeing it. Rāma beheld his mother Kausalyā running after the car, bewailing aloud, “Rāma, Rāma, Ah Sītā, Lakşmaņa,” shedding tears for Rāma, Laks maņa and Sītā, and appearing as if she had been dancing incessantly. The king exclaimed, "Stay,” Rāghava said, "On, On." Sumantra's mind vacillated like that of one placed between two hosts burning to encounter each other. Rāma said to him, “When taxed by the monarch (on your return), you will say, 'I did not hear you.' But delay will impart me terrible pain." Thereupon, doing Rāma's bidding, the charioteer, telling the people to desist, made the horses already coursing, run faster. The retainers of the king stopped after circumambulating Rāma, but their minds did not turn back. But the others did not return either bodily or mentally. Then the courtiers said to that mighty monarch, Dasaratha, “He that is expected back should not be followed far". Hearing their words, the king endued with every virtue, with his body covered with perspiration and his countenance woebegone, and exceedingly distressed, stopped short and stood with his wife looking at his son