Hearing Jāvāli's words, Rāma having truth for prowess, by help of an exceedingly subtle intellect uninfluenced (under the exhortations of that sage), said. What you, wishing for my welfare, have dwelt upon, though wearing the guise of a good action, is really not such; and though appearing to be beneficent, is really calculated to entail misery. The person that with his sinful acts sticking to him, walk astray, as well as he that hold up (to others) different patterns of character (from those recommended by scripture), does not win honour with the good. One's character (fashioned according to scripture) shows whether one is high-born or base, heroic or vainly priding himself on his manliness, pure or impure. (But by adopting the code of conduct inculcated by you), a mean character may appear as a noble one, one bereft of purity may appear pure, an inauspicious individual may seem auspicious, and one of vile ways may appear honest. If I adopt this unrighteous course, calculated to produce confusion of castes, and do acts not recognized by scripture, I shall, renouncing good, have to reap only evil. Then what man possessed of consciousness and capable of discriminating between right and wrong, shall honour me, given to wicked ways and deserving of universal reprehension? Whose is this course (that you asked me to follow)? And by what way shall I attain heaven, by following the present course, which would make me give up my vow? When I have (first) myself set up desire as my standard of action, the entire body of the people shall follow me: subjects take to the ways that have been adopted by their sovereigns. This eternal regal morality founded in kindness towards the subjects, is verily true. Hence a kingdom is essentially based upon truth; and this world itself is established in truth. Saints and celestials for certain regard truth alone. In this world a truthful person attains the regions of Brahma. Untruthful persons harass people as much as serpents. In this world virtue, which is said to be the root of everything, is itself established in truth. In this world, truth is the Lord; in truth is established righteousness. Everything has truth for its basis. No condition is superior to truth. The Veda, which inculcates gift, sacrifice homa, and asceticism, is based on truth. I never or One protects men, another his family; one is plunged in hell, another is honoured in heaven. Why should I not then obey the mandate of my father? My father was of truthful promise and of righteous ways and with the object of observing his promise, he laid on me this (for faithful performance). Having promised to my superior with an oath, shall through covetousness forgetfulness or pride rive the bridge of truth. We have heard that the gods and the Pitrs do not accept offerings from one inclined to untruth, or who is unsteady and of volatile faculties. This duty of maintaining truth, whose influence radiates all over one's soul, I certainly find to be the prime one; and this burthen has (ere this) been borne by worthy people. And it is for this that I reverence the same. I abjure that Ksatriya morality which, wearing the garb of righteousness, is in fact impiety, and which is pursued by the low-minded, or the wicked, or the covetous, or the sinful. A person commits a sin by means of his physique, but after he has accurately cast it in his mind; and he has also spoken an untruth with his tongue. Thus a sin is threefold. The earth and fame and renown and auspiciousness pay court to the truthful person. The good follow truth, therefore even truth is to be sought by all). Therefore the seemingly excellent thing that you, after having well ascertained it, have said to me in words informed with reason, 'You had rather do this', appears to me wanting in nobility. How, after having promised to my superior this exile of mine, shall I act up to Bharata's words, setting aside those of my superior? I having remained firm in the promise I had made to my superior, that noble lady, Kaikeyi, became exceedingly delighted. Living in the forest, pure, with regulated fare, I shall, propitiating the gods and the Pits with fruits, flowers and roots, (fulfil my vow). Satisfying the five classes,* I shall, retaining my simplicity and my religious faith and being able to distinguish between right and wrong, pass away the term (of banishment). * Prakrāmam, The commentator says that the word means, Cāndrāyaṇa and other rites. Having come to this scene of action, one should do that which is proper. Even Agni and Vāyu and Soma reap the fruits of their own acts. Having acquired the appellation of Satakratu, the sovereign of the celestials has gone to heaven; and, having performed rigid austerities, the Maharșis have attained the celestial regions.' Having heard of the reasons couched in that atheristical speech which he could not allow to pass without stricture, that one of fierce energy, the king's son, censuring what Jāvāli had said, again spoke. Truth, righteousness, prowess, kindness to creatures, fair spokeness, and worship of the twice-born ones, gods and guests, these have by the pious been styled the ways to heaven. Having duly heard that these are capable of conferring the summum bonum, and also come to the same conclusion by reasoning, Vipras, adequately and competely observing morality with the utmost care, are eagerly desirous of attaining those regions. I blame this act of my father's, viz., that he took (for his (for his priest) one of perverse understanding, who range by help of such an intellect, who is frightfully atheistic, and who has swerved from the path of righteousness. As a thief is, so is a Buddha, and know that in this matter, an atheist is in a like predicament. Therefore, such an one, when capable of being punished like a thief for the good of the people, should be punished like a thief; and let no Brāhamaņa ever speak with an atheist. Other Brāhmaṇas than yourself, superior to you, have, severing this world as well as the next, performed various excellent acts. Therefore those Brahmanas, a men, who have spared life and in other ways practised morality, and have also given away in charity, performed austerities and served others, (perform sacrifices in consonance with Vedas). And principal ascetics engaged in religion, surrounded by the good, possessed of energy, having charity for their foremost attribute, void of envy, and their hearts free from all stain, are honoured in this world. When the magnanimous Rama of undiminished strength had wrathfully said this, that Vipra with supplications again spoke words fraught with morality and high spiritual truth. I do not speak the language of atheists; nor am I an atheist; nor yet is it true that there is nothing (hereafter). On the occasion of things having reference to the next world being performed, I am again a believer, and on the occasion of things' connection with this world being taken in hand, I am an atheist once again. O Rāma, the time has gradually drawn nigh when for the purpose of making you turn back, it is necessary that I should speak the language of atheism. But pacifying you, I have (again) spoken this (i.e. I am a believer).