Having quartered his forces, Bharata eager (to go to Rāma's place), went to see his brother, showing to Satrughna the signs of Rāma's abode being in the vicinity. And having desired Vasistha, saying, “Bring my mothers without delay," that one attached to his superiors went before. And eager to see Rāma even like Bharata himself, Sumantra followed Bharata at a short distance. As Bharata passed on, he observed a neat cottage of leaves stationed among the asylums of anchorets, furnished with a portion having a wall with a door. Before the cottage, Bharata saw fuel broken up, and flowers gathered. And he saw at places signs of Kuśa and bark set up on trees when Rāma and Lakşmaņa (first) arrived at their asylum. And in that habitation, Bharata saw great heaps of dry dung of deer and buffaloes, gathered for preventing cold. As he proceeded, the intelligent and mightyarmed Bharata with a cheerful heart remarked to Śatrughna and all the courtiers. I conceive, we have reached the tract that was mentioned by Bharadvāja. Hard by this spot, I fancy, is the river Mandākini. On high are barks set up by Lakşmaņa. Having to pass by the way at unusual hours, (Laksmana) has marked it with signs. On the side of the hill is the way by which long-tusked elephants pass to and fro with vehemence, roaring at each other. Here is seen the dense and dark smoke of that which the anchorets are ever anxious to preserve in the forest, fire. Even here shall I with a delighted heart see that foremost of men, the noble Rāghava resembling a Maharși, ever engaged in serving his superiors. Then going to Citrakuta, that descendant of Raghu, coming to the Mandakini, said to the men. That foremost of men in all the world, the lord of all, coming into seclusion, is in his yoga posture. O fie upon my birth and my life! For me, having come by misfortune, and renounced every comfort, the effulgent lord of men, Rāghava, is dwelling in the woods. I shall be taxed of men on the score. To-day (first) pacifying him, I will fall at the feet of Rāma as well as of Sitã and Lakşmaņa. Having thus bewailed, Dasaratha's son saw a splendid, charming, and holy dwelling in that forest, composed of leaves. And Bharata beheld in Rāma's habitation a sacred structure made of leaves, covered with a profusion of Sāla, palm, and Aśvakarņa leaves; spread with soft Kuśa, like a dais in a sacrifice; adorned with bows resembling the iris, plaited on the back with gold, of mighty force, and capable of achieving arduous feets and destroying foes; and garnished with arrows in quivers, seeming like the rays of the sun, with flaming mouths, like to the Bhogavatī with serpents; and exceedingly beautified with golden sheaths and scimitars and shields spangled with gold and nice guana finger-fences decked with gold; inaccessible to foes like a lion's den to deer; and furnished with a spacious dais inclined on the north-east, with a fire flaming on it. And looking around, anon Bharata saw his superior Rāma seated in the cottage bearing a head of matted locks, clad in a black deer-skin, and having tattered cloth and bark for his garment. And he saw Råma seated like to a flame, with leonine shoulders, mighty arms, and eyes resembling lotuses, the righteous lord of this world bounded by the seas, saw the mightyarmed on like to the eternal Brahma, seated on a skin-seat on the ground along with Sītā and Lakş mana. And seeing him, overwhelmed with grief and affliction, the righteous and graceful son of Kaikeyi, Bharata, rushed (towards him). And soon as Bharata saw Rāma, he, exceedingly distressed, broke out into lamentations in words choked with sorrow. And incapable of holding himself in patience, he said. That elder brother of mine, who (seated) in court should be surrounded by the subjects intent upon paying him homage, is now surrounded by wild deer. He that used to adorn his person with attire worth many thousands (of things), engaged in observing morality, is clad in deer-skin. Why does he that always wore variegated blossoms, Rāghava, bears this burthen of matted locks? He who is worthy of acquiring religious merit by celebrating sacrifices according to the ordinance, is now following morality by afflicting his person. How is the person of that one whose body used to be daubed with costly sandal, covered with dust. It is for me that Rama, although deserving of comfort, has come by this misfortune. Wicked that I am, fie upon my life despised of men! Thus lamenting in woeful guise, with the lotus of his countenance covered with sweat, Bharata coming at Rāma's feet, fell at them bewailing. And inflamed with grief, the exceedingly powerful prince Bharata, having in distress of spirit uttered, O noble one, again said nothing. And beholding the illustrious Rāma, Bharata with his utterance choked with emotion, exclaimed, O noble one, and was unable to say anything further. Then Śatrughna also weeping paid homage unto the feet of Rāma. And shedding tears, Rāma embraced them both. Then as in the sky, the Sun and the Moon meet with śukra and Brhaspati, those two princes (Rāma and Laks mana) met with Sumantra and Guha in the forest. And beholding those kings resembling leaders of elephant-herds met together in that mighty forest, the dwellers in the woods, resigning their cheerfulness, began to shed tears. forest, the dwellers in the woods, resigning their cheerfulness, began to shed tears.