Then with depressed spirits, and exceedingly afflicted, with tears flooding their eyes, smitten with mortal grief, the inhabitants of the city went back from Rāma to the city. And with their lives appearing as ready to go out, those unsteady ones came to their respective homes, and surrounded by their wives and sons, washed their faces with copious tears. They forgot to rejoice or make merry, and the traders did not spread (their stores), and stalls did not grace the place, and the householders did not cook, and people did not rejoice on recovering lost property or gaining a profuse accession of wealth, and mothers did not feel any delight on beholding their first-born. And in every home females afflicted with woe, weeping child their husbands coming home, with the following words as (drivers) spur elephants with hooks. Of what use are their houses, and wives, and wealth, and sons, and comforts, to those who see not Rāghava (in their midst?) There is one only good man in this world even Lakşmaņa, who along with Sītā is following Käkutstha Rāma to the woods. Those streams, assemblage of lotuses, and pools are blessed by which bathing in the sacred waters, Kakutstha will pass. And romantic forests and woods, watery expanses of mighty volume, and mountains with flat spaces, will grace Kākutstha. And forests and hills to which will repair Rāma cannot go without paying him homage like to a welcome guest. And wested with flowers of various hues and putting forth frequent shoots, trees, swarming with bees will show themselves to Rāghava. And hills from regard will show to Rāma arrived there the choicest flowers and fruits even out of season and will supply him with fountains of pure water. And presenting him with many a charming fountain, trees will delight Rāma at the tops of mountains.* Where Rama is, there is nor fear or failure. That mighty-armed son of Dasaratha is heroic. Let us while he is yet ahead within a short distance of us, follow Rāghava. *The meaning is, Trees will please Rāghava by spreading for him a bed of leaves and flowers. Even the shadow of the feet of our master, so high-souled, would bring us happiness. He is the lord of all these, he is the refuge, he is the accomplishment of our religious duties. We and you, will serve Sītā, and Rāghava. Thus afflicted with grief, the women of the city spoke to their husbands. In the forest Rāghava will attain for you the unattainable and protect what is attained; and Sītā being a female will do the same for these (women.) Who will take pleasure in residing in a dwelling where the heart dies within itself, which is devoid of delight, where the people are always agitated with anxiety and which is exceedingly disagreeable? If this kingdom devolves on Kaikeyi it will be divested of all virtues and will be like to one without a master. And of what avail then is our life itself, not to speak of sons and wealth. Whom else will that stainer of her line, Kaikeyī, forsake now, who for the sake of wealth has forsaken her son and her lord? We swear by our sons that so long as Kaikeyi is alive, we living will never stay in her kingdom, although we may be maintained by her. What happiness can be ours by living with that wicked and unrighteous one who lost to every sense of shame is bent upon exiling the son of the foremost of kings? Troubled by disturbances, with all its sacrifices stopped, and having no master over it, the entire (kingdom) will meet with destruction because of Kaikeyi. On Rāma retiring to the forest, the lord of earth will surely not live; and Dasaratha dying, it is evident everything will come to naught. Do you, your virtue exhausted, and oppressed with grief, pounding poison, take it, or follow Rāghava, or remove to such a place that the very name of Kaikeyī may not reach your ears. Rāma has been deceitfully exiled along with his wife and Lakşmaņa; and we are bound to Bharata like to a (sacrificial) beast before one that is to slaughter it. Surely that mighty car warrior, with deepest collar-bones having a countenance resembling the full-moon, sable-hued, repressing his foes, with this arms reaching to his knees and lotuslike eyes, Rāma the elder brother of Laksmana, always speaking first (to a visitor,) suave, truthtelling, endowed with prowess, amiable to all men, and lovely like the moon himself, surely that foremost of men gifted with the strength of a mad elephant, will grace the forests, ranging it around. Thus lamenting in the city, the females thereof burning in grief became distressed like people stricken with panic on the occasion of a plague. As the women were thus bewailing Rāghava in their homes, the Sun set and night came on. The city became enveloped in darkness, and the light of the sacrificial fires) extinguished, and the sounds of study and edifying discourse ceased. The shops of the tradesmen being closed, and festive mirth having disappeared, and people becoming defenceless, the city of Ayodhyā resembled the firmament deprived of the stars. Distressed for the sake of Rāma as if it was a was son or a brother of theirs that was banished, the women weeping forlorn, lamented with senses lost; and Rāma was to them more than a son. And the voice of song and festal glee and dance and sounds of instruments having died away, and mirth having disappeared, and the shops not displaying their wares, Ayodhyā then resembled the mighty ocean emptied of its waters.