Receiving this pleasant and beneficial mandate of his brother, Lakşmaņa speedily went to the abode of Sujajña, and finding thai vipra in the chamber where the sacrificial fire was maintained, worshipped him and addressed him, saying; "friend, come and behold the abode of that one of arduous deeds(Răma) renouncing his incoming installation.” Finishing his prayers, Sujajña accompanied Lakşmaņa and arrived at the splendid mansion of Rama, filled with riches. No sooner Rāma found that Brāhmaṇa versed in the Veda (Sujajña) arrive there, shining in effulgence like to the blazing fire, that he roes up from his seat along with Sītā, with clasped hands, and received him as if he had been the sacrificial fire itself, and offered gun excellent golden Angadas shining ear-rings, necklaces of jewels fastened together with golden strings, Keyuras, bracelets, and various other ornaments, and spoke to him, being desired by Sītā, the following words “O my gentle friend! do you by some servant send to your wife this necklace and Hemasutra and Sītā, the friends of your wife, also intends to give this Rasaná to your wife.” On the eve of her going to the woods, she presents your self and your wife with Angadas of curious workmanship and elegant Keyuras. Vaidehi wishes to present you with this fine bed-stead with its coverlet studded with various precious jewels. I offer you, o great ascetic, with a thousand gold coins, this excellent elephant, called the destroyer of foes, which had been bestowed upon me by my maternal uncle. Being addressed thus by Rāma, Sujajña accepted all those offers, and showered benedictions upon Rāma, Sītā, and Lakşmaņa. Thereupon Rāma spoke to his beloved considerate and fair-speaking brother, the son of Sumitrā, the following pleasant words, like to Brahma addressing the Lord of celestials. O son of Sumiträ, do you invite the excellent Brāhmaṇas, Agastya and Viśvāmitra, and adore them, O Raghava, by conferring upon them gems, as people cherish corn with water. And, O mighty armed one, do you worship them, O Raghava, with a thousand cows, gold, silver, and various precious jewels. Do you confer upon that good Brāhmaṇa, the preceptor of the Tittirīya portion of the Vedas, who crowns Kausalyā with blessings every day, silk cloth, conveyances, maid-servants, and such other things, till the twice-born one is satisfied. Do you propitiate the worshipful Citraratha, who is our charioteer and counsellor and of advanced years, with precious jewels, clothes, wealth, with all kinds of beasts and a thousand cows. Do you confer upon those Brāhmaṇas, O son of Sumitrā, who live under my protection, studying the Katha section of Yajur Veda, with staffs in their hands. a grant of eighty mules loaded with jewels, of a thousand miles of pines, and of a thousand cows, for curd and clarified butter. They are always inactive, being constantly engaged in Vedic studies, and are greatly slothful though having a taste for delicious food, and are always esteemed by great men; to each of all those Brahmanas, who always come to Kausalya, do you, O Laksmana, make a grant of a thousand gold coins, and offer to them all such gifts as may please my mother. Thereupon Laksmana, that best of men, distributed amongst all these Brāhmaṇas all the entire riches as ordered by Rāma like to the Lord of wealth. Seeing his dependants in a wretched plight, shedding tears continually, Rāma proffered to them various articles for their maintenance, and said, Do you occupy in turn until our return my rooms as well as Laksmana's. Having spoken thus to all those dependants who were racked with great sorrow, Rāma ordered the Treasury officer to bring his riches there. There at, the servants brought all his riches and collected them in great heaps. Rāma, the best of men, together with Laksmana, distributed them amongst the Brahmanas, boys, the old, and the poor. There lived in that quarter a Brāhmaṇa of a tawny colour, by name Trijata, descended from the line of Garga, earning his live-hood by digging the earth with spades and ploughs. His young wife with her little children, struggling with poverty, spoke thus to the old Brāhmaṇa. “Throwing aside your spades and ploughs, do you hear my words. Go and see the virtuous-souled Rāma, and you are sure to get something from him now." Hearing these words of his wife. Trijata, shining in effulgence like to Bhſgu and Angirā, covering his body with a torn piece of cloth, proceeded towards Rāma's abode with his wife, and going on in a speedy and uninterrupted course, reached at last the royal abode and spoke to Rama thus: O mighty son of the King! a poor man am I, having a number of children. I maintain my family by digging the earth; do you therefore look upon me mercifully. Whereupon Rāma replied laughing: "I have not distributed as yet even one thousand of my cows. Do you hurl this rod, and you are the master of all those cows occupying the space at the extremely of which this rod shall fall." Upon this, swiftly tightening the cloth around his waist, Trijața firmly grasping the rod hurled it with a mighty force. The rod, hurled off his hands, fell on the other side of the river Sarayū in the midst of many thousand bullocks. Seeing this, the virtuous-souled Rāma despatched to the hermitage of Trijata all the cows that lay extending up to the banks of the river Sarayū, and consoling him afterwards accosted him with the following words. “Be not offended." I acted thus only as a matter of joke. I asked you to do this only with the object of knowing whether you had the power to hurl this rod. Do you ask of me now anything you like. Truly do I speak that you should not hesitate. I am ready to devote my wealth to the services of the Brāhmanas. And the wealth I have earned will conduce to my favour, if I can apply it to your service. Then Trijata, being pleased with the accession of cows, went away along with his wife, showering happiness and joy. Rama of great manliness afterwards distributed with proper respect and due welcome all his wealth amassed by righteous means amongst the Brāhmaṇas, friends, servants and the poor, according to the recommendation of his friends.