And then the intelligent Bharata surveyed that assembly filled with noble, and worthy personages, resembling the night of the full moon. And that august assembly was ablaze with the brilliant hues proceeding from the attires of the honourable persons seated according to rank. And that splendid assembly filled with learned people looked like he night of the full moon after the clouds have dispersed. And seeing all the subjects of the sovereign gathered together, the priest cognizant of virtue softly spoke to Bharata. Your child, leaving to you this prosperous carth abounding in corn and wealth, king Dasaratha having performed his duties, has gone to heaven. And Rāma of truthful character observing the virtue of the righteous has not set aside his father's commands. even as the risen moon does not renounce the moonlight. Loved by the courtiers, do you, having been installed, enjoy this kingdom conferred on you by your father and mother, rid of its thorn. Let princes throned as well as those without thrones, from east, and west, north and south, and also persons ranging the sea, procure countless gems (for presenting them to you. Hearing this speech, Bharata cognizant of virtue, filled with sorrow, mentally repaired to Rāma desirous of reaping merit. Then in words choked with the melodious voice of a swan, lamented and taxed the priest, in the midst of the assembly. Who like myself ever deprives one that has led a Brahmacharya mode of life, that is endowed with understanding and performed his bath after having acquired learning, and that is always intent on righteousness, of one's kingdom? How begot of Dasaratha, shall I deprive Rāma of his kingdom. It behove you to speak righteousness before this assembly. First-born, and foremost in merit, righteoussouled, and comparable to Dilipa and Nahuşa, Kākutstha deserves the kingdom, just as Dasaratha did. If I commit myself to this sin dishonourable and calculated to bring me to perdition, I shall in this world bring disgrace on the race of the Ikşvākus. I do not at all relish the sin that has been committed by mother. Remaining here with joined hands I bow down to Rāma gone to the forest fastness. I will follow Rāma. That best of men is the king. Rāghava deserves the dominion of the three worlds themselves. Hearing words informed with those righteousness, the entire assembly with their minds intent upon Rāma, from joy shed tears. If I fail to bring back the noble one from the forest, I will like the exalted Lakşmaņa remain even in that forest. I will in presence of this mixed assembly of pious and honourable persons following every perfection, adopt every expedient to bring back Rāma. I have already despatched beforehand persons serving for love as well as those for money, and layers of roads and their keepers, and I intend setting out now. Having said this, the virtuous Bharata attached to his brother spoke to Sumantra skilled in counsel, who was by, saying. Up, and go, O Sumantra at my command. Do you make known this journey and bring the forces. Thus accosted by the magnanimous Bharata, Sumantra with a cheerful heart issued orders concerning everything desirable as he was ordered. Hearing that the army had been ordered to march forth for bringing back Rāma, the subjects as well as the generals of the forces became exceedingly delighted. Hearing of the journey to Rāma, for bringing him back the wives of the soldiers apprised of the order that had been issued to the latter, being exceedingly delighted, hurried on. And the generals expeditiously despatched their forces with warriors by means of horses and cares and cars fleet as the mind. Seeing those force marshalled, Bharata staying near his preceptor, said to Sumantra who was at his side, “Do you speedily bring my car” In obedience to the mandate of Bharata, Sumantra exceedingly rejoiced, appeared with the car yoked with superb steeds. Then that powerful descendant of Raghu of truthful character, and having unswerving truth for his prowess, Bharata, having said what was fit, spoke words calculated to gladden his illustrious superior gone to the mighty forest. O Sumantra, arise you speedily and, your desire fully attained, go by my command, and tell the chiefs of the army, and our principal adherents to array the forces. Thereat rising, Rājanyas and Vaisyas, and Vņşalas; and Vipras in every house began to yoke camels and cars and mules and elephants and excellent steeds. Thereat rising, Rājanyas and Vaisyas, and Vņşalas; and Vipras in every house began to yoke camels and cars and mules and elephants and excellent steeds.