When the night had been spent, that best of Raghus gently awakened Lakşmaņa from his light sleep. O Sumiträ's son, do you hear the dulcet notes of the birds in the woods. Let us proceed. O repressor of foes, the time of our departure is present. Awakened at the proper time, Rāma's brother left off sleep and drowsiness and clinging fatigue. Then they all arising touched the sacred waters of the river, and began to proceed on the way to Citrakuța inhabited by ascetics. Setting out in season with Sumitra's son, he of eyes resembling lotus-petais spoke these words to Sītā. O Vaidehi, behold these flowering trees, the Kinsukas in spring appearing engarlanded with their own flowers, and as if flaming., Do you behold the Bhallatakas and Bilvas bending beneath their fruits and flowers, with no man to enjoy them. Surely, we: shall be able to live here. Behold, O Laksmana, these honeycombs measuring about a Droņa have been hung up on trees by the bees. In the charming woods overarched by flowers, the Datyuha cries, and is responded to by the peacock. Do you behold Citrakuta frequented by mad elephants and resonant with the voice of multitudes of birds, the mountain with its towering summits. O child, we will disport in the sacred woods of Citrakuta with fine level plains, and covered with divers trees. Then they proceeding on foot along with Sītā, arrived at the charming and beautiful mountain Citrakuta. Arriving at the mountain inhabited by birds of various kinds, abounding in fruits and roots, and furnished with watery expanses, (Răma) said. O amiable one, methinks this beautiful hill furnished with innumerable fruits and roots, is fraught with subsistence. And the hill is inhabited by high-souled ascetics. Let this, O child, be our abode. We will dwell here. Then Ráma, Lakşmana and Sītā with joined hands presented themselves at the asylum of Vālmīki and saluted him. Thereat the Maharși cognizant of morality said to them, "Be seated!” and addressed Rāma, saying, “Has your journey been a pleasant one?” Then having duly acquainted the saint with matters pertaining to himself, that lord, the mighty-armed elder brother of Laksmana, said to the latter. O Lakşmaņa, bring you wood good and strong. O amiable one, construct a dwelling. My mind is set upon staying here. Hearing his words, Sumitra's son procured woods of various descriptions, and then that subduer of foes reared a cottage thatched with leaves. Beholding that goodly dwelling walled with wood furnished with doors, Rāma addressed these words and Lakşmaņa, intent upon ministering to his brother. Procuring meat, we will worship the deity presiding over this dwelling. O Sumitrā's son, those who wish to live long, should pacify the household gods. O Lakşmaņa graced with auspicious eyes, do you killing deer, swiftly bring it here. It behoves us to observe the rules prescribed by the scriptures. Do you follow the ordinance. Acquainted with the words of his brother, Lakşmaņa, slayer of hostile heroes did as he was told. Thereupon Rāma addressed him again. Do you cook this meat. We will worship the presiding deities of this mansion. Bestir yourself, the moment is mild and the day is styled Dhruva. Then Lakşmana the son of Sumitrā endowed with vigour, having slain a sacred black deer, threw it into flaming fire. And seeing it well scorched and hot and free from blood, Lakşmaņa spoke to that foremost of men, Rāghava, saying. Here is the entire black deer roasted by me, capable of serving any purpose. Do you, O you that resemble a celestial, worship the gods. Having performed his ablutions, Rāma conversant with the ritual and possessing a knowledge of Japa, restraining his senses, performed all the mantras that are necessary for completing a sacrifice; and having in a pure spirit communed with all the deities, entered the habitation. And (this having been done), Rāma of immeasurable energy rejoiced exceedingly. And sacrificing to Vaisva, Rudra and Visnu, he performed some ceremonies for removing malign influences from the abode. Having duly performed Japa and bathed is consonance with the ordinance, Rāma made an excellent sacrifice for removing sin. And then Rāghava established a dais, and a Caitya proportionate to the abode.* The N.W.P. text reads:, "And in that romantic. forest abounding in various kinds of beast and birds, with trees bearing a profusion of variegated flowers, and resounding with the roars of beasts and serpents, those ones and, who had conquered their senses, began to live happily.", And having with garlands made of wild flowers, fruits roots, meat cooked according to the ordinance, water, Fapa as prescribed by the Veda, grass, and faggot, worshipped the spirits, those descendants of Raghu, the auspicious Rāma and Lakşmaņa, in company with Sītă entered the graceful mansion.] And as the celestials enter the hall entitled Sudharmă, they together with the view of dwelling in it, entered the mansion beautiful to behold, thatched with the leaves of trees, built at a convenient site, well-made, and keeping out the wind. And having come to the charming Citrakuta and the river Mālyavatī furnished with excellent bathing places, and haunted by beasts and fowls, they rejoiced with glad hearts, and forsook the grief incident to their exile from the city.