Hearing of his father's death and the exile of his brothers, Bharata burning in grief, said these words. Deprived of my father as well as my brother like to a father, what shall I bewailing them and undone by you do with the kingdom? You, like one throwing alkali on a sore, have, by bringing about the death of the king and making Rāma an ascetic, heaped grief on grief. You have come like the fatal night for the destruction of this race. Not under-standing it, my father embraced live coal. O you that have your gaze fixed on sin, it is through you that my sovereign has come by death; and that, O stainer of the line, this race has by your infatuation been deprived of its happiness. Having got you, my illustrious sire intent upon truth, king Dasaratha, afflicted by extreme sorrow, has departed this life. Why has the king, my father, ever loving virtue, been deprived of life? Why has Rāma been banished; and wherefore has he gone to the woods? Afflicted with grief for their son, even if Kausalya and Sumitrā live, it will be hard for them to do so in the presence of you, my mother. Surely the noble and virtuous Råma, well knowing his duties towards his superiors, regards you as highly as he does his own mother. In the same way, my eldest mother, the farsighted Kausalyā, doing her duties by you, bears herself like a sister. Why, O sinful one, having sent to the woods her magnanimous son, clad in bark, do you not grieve? Having exiled the famous and heroic Rāma seeing no sin, clad in bark, what benefit do you perceive as yours? I deem that you did not know how very highly I regarded Rāghava; and therefore it is that you have brought this mighty calamity. Not seeing those chiefs of men, Rāma and Lakşmaņa, by virtue of whose energy can I venture to rule the kingdom? The monarch was ever protected by that powerful one possessed of mighty energy, as Meru is protected by its forest. Like a calf burdened with a load capable of being borne by a mighty ox, by what energy shall I bear this burden which was borne by an exceedingly strong person? And even if this strength be mine through yoga or vigour of intellect, I will not crown with success the hopes of you, proud of your son. Nor, had Rāma not always regarded you as his mother, would I hesitate to renounce you, whose heart has been set on sin. O you that views unrighteousness, O you that have fallen off from the way of the good, how could such thoughts unworthy of our line, arise in your mind? In this race, the eldest brother of al} is installed in the kingdom: the other brothers remain under him. O fell one, you did not, I think, know the morality of kings, or the consequence that attends its faithful observance. Of all the princes, the eldest is always installed as the king. Even this is the accepted principle of all sovereigns, specially the descendants of Ikşvāku. But to-day the pride of character of those whose virtue was their sole concern,* and who shone in the character of their line, has been humbled through they instrumentality. *Another interpretation is;, Whose virtue is their sole protector. And how, O highly exalted lady, O you that born in a royal race, could such reprehensible fatuity take possession of your senses? But, O you bent upon sin, I will by no means fulfil the wish of you by whom has been brought in the first instance this calamity calculated to end my existence. Further, O sinless one, I will do this at present was to displease you: I will bring from the forest my brother dear to his relatives. And having brought back Rāma, I will in a perfectly contented spirit, became the slave of that one of flaming energy. The high-souled Bharata afflicted (his mother) with multitudes of words causing pain; and distressed with grief, emitted sounds like to a lion in the cave of Mandāra.