Then on the morning of the fourteenth day, the ministers of the king assembled addressed Bharata in the following words. Having exiled his eldest son and the exceedingly strong Lakşmaņa, Dasaratha who was the superior of our superiors has gone to heaven. Do you, therefore, O illustrious prince, become our king. Having been permitted by the king you will commit no fault (by doing so), as this kingdom is without a master. O Raghava, having procured all these necessaries for the installation, the counsellor and othe, as well as the citizens wait, О king's son. Do you, O Bharata, take charge of this secure kingdom bequeathed by your father and grandfather. Do you, O foremost of men, have yourself sprinkled, and rule over us. Thereupon, having gone round all the things procured for the sprinkling, Bharata from in his vows addressed those persons, saying. In our line it is ever fit for the first-born alone to perform the task of government. It does not behove you who are wise to say so to me. Certainly Rāma our eldest brother shall become the king; and I will abide in the forest for five all nine years. Do you array the grand and mighty my consisting of fourfold forces. I will bring back from the forest my eldest brother Rāghava. And taking all these necessaries for the investiture in front, I will go in the direction of the forest for Rāma. And sprinkling that chief of men on the spot, I will placing him in our front, bring Rāma back, like to fire brought in from the sacrifice. I will never fulfil the desire of this lady proud of her son. I will inhabit the impracticable woods, and Rāma shall become the monarch. Let workmen lay out level roads in uneven tracts; and let those men that are adepts in threading places difficult to pass through, follow us. When the prince had spoken thus in behalf of Rāma, all those persons answered him in these excellent words. For saying this, may Lakşmi seated on the lotus remain at they side; inasmuch you wish to confer the earth on the eldest son of the monarch! Hearing that graceful speech of the king's son, tear-drops. begot of delight began to trickle from their eyes and adorned those noble countenances. Their grief removed, with cheerful hearts, the counsellors, courtiers, and others hearing that speech (of the prince), said, “O best of men, according to your order artizans as well as people cherishing a high regard for you have been directed to lay out a read."