Rāma, intent on repairing to the forest, and treading in pious tracks, after duly saluting Kausalyā and beautifying the royal road, crowded with people, captivated their hearts by means of his high accomplishments. Vaidehi, ever engaged in ascetic rites, did not hear of all these affairs; there was in her heart only the thought of Rāma's installation. That daughter of the king, after offering her service to the deities according to the proper royal rites, was eagerly awaiting the approach of Rāma with a grateful and pleased heart. Entered Rāma this beautiful abode, excellently furnished and filled with people highly delighted, having his head hanging down a little with shame. Sītā, seeing her husband, racked with sorrow and troubled in mind with anxiety, rose up trembling from her seat. Seeing her, that virtuous souled Rāghava, could not bear his internal sorrow, which manifested itself by external signs. Finding him with face pale and perspiring, and incapable of containing grief within, Sītā sore distressed with sorrow addressed him, saying, Oh my lord, why do I perceive such a change in you? To day the constellation Puşya is in conjunction with the moon, and planet Bịhaspati is presiding over this conjunction, this day has been declared as the most auspicious one by the learned Brahmins, then why do you cherish such a sorrow in the mind? Why has not your charming face been placed under the shade of an umbrella having hundred ribs and white as a watery foam? Why do not the servants fan you, having eyes like lotus' petals, with chowries white as the moon or a goose? I do not see you, Oh best of men, eulogised with auspicious songs by the panegyrists, encomiasts and family bards. Why do not the Brahmins, versed in the Vedas, observing the formal rites, sprinkle on your head honey and curd, after washing it duly? Why are not your subjects, citizens urbans, and leading members of society dressed and adorned, willing to follow you? Why does not that excellent sport-chariot go before you, having four fast going steeds, adorned with golden ornaments tied to it? Why does not that excellent elephant precede you, Oh great hero, which is gifted with auspicious marks and resembles as mass of dark clouds and a mighty hill? Why do not the servants run before you, Oh mighty hero, with a pretty looking royal seat embroidered with gold? Why do I perceive your face so pale as never seen before, and why therein is no mark of gladness, when every thing for your installation has been made ready? Whereupon spoke to that weeping Sītā, the descendant of Raghu thus:, Oh Sītā, Oh you born of a great family, versed in the knowledge of religion and intent on the performance of religious rites, my father has banished me to the forest! Do you hear, Oh daughter of Janaka, how has this calamity befallen me. In the days of yore was granted to my mother, Kaikeyi two boons by my father, king Dasaratha of truthful vows. When every thing was made ready by my father for my installation, Kaikeyi reminded him of his promise and gained over him for this righteousness. I shall live in the forest of Dandaka for fourteen years and Bharata shall be installed by my father as the heir apparent of the throne. And myself bound to fly as an exile to the wood, have come here to see you; do you not praise me ever before Bharata. Those who are crowned with prosperity cannot bear another's praise; is it therefore behoves you not to extol my virtues in the presence of Bharata. You should not extol me even in the company of your friends; you shall be then able to live with Bharata as one favourable to his party. The monarch has granted him this lasting heir appearentship; it is therefore proper for you, Oh Sītā, to please him specially for he is the king now. To day shall I repair to the forest for redeeming my father's vows; do you, Oh high minded one, live here in undisturbed mind. Do you, Oh sinless and auspicious one, live here engaged in religious rites and fasts, when I shall wend my way to the forest inhabited by the great ascetics. Rising from the bed early in the morning, adore the deities, every day, and then bow down to the feet of my father Dasaratha, the lord of men. My mother Kausalyā is old and much pressed down with sorrow; do you show proper respects to her, considering it to be a pious deed. You should then bow down to my other mothers who all minister to me, with equal love and affection. Should you specially regard Bharata and Śatrughna like to your sons or brothers, who are dearer to me than my life itself. You should not do, Oh Vaidehī, any such thing as might be unpleasant to Bharata, for he is the king of the land as well as of the family. The monarchs are always propitiated by being served with assiduity and good temper; they are offended when any thing contrary to it happens. They renounce even their own son, born of their lions, when they find him bringing about their mischief, and admit into their favour persons devoted to their welfare bearing no relationship whatever. It therefore behoves you, Oh auspicious one, to live here, abiding by Bharata's commands and being engaged in religious rites and truthful vows. I am going to the forest, Oh my darling, and you shall live here. Oh excellent lady, abide by my word as did you never formerly falsify it.