Afflicted by the mighty force on its way with banners (displayed), those inhabitants of the woods, leaders of elephant-herds, took to their heels in company with the herds themselves. And bears and Prsatas and Rurus were on all sides seen in the forest-ways, and on hills and rivers. And that virtuous son of Dasaratha with a glad heart held on this way, surrounded by that vast army consisting of fourfold forces, raising a tremendous uproar. And that army of the high-souled Bharata resembling the waves of the ocean, covered the earth quite, as clouds in the rainy season cover the welkin. And filled with steeds and mighty elephants, the earth at that time for a long while remained invisible. And having proceeded a long way, the graceful Bharata, with his bearers extremely tired, said these words to that foremost of counsellors, Vasistha. From appearances, and from what I had heard, it is evident that we have arrived at that region which Bharadvāja had told us of. This is the mountain Citrakuta and that the river Mandakinī. And from a distance this forest appears like dark clouds. And now our elephants resembling hills afflict the romantic sides of Citrakuta. And the trees scatter blossoms over the sides of the mountain, even as after summer sable clouds pour down showers. O Śatrughna, behold the realms inhabited by Kinnaras, scattered with steeds, like the main with makaras. And these herds of deer furnished with celerity, being urged on, roam about like masses of clouds in the sky in autumn, propelled by the winds. And like the people of the south, these warriors bearing shields resembling clouds, are adorning their heads with ornaments of perfumed blossoms. And this forest, although void of men and dreadful in appearance, at present appears to me like Ayodhyā teeming with people. The dust raised by the hoofs (of horses) stands covering the sky: anon the wind bearing it away, compasses my pleasure. And, O Satrughna, see how fast these cars yoked with steeds and driven by skilful charioteers, are proceeding in the forest. And behold these beauteous peacocks, which, being frightened, take refuge in the mountain, the home of feathered tribes. This country appears to me exceedingly lovely. This abode of the ascetics is like to the way to heaven itself. Male and female deer and Prşatas in the forest, beautiful to look at, appear as if variegated with flowers. Now let the soldiers go advisedly and search this forest, so that they light upon those chiefs of men, Rāma and Lakşmaņa. Hearing Bharata's speech, persons with weapons in their hands, plunged into the forest, and those heroes presently discovered the top of a (column of) smoke. Having seen the top of the (column of) smoke, they came before Bharata and said, "Fire cannot exist where there is no man present. Therefore it is evident that even here are those descendants of Raghu.” But if those foremost of men, those subduers of their enemies, the princes, be not here, there are others, being ascetics, resembling Rāma. Hearing their words acceptable to the pious, that afflicter of hostile ranks, Bharata, said to the entire army. Do you carefully stay here: do not proceed further. I myself will go, and Sumantra and Dhrti. Thus desired, the troops remained all about that place. Bharata went away, keeping his gaze fixed in the direction of the top of the column of) smoke. Desired by Bharata to halt, that army, looking in the direction of the smoke, rejoiced soon on learning that the beloved Rāma had arrived (at that place). Desired by Bharata to halt, that army, looking in the direction of the smoke, rejoiced soon on learning that the beloved Rāma had arrived (at that place).