As those foremost of persons surrounded by their friends indulged in lamentations, the night passed away in grief. On the night being succeeded by an auspicious morning, those brothers surrounded by their friends, having performed Homa and Japa on the Mandākinī, returned to Rāma. And sitting silent, no one said anything. Then Bharata addressed Rāma in the midst of those friends, saying. My mother was (first) pacified (by grant to the kingdom.) The kingdom is (now) mine. I grant the same to you. Do you enjoy the kingdom rid of its thorns. Like to a dyke forced by a torrent during the rains, this mighty monarchy is difficult of being protected save by you. As a mule is incapable of imitating the course of a horse, or as birds, that of Tarksya, I, O Lord of earth, lack the strength to imitate you. O Rāma, ever happy is the life of him that others depend upon for subsistence: unhappy is the life of the person that depends upon others for support. As a tree planted by a person, and by him made to increase, (until at last), sending out branches, a mighty tree, it is incapable of being got up by a dwarf; and then if, flowering, it show no fruits, it cannot contribute to the satisfaction of him for whom it has been planted. O mightyarmed one, this comparison is meant for you. This* it behoves you to apprehend, inasmuch as you are our excellent lord, and you do not teach us who depend upon you for support. *The import of the image. Let the principal orders, O monarch, behold you, represser of foes, established in the kingdom, like the powerful sun himself. O Kākutstha, let mad elephants roar, with the view of following you; and let the women of the inner apartments with concentrated rainds utter jubilation. On hearing the words of Bharata, who was beseeching Rāma, many of the citizens expressed their approbation by exclaiming, “Excellent well!" Seeing the illustrious Bharata aggrieved and engaged in lamentation, the calm and considerate Rāma consoled him, saying. No creature is endowed with the power of exercising any control over the course of events, man has no independent status (in nature). The Destroyer draw him both here and hereafter. Those that increase, are destined to deteriorate; those that go upward, ultimately fall, those that come together, separate in the end; and life at length meet with death. As a ripe fruit has no other fear than fall, so man who is born, has no other fear than death. Even as a stout-pillared edifice, getting dilapidated, waxes weak, so men coming under the sway of decrepitude and death, get enfeebled. A night that has gone by, does not return, as the full Yamunā, when she has entered the ocean, does not come back. In this world, days and nights pass away with creatures, and speedily impair their lives, even as in summer the rays (of the sun) (dry up) the waters. Do you therefore deplore yourself. Why do you lament any thing else? Every one's life is decreasing, whether he sits or moves. Death goes with one, sits down with one, and after having gone a long way, returns with one. The person is filled with folds in the skin, the hair has grown hoary, the individual is enfeebled because of age, by doing what, can be prevent this? People rejoice on the rising of the sun; they feel delighted at the approach of night, but they do not understand that their lives have (meanwhile) been shortened. People are exhilarated at the commencement of a new season of novel fashion; creatures get their lives shortened at the change of season. As on the mighty ocean, one piece of wood comes in contact with another; so, a person, having been in association with another, is separated from him in time. In this way, wives and sons and kindred and wealth, having been in association, go away; their separation is certain. There exists not one in this world that can change one's nature as received. A person lamenting a dead individual, has no power to prevent his own death. As while one is proceeding on a road, another stationed by the way, says, 'I too will go in your wake,' even so, the way that has been followed by our predecessors, (must be followed as well by us.) Why should people mourn for deceased relatives), when they are themselves subject to the fate that knows no turning? (Perceiving the destruction of) life declining, like to a current that never turns back, one should engage his soul in happiness; for all men are said to be born for the same. My child, our righteous sire, who, after having performed excellent and entire sacrifices, accompanied with Dakșiņās, has repaired to heaven, honoured of he good, should not be mourned.* *The N.W.P. text has seven additional lines here, wanting in the other texts:, “That lord of the earth, our father Dasaratha, has gone to heaven. On account of having adequately maintained his servants and governed his subjects, and virtuously given away wealth, our sire has gone to heaven. And by virtue of supremely excellent and desirable acts, and sacrifices accompanied with Dakşiņā, that master of this world, our father Dasaratha, has ascended heaven. And having celebrated many sacrifices and enjoyed luxuries, that lord of the earth, having attained a goodly age, has gone to heaven." Having renounced his human frame wasted and worn out with age, our father has attained celestial state, which exists in the regions of Brahma. Such an one should never be mourned by any wise person like you or myself, accomplished in learning and more than ordinarily intelligent. Such manifold grief and mourning and lamentation should be renounced by intelligent and firm persons in all conditions in life. Do you cast off this grief: let not sorrow overpower you. Going thither, stay in that city. And, O best of speakers, this was also enjoined by our sire of controlled sense. I also must do my noble father's will as to whatever that one of pious acts has laid upon me. O subduer foes, it is not proper for me to pass by his orders. So they are also worthy of being honoured by you. He is our friend and father. O descendant of Raghu, that mandate of our righteous father, acceptable to me, will I obey by abiding in the woods. O foremost of men, (good in the next world is capable of being attained by an honest and pious person crowned with sterling virtues, ever following his superiors. O best of men, thinking that our father Dasaratha has attained excellent state, do you, resorting to all noble qualities, seek your welfare in the next world. Having said these significant words to his younger brother, with the view of making him obey the injuctions of their father, that lord, the magnanimous Rāma, paused.