Then set out in advance persons having a knowledge of the humidity or otherwise of the soil, men skilled in making tents, brave delivers engaged on their proper work; those capable of constructing canals and water courses, people on pay, car-makers, men preparing machines, carpenters, those intended to guard the ways, pioneers, cooks, perfumers, makers of wickerware and able guides. And as the mighty throng began to proceed, it resembled the swell of the sea on the occasion of a parva. And number of men skilled in roadconstructing went before furnished with various implements. And hewing away boughs, plants and shrubs and woody projections, stones, and diverse trees, they went on preparing a road. They set up trees where there were none, and at places they felled trees by means of axes, tankas, and daos, others possessed of greater strength and more powerful, with their hands uprooted masses of Vīrana and here and there levelled a rising ground. And other filled up with dust wells and capacious hollows, and speedily levelled deep places all around. And those men threw bridges wherever they became necessary, and broke the earth wherever such a process was required, and excavated whenever such a process was required, and excavated whenever it was necessary. In a short time, they made places poor of water overflow with many and various expanses resembling the ocean. And in tracts void of water, they digged divers receptacles of water, decorated with daises. And the way of the army, furnished with pavements of bricks and clay, with trees bearing blossoms, eloquent with the tunes of birds, decorated with pennons, sprinkled with sandal showers, and garnished with flowers of various kinds, looked exceedingly beautiful, like to the way of the celestials. Then having received the command of Bharata, the men that were in charge of the tents, ordered (the workmen) to pitch the tents, and when they had been pitched at a romantic spot filled with tasteful fruits, in consonance with the injunction of the high-souled Bharata, the men decorated splendidly the tents which themselves were like the ornaments of the road. Under an auspicious star and at a favourable hour, men well up in the work set the encampment of the high-souled Bharata. And the tents surrounded by an entrenchment paved with dust, containing images made of sapphires, graced with goodly thoroughfares, lined with edifices, encircled by towers and walls, decorated with streamers, having wellmade high-ways, and appearing like celestial daises and containing stately mansions dovecotes, resembled the metropolis of Śakra himself. And passing by the Jāhnavi abounding in various trees and woods, of cool and crystal waters, and filled with mighty fishes, that way of the chief of men constructed by artizans, looked more and more lovely as it proceeded, as the unclouded sky looks beautiful at night, adorned with innumerable stars.