Then going out of the mountain, the Lord of Kosala showed to Mithila's daughter the charming stream Mandākini of excellent waters. And Rāma, furnished with eyes resembling lotuses, addressed the daughter of king Videha, transcendentally beautiful, with a countenance like the fair moon, saying. Behold the river Mandākini, having variegated islets; beautiful; frequented by ducks and cranes; and filled with flowers; covered with diverse trees bearing fruits and flowers; and looking graceful all round like Saughandhikā herself of Kuvera. And the waters rendered muddy in consequence of herds of deer drinking of them, as well as the graceful descents to the river, fill me with pleasure. And, my beloved sages wearing matted locks and deer-skins, with barks for their sheets, are in season performing their ablutions in the river Mandakini. And observing rules, persons raising up their arms, are worshipping the sun, and, O you of expansive eyes, after these appear ascetics following vows, (engaged if Tapa) And the hill seems to dance on the wind swaying the tops of tree; and on both sides of the river, the trees are crowned with flowers and leaves. And behold the river Mandakini, somewhere with its waters resembling pearls, and somewhere with islets, and somewhere filled with persons who have attained emancipation. O you of slender waist, behold these hosts of flowers spreading along, and others dipping themselves (in the stream). And, O auspicious one, behold these sweetthroated birds, the Chakravākas, getting upon the islets, uttering pleasant notes. Methinks, O beauteous one, the sight of Citrakuta and of Mandakini is even more delightful than life in the metropolis, or the sight of your own self. Do you like to her companion perform your bath with me in this stream, whose waters are perpetually stirred by emancipated ones, furnished with asceticism, self-restraint, and control over the senses, who have had their sins removed. Do you, O Sītā, perform your ablutions in the Mandākinī, scattering at the sometime, O girl, red and white lotuses. Do you, my wife, always consider the wild animals as citizens, the mountain as Ayodhyā, and this stream as the Sarayū. The virtuous Lakşmaņa is ever obedient to my commands; and, O Videha's daughter, you also are favourable to me. This causes delight in my heart. Bathing thrice (in this river), and living on tasteful fruits and roots, I in your company do not today wish either for Ayodhyā or royalty. Bathing in this beauteous stream agitated by herds of elephants, whose waters are drunk by elephants, lions and monkeys, which is graced with flowers, and which is decked with multitudes of blossoms, there is not one who has not his fatigue removed, and who does not feel exhilarated. Having thus along with his beloved one, spoken variously regarding the stream, that perpetuator of the Raghu race, began to range the charming Citrakuța, resembling the collyrium in hue.