Having passed the extensive and romantic Kosala, the intelligent elder brother of Lakşmaņa facing Ayodhyā said with joined hands. O best of cities, governed by Kākutstha, I address you as well as the deities that inhabit and guard you. Returning from my abode in the woods, I will, freed from my debt to the lord of earth, behold you again along with my father and mother. Then he furnished with graceful coppery eyes raising his right hand, with tears in his eyes and in forlorn guise addressed the people of the provinces, saying. You have shown due compassion and regret for me. To grieve long is not fit. do you therefore repair to look after your interests. Thereupon saluting that high-souled one and going round him, bewailing all the while in heaviness of heart, they at times stopped on their way. And as they kept lamenting, unsatiated in beholding him, Rāghava went beyond the range of their sight, like the Sun disappearing at nightfall. Then that powerful one mounted on his car left behind him Kosala abounding in wealth and kine, inhabited by charitable people, auspicious, free from every kind of fear, charming, containing altars and stakes, with gardens and mango groves, furnished with tanks, teeming with burly and contented people, filled with kine, worthy of being protected by monarchs, and resounding with the sounds of Vedic recitations. Proceeding at a middling pace, that best of those endowed with fortitude, passed through lands smiling cheerfully, prosperous, and crowded with elegant villas, realms worthy of being covered by the foremost of kings. Then Rāghava saw the celestial Gangā running in three courses with cool waters free from moss, beautiful to behold, frequented by the sages, adorned with graceful asylums close by, containing sacred watery expanses haunted at the hours of sport by delighted Apsaras, graced with celestials, Danvas, Gandharbas, and Kinnaras, ever holy, attended by the wives of Nagas and Gandharbas, with hills serving as sporting-places for the celestials, the river surrounded by gardens of the immortals, that for the behoof of the celestials had ascended heaven, famous, furnished with assemblage of celestial lotuses, with the rocks laughing aloud in consequence of the dashing of water, laughing without blemish with foam, sometimes having her water flowing like a braid, and sometimes decked by eddies, sometimes still and deep, and sometimes rushing furiously, sometimes sounding solemnly and sometimes roaring dreadfully, with crowds of deities bathing in its water, embellished with fresh-blown lotuses, having spacious shoals and spots covered with glittering sand, resounding with the cries of cranes of various kinds graced by Chakravakas, ever resorted to by maddened fowls, without blame, decked by trees on its banks resembling garlands somewhere covered with full-blown lotuses and somewhere containing multitudes of lotuses, at places decked with tracts of lilies, at others with opening buds, rife with the farina of various flowers, sometimes resembling a proud female, removing the dirt of sin, translucent like a gem to the view, with the elephants of the quarters, wild ones, mad ones, as well as those the best of their species, and those carrying the foremost of celestials, roaring in the neighbouring woods, adorned carefully with the choicest ornaments like to a damsel, crowded with flowers and fruits and bushes as also with birds, flowing from the feet of Vişnu, divine, without sin, capable of destroying it, filled with porpoises, crocodiles and snakes, drawn out from the matted locks of Sankara by the energy of Sagara's descendant, the queen of the Ocean, resonant with the cries of cranes and krauñcas. The mighty-armed Rāma came to the Gangā near Śộngaverapura. And beholding (the river) with her surging eddies, that mighty car-warrior said to the charioteer, Sumantra, We will rest here to day. There is hard by the river a gigantic Ingudī tree, bearing a profusion of flowers and fresh leaves. Here, O charioteer, will we stay to-day. I see (before me) the foremost of streams, whose waters are honoured (by all) and which is sacred to celestials and men and Gandharvas and beasts and serpents and fowls. Thereupon saying to Rāghava, “Very well,” Lakşinana and Sumantra with the horses went to the Ingudi tree. And reaching the tree, that descendant of Ikşvāku alighted from the car along with his wife and Lakşmaņa. Then descending, Sumantra relieved those excellent horses, and with joined hands stood before Rāma seated at the foot of the tree. There lived at the place a king named Guha, a friend to Răma, dear as his own self, a Nişāda by birth, powerful and famed as the lord of the Nişādas. Hearing that thai foremost of men, Răma, had arrived at the place, he (Guha) surrounded by his aged counsellors and kindred came to him. Seeing the lord of the Nişādhas at a distance, Rāma came up to him in company with Sumitra's son. Thereat touched, Guha embracing Rāghava said to him, "O Rāma, as Ayodhyā this kingdom is to you. What shall I do for you?" Who, O mighty-armed one, receives such a welcome guest? Then speedily bringing various kinds of sapid rice and Arghyas, he said, “O mighty-armed one, has your journey been a pleasant one? This entire earth is yours. We are your servants, you are our master. Do you rule here, accepting the eatables and drinkables and those that are to be sucked and excellent beds and fodder." When Guha had said this, Rāghava answered him, saying, “We have been well received by you and are well pleased with you, since coming here on foot you have shown us affection." Then pressing Guha hard with his arms, Rāma said, O Guha, it is by good luck that I see you whole along with your friends. Is your kingdom in peace both as regards your friends and the forest? The things that you have presented me with out of love I accept but can not enjoy. Do you know me as assuming an ascetic mode of life in the woods, in which I am to wear Kusa and bark and live upon fruits and roots. So, with the single exception of the food for the horses, things require I none; and these horses being well kept, I shall consider myself as entertained by you. These are the favourites of my father, Dasaratha, and on these horses being well provided for, I shall be well received. Thereupon Guha on the spot commanded the men, saying, Let the horses have without delay meats and drinks. Then putting his sheet over his person, he (Rāma) performed his evening devotions. Having done this, he took as his sustenance the water that had been procured by Lakşmaņa himself. On Rāma having lain down on the ground along with his wife, Lakşmaņa washed their feet, and then remained stationed under the tree. Then bow in hand and with his wits about him, conversing with Sumitra's son along with the charioteer, Guha remained awake, watching Rama. Thus the livelong night passed away with that illustrious, intelligent and high-souled son of Daśaratha, unacquainted with troubles and worthy of happiness.