Seeing the forces with banners flying quartered on the banks of the river Gangā, and engaged in carious occupations, the lord of the Nisadas, Guha, said to his relatives ranged around. This mighty host here appears like an ocean. I do not find its end even by thinking of it in my mind. Surely the foolish Bharata has come hither himself: on his car appears the huge Kovidāra banner. Be like, he will either bind us by nooses or slay us and next Daśaratha's son Rāma banished from the kingdom by his sire. Desirous of taking complete possession of the rare regal fortune of that sovereign (Rāma), Kaikeyi's son, Bharata, comes to destroy him. Rāma the son of Daśaratha is both my maintainer and friend. Do you in his interests, donning on your mail, wait on the banks of the river. And stationed on the river Gangā, let my powerful retainers subsisting on fruits and roots and meat, be prepared for opposing Bharata's passages over the river. And let hundreds upon hundreds of Kaivarta youths accoutred in mail remain in each of five hundred barks., Guha issued this order. But if Bharata be well disposed towards Rāma, this host shall today safely cross the Ganga. Having said this, the lord of the Nişādas, Guha, taking a present of flesh, fish and honey, went out for interviewing Bharata. Seeing Guha approaching, the powerful son of the charioteer knowing season, humbly informed Bharata of it, saying. This lord (that approaches) surrounded by his relatives, is very potent in Dandaka and is an old friend of your brother. Therefore let Guha, the lord of the Nişādas, see you, O Kākutstha. He indubitably knows where Rāma and Lakşmaņa are. Hearing these wise words of Sumantra, Bharata at once said, "Let Guha see me." Receiving permission, Guha, right glad, appeared before Bharata, bending low, and said. This place is your home. But you have stolen a march over us. We dedicate all this to you. Do you reside in the abode of your servant. Here are fruits and roots gathered by the Nişādas and meat dry and moist and various other produces of the forest. I pray that entertained in various ways and heartily partaking of meats and drinks, this army may spend the night here. Tomorrow morning, you will go along with your forces.