That best of men, Rāma, remembering his father's commanded cleared a large tract of country before the night terminated. And as he went on, the auspicious night was spent. And then having offered up his devotions to the beneficent Sandhyā, Rāma entered into another country. And seeing villages having ploughed fields on their skirts, and powering woods, he by means of those excellent horses, proceeded very fast although seeming to go slowly. And as Rāma proceeded,* he heard the villagers speaking to each other, saying, Fie on king Dasaratha, who has yielded himself up to lust! *The N.W.P. text has an additional couplet:, How will that exalted lady, Janaka's daughter, ever engaged in enjoyment, bear misery? Ah! the rebutless, fell and sinful Kaikeyi intent upon impiety, having put by her honour, has resolved upon an exceedingly atrocious deed, she that exiles into the woods such a virtuous son of the monarch, endowed with high wisdom, kind, and having his senses under control.* *The N.W.P. text has an additional line: And of the reprehensible Kaikeyi intent upon cruel deeds. Alas! king Daſaratha has no affection for his own son, since wishes to dismiss from hence Rāma sinless and dear to the subjects. Hearing these words of the villagers, that hero, the lord of Kosala, left Kosala behind him. Then crossing the river Vedaśruti of sacred waters, Rāma went in the direction of the quarter in which Agastya resided. (South) Then proceeding for a good while, he crossed the cool flowing stream Gomati running in the direction of the ocean, with its banks filled with kine and inundating its edge. Having passed the Gomatī, Rāghava by means of fleet-coursing horses next crossed over the river Sandika resounding with the cries of cranes and peacocks. Here Rāma showed to Vaidehi those flourishing regions that had formerly been conferred by king Manu on Ikşvāku, and which teemed with populous tracts. Then frequently addressing the charioteer, saying, "O Suta", that best of men furnished with grace and endowed with a voice like that of a mad swan, spoke. When shall I coming back, range a hunting the blossoming groves of the Sarayū, along with my father and mother? I do not so much long for hunting in the woods of the Sarayū; but a relish (for the pastime) is considered as beyond compare being held in esteem by the Rājarşis. Hunting in the forest was introduced for the recreation of Rāghavas. Yet do I not take beyond measure to the chase which has been followed in season by the descendants of Manu and which is ever coveted by bowmen. Taking this subject, the descendant of Ikşvāku passed the way, addressing sweet words to the charioteer.