Then Rāma cast his eyes on (Bharata) as clad in bark and wearing matted locks he lay on the earth with joined hands, incapable of being gazed at, like the Sun at the time of the universal dissolution. Then recognizing him a little, he took by the hand his brother Bharata, lean, with a pallid countenance. And smelling the crown of his head, and embracing that descendant of Raghu, Rāma took Bharata on his lap and asked him affectionately. Where was your father, child, that you have come to the forest? It certainly behoves you not to come to the forest while he is living. Ah! I see you come from far after a long time. Why, my child, have you come to this gloomy forest? Is the king alive, my child, seeing that you have come hither; or, afflicted with grief, has he suddenly gone to the other world? O mild one, child that you are, your kingdom ever yours has not been wrested from you? And, O you having truth for prowess, do you, my child, minister to our sire? Is that truthful one, that performer of Rajasüya and Aśvamedha, ever devoted to righteousness, king Dasaratha, well? My child, is that exceedingly effulgent and learned Brāhmaṇa ever steady in morality, the priest of the Iksvākus, duly honoured? And, my child, are Kausalyā, and Sumitrā having a son, in happiness? And is the noble Kaikeyi in spirits? And is that one, sprung from a mighty line, humble and versed in various lore, your priest, who performs every ceremony, who bears no ill will, and whose gaze is ever fixed upon our welfare, honoured? Do intelligent and sincere people cognizant of the rules, look after the sacrificial fire? And do they regularly inform you of the proper seasons for performing the fire-sacrifice? Do you regard the deities, the ancestral manes, the preceptors like to predecessors, the physicians, the Brahmanas, and the servants? And do not disregard the preceptor Sudhanvā versed in excellent arms whether inspired with mantras or not, and accomplished in the knowledge of polity? And, my child, have you employed as your controlled, well-born, and understanding signs, who are like your own self? O descendant of Raghu, counsel well kept by clever councillors versed in lore, is the root of victory with kings. You have not come under the sway of sleep? and you awake at the proper hour? And do you during the short hours revolve the means of acquiring wealth? And you did not take counsel either with yourself alone, or (on the other hand) with a multiplicity of counsellors? and your counsel does not range the kingdom (i.e. does not take air)? O descendant of Raghu, having determined upon a course costing small effort but fraught with a mighty result, you set about it sharply and delay not? Do the (auxiliary) kings know only those acts of yours that have been accomplished or those that are well nigh so, and not those that you intend to set yours hand to? Do others through inference or appearances come at a knowledge of your counsels, although undivulged to others by yourself or your counsellors; and (do you and your ministers) attain to a knowledge of others' counsels? And passing by a thousand dunces, do you set your heart on having a single wise man? In times of pecuniary stress, a wise man stands in excellent stead. And although a king might be surrounded by a thousand or ten thousand fools, yet he can count upon no assistance (at their hands). And a single able counsellor, intelligent, heroic, and sagacious, bring great prosperity upon a king or a prince. And, my child, do you employ the best servants upon the best offices, the middling upon middling, and the worst upon the worst? And did you employ upon the most worthy offices counsellors who are above bribery, who have served your father and grand-father, and who are pure? And do the subjects visited with condign, punishment, as well as the ministers, disregard you, O son of Kaikeyi? Do the priests scorn you like a fallen one, even as females do those lascivious folks who use force towards the former? He that does not slay a physician skilled in ways and means, a servant given to enlisting the sympathies of his fellow-servants against his master, or a hero that covets riches, is slain (by them). And had you chosen for your general one that is confident, is endowed with intelligence and fortitude, sprung in a respectable race, and attached and able? And do you practically honour your foremost warriors possessed of prowess, who have already given evidence of their manliness? And do you at the proper time grant your soldiers what you should, provision and pay; and do not delay in doing this? If the proper time for granting provision and pay be passed, the servants get wroth with their master and tax him; and great is the evil that springs herefrom. And are the principal descendants of our race attached to you; and are they, when enlisted on your side with concentrated minds, ready to lay down their lives? O Bharata, are your spies persons coming from the provinces, and learned, upright, endowed with presence of mind, representing the truth, and possessed of wisdon? And do you acquire intelligence of the expedients, eighteen* in respect of others, and fifteen in respect of the own self, by means of every three spies appointed in connection with each of these expedients, men quite ignorant of each other's counsels? *1. Minister. 2. Priest. 3. Heir-apparent. 4. General. 5. Warder. 6. Gatekeeper of the inner-apartment. 7. Jailer. 8. Treasurer. 9. Conveyer of the royal orders. 10. Pleaders. 11. Judges. 12. Members of the council. 13. Distributor of pay and provision to the army. 14. Journeymen. 15. Justice of the peace. 16. Protector of the frontiers of the kingdom. 17. Magistrate. 18. Guards of rivers, hills, and fortresses. And do you not contemn those. weak ones that, O destroyer of your. foes, having been expelled, have come again (to you)? And, my child, you did not minister to atheistical Brāhmaṇas? These childish persons proud of their learning are only fit for bringing evils upon others. While there are excellent scriptures, these people of subtle intellects, having acquired a knowledge of dialectics, speak vanities. My child, do you protect the prosperous and renowned Ayodhyā, inhabited formerly by our heroic predecessors; bearing a true name; having strong gates; filled with elephants, steeds, and cars; thronged by thousands; with noble Brāhmaṇas, Kștriyas and Vaisyas breathing high spirits, and with their senses controlled, each engaged in his own task; abounding in people learned in the Veda; and surrounded with palatial mansions of various shapes? And, O descendant of Raghu, are the flourishing provinces marked with hundreds of Chaityas, filled with prosperous people, graced with abodes of deities, places for distributing water, and tanks, with man and women in happy mood, gay with meetings and festivities, having their outskirts well furrowed, provided with beasts, void of ill feelings, depending on tanks for their water supply, charming, renounced by fierce animals, free from all kinds of fear, decked with mines, left by unrighteous people, and well governed by my predecessors, having a good time of it? And do agriculturists and cow herds find favour in your sight? And remaining in their respective vocations, do they enjoy happiness? And do you maintain them by securing to them what they wish for and removing from them what they wish away? All the dwellers in his dominions should be protected by the king. And do you conciliate the females; and are they well protected by you? And do you not regard them; and do you not open to them your mind? And are the woods where elephants breed, kept by you; and have you kine? And do you not foster mares and female-elephants? And do you show yourself daily in the court, well robed? And rising in the morning, do you show yourself in the high-ways? And do your servants boldly present themselves before you; or do they all keep away? A middle course contributes to their good fortune. Are all the forts furnished with wealth, corn, arms water, machines, artisans, and bowmen? And are your incomings great and outgoings slender? And, O Raghu's descendant, you do not give away your coffers to the undeserving? And did you spend your wealth in the interests of the deities, or the pitris, or the Brāhmaṇas who have come to you, or warriors, or friends? If any respectable, pure-spirited and clean person happen to be accused by some one of theft or other crimes, do you from covetousness punish him without first having him tried by persons versed in scripture? And, O best of men, is a thief, that has been caught, interrogated (as to his guilt), and found with the stolen property on his person, set free (by your men) from motives of gain. And do your counsellors, o descendant of Raghu, accomplished in various lore, uninfluenced by greed, consider the conduct of both the rich and the poor involved in peril? O son of the Raghu race, the tears of those who have been falsely charged with any offence, (and who have failed to obtain justice), dropping, destroy the sons as well as the beasts of the ruler that minds his own comfort only. And do you with these three, gifts, mind and word, try to win over aged people, boys, physicians, and the principal ones? And do you salute spiritual preceptors, aged persons, ascetics, gods, guests, Caityas, emancipated one, and Brāhmaṇās? And you do not oppose righteousness by interest, or interest by virtue, or both by desire, intent on gratifying the senses? And, O foremost of conquerors, do you, O you cognisant of time, in season resorting to interest, desire, and virtue respectively, attain them, O bestower of boons? And do Brāhmaṇas versed in all religious lore and knowing interest, together with the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces wish for your happiness, O highly wise one? Atheism, untruthfulness, inattention, anger, procrastination, companionship with evil persons, indolence, gratification of the senses, consultation with a single person concerning the needs of a kingdom, taking counsel with those that are cognisant of evils alone, omission to take in hand a task that has been decided upon, divulgence of counsel, non-commencement of a course in the morning, and marching against all the foes at one and the same time, have you eschewed these ten and four faults? O descendant of Raghu, truly understanding the tenth, fifth, fourth and seventh classes as well as the eighth, and third ones, and the three kinds of learning, and victory over the senses, and the evils human and superhuman, six attributes, and the (peculiar) duties (of royalty), and the twenty classes, and the kinds of Prakritis and Mandala, and Yatra chastisement, and war and peace having each two sources; do you with due order observe all these? And, O wise one, do you, as laid down in the ordinance, take counsel, severally and in a body with three or four men? And do you observe the Vedas? And do you perceive the fruit of your acts? And have your wives borne children? And has your knowledge of scripture borne fruit? O descendant of Raghu, is your intellect going the way that I have indicated above? This course is conducive to long life, and fame; and virtue, desire and interest. O child, are you following the course that was followed by our ancestors? And are you maintaining the conduct that is excellent and passes along pious ways? And, O son of Raghu, you do not alone partake of sapid meats yourself alone? And do you share them with those friends who expect it? The learned king ruling (all) righteously, that chastiser of the subjects, the monarch attaining duly the entire earth, going away from hence, acquires the celestial regions.