Having heard this grand story, Anasāyā cognizant of righteousness, smelling the head of Mithilā's daughter, embraced Sītā with her arms. I have heard all that you, describing the selfchoice, have spoken sweetly and beautifully in articulated letters and feet. O sweet-speeched one, I have been delighted with your narration. But ushering in the auspicious night, the graceful Sun has set. And there are heard the notes of feathered ones, which, after having gone about in search of food, are resting now for the purpose of sleeping. And these ascetics having bathed, are wending their way in a body, carrying waterpitchers, their barks drenched with water. The smoke arising from the fire-sacrifice duly performed by the ascetics, reddish like the hue of the pigeon's neck, is seen, wafted by the wind. And trees of spare foliage appear dense (on all sides); and distance is no longer perceptible. And animals ranging in the night are going about all round; and those deer of the asylum are reposing on the daises. O Sītā, the night crested by the stars has arrived; and, veiled in moonlight, appears the moon in the heavens. Go you; I permit you. Do you seek the society of Rāma. I have been pleased with your sweet converse. O daughter of Mithilā, do you deck yourself before me. Do you thus please me, my child, you that look beautiful with excellent ornaments. Thereat, having adorned herself, Sītā, resembling the daughter of a celestial, bowing down to the feet (of the female ascetic), directed her steps towards Rāma. And that best of speakers, Raghava, saw Sita, decked with the ornaments affectionately presented by the ascetic; and he rejoiced thereat. Then Mithila's daughter, Sita, related to Rama all about her having been affectionately presented by the ascetic with attire, ornaments and the garland. Thereupon, witnessing the honour that had been accorded to Maithili, rare among men, Rāma became well pleased, as also that mighty car-warrior, Laksmana. Then Raghu's son, ministered to by the ascetic, happily spent the delightful night there, with her face resembling the moon. On the night having passed away, those foremost of men, after performing their ablutions, enquired of the ascetics performing fire sacrifices, who lived in the forest. Thereat the righteous ascetics ranging the forest said that all the sides of the forest were infested by Rākşasas. “Ferocious beasts feasting on blood, and Rākşasas, O Rāghava, living on human beings, wearing various shapes, abide in this mighty forest." These eat up ascetics leading the Brahmacarya mode of life, who happen to be unclean or heedless. Do you, therefore, O Raghava, let them. This is the path of the Maharșis, who procure fruits in the forest. By this way you will be able to enter the impracticable wild, O Rāghava. Thus addressed by the ascetic twice-born ones, and having been blessed by them, that repressor of foes, Rāghava, entered the forest in company with his wife and Lakşmaņa, like the sun entering a mass of clouds.