Bharata was speaking thus when the envoys with their vehicles fatigued, entered the splendid royal residence surrounded by a strong rampart. Presenting themselves before the king, they, well received by him as well as the prince, bowed down to the feet of the monarch. Then they addressed Bharata, saying, The priest and the counsellors have enquired after your welfare. Do you set out speedily. A business is on hand that Brooke no delay on your part. And, O you of expansive eyes, do you take these costly raiment's and ornaments, and present them to your maternal uncle and grandfather. Twenty Kotis are intended for the king and complete ten for your maternal uncle, O son of the monarch. Taking all these, Bharata attached to his relatives, made the articles over to them; and receiving the envoys with goodly gifts, spoke to them. Is my father, king Dasaratha, well? And is it well with Rama and the high-souled Laksmana? And is the mother of the intelligent Rāma, the revered Kausalyā, conversant with virtue and ever practising it, well? Is the virtuous Sumitrā, mother of Lakşmaņa and of the heroic Śatrughna, well? And that wrathful one ever intent on her interest and setting immense store by her wisdom, my mother Kaikeyī, is it also well with her? Thus addressed by the magnanimous Bharata, the envoys spoke to him these humble and brief words. Those of whose welfare you are enquiring after, are, O foremost of men, all well. Śrī seated on the lotus asks for you. Let your car be yoked. Thus addressed, Bharata said to the envoys, “Let me tell the king that the envoys are urging speed on me.” Having said this, that son of the king, Bharata, communicated to his maternal grand-father what the envoys had told him. Asked by the envoys, I shall, O monarch, go to my father. I shall come again whenever you will remember me. Thus accosted by Bharata, his maternal grandfather, the king, smelling Bharata's head, spoke these auspicious words to that descendant of Raghu. Go, my child; I permit you. Kaikeyi is mother of a worthy son through you. Do you O subduer of foes, communicate our welfare to both your father and your mother. Do you likewise communicate the same to the priest and the other principal Brāhmaṇas; as also, my child, to those mighty bowmen, the brothers Rāma and Lakşmaņa. Then honouring Bharata, king Kekaya conferred on Bharata wealth consisting of choice elephants maintained (at the palace) and woollen sheets and deerskins. The king presented him with dogs brought up in the inner apartment, resembling tigers in strength and prowess, furnished with teeth representing weapons, and large of body. Honouring the son of Kaikeyi, Kekaya gave him two thousand nishkas and six hundred : horses. And for following Bharata, Aśvapati without delay assigned a number of goodly, trustworthy, and qualified courtiers. Bharata's maternal uncle conferred on Bharata wealth in the shape of graceful elephants sprung in the īrāvat mountain and the country called Indrasira; as well as fleet and well-broken horses. But owing to the hurry of his departure, Bharata the son of Kaikeyi did not appear to be so very much gratified with the gifts. Owing to his having seen the dream and the post haste speed of the envoys, a mighty anxiety was present in his heart. Then issuing from his abode, that one possessed of exceeding grace passed the goodly thoroughfare thronged with men, horses, and elephants. Having left it behind, Bharata saw (before him) the inner apartment (of the king); and thereupon the handsome Bharata entered it without let. Then after speaking with his maternal grandfather and uncle, Yudhajit, Bharata ascending a car, set out with Satrughna. Thereat servants by means of an hundred cars, furnished with circular wheels, and yoked with camels, oxen, horses, and asses, followed Bharata. Protected by the forces and the courtiers of his maternal grandfather dear to him like his ownself, the magnanimous Bharata who had his foes removed, taking with him his brother, Śatrughna, departed from the abode (of the king), like Siddha issuing from the regions of Indra.