Having arrived at (the neighbourhood of) Bharadvāja's asylum, that foremost of men while it was a krosa (to the destination), left his forces behind and went thither, accompanied by his counsellors alone. And leaving his attire and arms, and clad in a silk cloth, that pious one placing the priest in front, went on foot. Then with the view of seeing Bharadvāja, that descendent of Raghu leaving behind the counsellors also, went in the wake of the priest. As soon as Bharadvāja of rigid austerities saw Vasiştha, he at once rose from his seat, saying to him disciples "Arghya!" On being called upon by Vasiştha, that highly energetic one understood that it was Daſaratha's son. Having offered them (the guests) water to wash their feet and Arghya, as well as fruits subsequently, that virtuous one (Bharadvāja) successively enquired after the welfare of their (respective) homes; and after that, of the forces, exchequer, friends and counsellors in Ayodhyā. And knowing that Dasaratha had departed this life, he did not ask anything relating to the monarch. Then Vasiştha and Bharata questioned him as to his welfare, in relation to the body, the (sacrificial) fire, the trees, the beasts and the birds (of the hermitage). To all this returning "So it is,” the illustrious Bharadvāja from affection for Rāghava said to Bharata. What is the use of your visit here, seeing that you are engaged in the task of governing the kingdom? Do you relate all this to me; my mind is ill at ease. That slayer of foes and perpetuator of his race who has been born by Kausalyā, and who along with his wife and brother has been banished to the woods for a long term, that illustrious one who enjoined by his sire in the interests of a woman, has become an inhabitant of the woods for fourteen years, do you, desirous of securely enjoying the kingdon belonging to him as well to his younger brother, intend to do any harm to that sinless one? Thus accosted, Bharata replied to Bharadvāja with tears filling his eyes and his words choked with grief. Undone am I if the reverend one also deems me so. Do not apprehend any wrong from me; and do you not reproach me thus. Whatever my mother has said in relation to me, does not express my wish, I am not satisfied with that, nor do I endorse her speech. I, intending to pacify him, and going to that chief of men, with the view of taking him to Ayodhyā and of paying homage to his feet. Thinking me as already gone, you should show your favour to me. O reverend Sir, tell me where stay at present Rāma, lord of the earth. Besought by Vasiştha and the other Rtvijas, the venerable Bharadvāja well pleased, spoke to Bharata. foremost of men, even this is worthy of you. Serving superiors, restraint of the senses, and following the pious, are ever found in one sprung in the Rāghava line. I know that even this is your intention, but for the purpose of making your mind all the firmer, I had asked you in this wise; so that your fame might greatly increase. I also know the righteous Rāma with Sītā and Lakşmaņa. This brother of yours at present stays at the mighty mountain Citrakuta. On the morrow you will set out for that region. Do you to-day sojourn here along with your counsellors. O wise one, do this at your pleasure, O you understanding interest and desire. Thereat the gently-looking and highly famous one said, “Be it so;" and the king's son made up his mind to spend the night in the great hermitage (of the saint).