Then Rāghava pausing on the banks of the Tamasā, looked at Sītā and spoke to Sumitrā's son, saying. O son of Sumitrā, this is the first night of our exile into the forest. From this day it behoveth you not, good betide you, to suffer your mind to grieve (by dwelling on past joys.) The empty forest resounding with the cries of beasts and birds returned to their abodes, covered with gloom, seems to weep on all sides. Doubtless to-day the men and women of Ayodhyā, the metropolis of my father, are bewailing us retired to the forest. O foremost of men, the people are attached to yourself, the monarch, Bharata, Satrughna, and myself, because of our various good qualities. I bewail our father as well as my illustrious mother. I fear lest lamenting ceaselessly, they become blind. But surely the virtuous Bharata will console our father and mother with words fraught with virtuc, interest and profit. Reflecting again and again on Bharata's sincerity of soul, I do not, O mighty-armed one, bewail either my mother or my father. foremost of men, that you have followed me in what is your duty. (If you had not done so), I should have to seek elsewhere for the protection of Vaidehī. O Sumitrā's son, I will spend here this night, subsisting alone. Even this recommends itself to me, although the forest yields various kinds of fruits. Having said this to Sumitrā's son, Raghava spoke to Sumantra, saying, “O mild one, do you now heedfully tend the horses.” Then at sunset, fastening the horses, Sumantra fed them plentifully with grass, and then came back. Then seeing the night arrived, the charioteer worshipped the beneficent Sandhyā, and then in company with Sumitrā's son, prepared Rāma's bed. on water And looking at that bed on the shores of the Tamasā surrounded by trees, Rāma along with his wife and the son of Sumitrā, lay down, When Lakşmaņa found that Rāma afflicted with fatigue had slept together with his spouse, he began to speak to the charioteer concerning the various qualities of Rāma. As remaining awake in the night, Sumitrā's son was engaged in expatiating to the charioteer on the virtues of Rāma on the banks of the Tamasă, the sun arose. Rāma abode that night along with the subjects at some distance from the banks of the Tamasā filled with kine. Rising (from his bed), that highly energetic one, Rāma, viewing the subjects (asleep), addressed his brother Lakşmana graced with auspicious marks. O son of Sumitrā, these that for our sake have disregarded their own homes, are still asleep beneath the trees. These citizens have determined upon making me turn back from the forest, they would rather renounce their lives than give up their resolve. Let us while they are asleep ascending on our car, swiftly go our way without fear of molestation. Attached to me, the denizons of Ikşvāku's city will not again indulge in sleep underneath trees. A prince should deliver citizens from the calamity they bring upon themselves; but he should by no means drag them into those which he himself has brought on. Then Lakşmana spoke to Rāma like to manifest Virtue on earth, "O wise one, even this is relished also by me. Do you speedily ascend (the car.)" Rāma said to the charioteer, "Do you at once yoke the car. I will repair to the forest. Do you, my master, swiftly go hence." Thereupon the charioteer bestirring himself, yoking the excellent horses to the car, said to Rāma with joined hands. Here, O mighty-armed one, is your car ready yoked, O foremost of car-warriors. Do you speedily ascend, good betide you, along with Sītā and Laksmaņa. Ascending the car after equipping himself, Rāghava crossed the rapidly-rushing Tamasā abounding in eddies. Having crossed (the stream), the auspicious and mighty-armed one came upon a safe and goodly-high way capable of inspiring even timid people with confidence. But with the view of deluding the citizens, Rāma said to the charioteer, "O charioteer, do you ascending the car proceed northwards; and having proceeded swiftly for a while, do you turn the car. Do you carefully act so that the citizens nay not perceive this." Hearing Rāma's words, the charioteer did accordingly, and having returned said to Rāma to ascend the car. Then on those perpetuators of the Raghu race having along with Sītā been seated on the car, the charioteer drove the horses by that road which conducted to the hermitage. Then placing the car with its face northwards for the purpose of invoking auspiciousness on their journey, that mighty charioteer, Dasaratha's son established on the vehicle, set out for the forest.