Remembering the extraordinary death of the Maharsi, that righteous descendant of Raghu, lamenting his son, thus spoke to Kausalyā. Having unwittingly committed that great sin, I, with my senses oppressed through grief, thought within myself as to how I could mend it. Then taking up the pitcher filled with excellent water, I went by the way mentioned and (at last) reached the asylum. There I found his aged, infirm, forlorn, parents, without any one to help them in moving about, like to birds whose wings have been severed, keeping up a talk about (their son) without experiencing any fatigue, and like helpless ones feeding on a hope which had been blasted by me. My senses overpowered by grief, and my consciousness almost lost through apprehension, I, arrived at the hermitage, again overwhelmed with sorrow. Hearing my footsteps, the ascetic said, “Why, my son, delay you? Bring the drink at once. Your mother, O child, was exceedingly anxious in consequence of your sporting in the waters. Do you speedily enter the asylum. O child, it behove you not to take to heart any unkind action that, O son, may have been done to you of high fame either by your mother or myself. You are the resource of these helpless ones; you are the eyes of these bereft of their sight. was Our lives are bound up with you. Why do not answer?' Seeing the ascetic with a choked utterance indistinctly speaking thus with the letters not articulated clearly, I, dashed in spirits, yet concealing the real state of my mind by assuming a doughty tongue, communicated to him the danger that had befallen him in consequence of the calamity of his son: I am a Ksatriya, Dasaratha (by name), and no son of yours, O magnanimous one. I have come by a misfortune in consequence of an act blamed by the good. O revered one, desirous of killing some beast of prey, and elephant (or some other), come to the waters, I went to the banks of the Sarayū bow in hand. Then hearing sounds from the water of a filling pitcher, I thought, This must be an elephant. I wounded it with a shaft. Next coming to the edge of the river, I saw an ascetic lying down on the ground almost deprived of life, with his heart pierced with an arrow. Then coming forward, I in accordance with the direction given by him as he lay in agony, suddenly extracted the arrow from his vitals. And as soon as the arrow had been extracted, he ascended heaven, O reverend sir, lamenting and bewailing you, both grown old. It is through ignorance that I suddenly wounded your son. This having been past, do you favour me with telling me what is now to be done, O ascetic. Having heard these cruel words, the worshipful ascetic could well by his curse consume me to ashes. With eyes flooded with tears, and well nigh deprived of his senses by grief, that highly energetic one said to me standing with joined hands. If, O king, you had not of yourself immediately communicated to us this unpleasant news, your head would have been reduced to a thousand flaws. Not to speak of Kștriyas, I can even drag the very wielder of the thunderbolt himself from his position, if he knowingly kills one, in especial, that has assumed the Vånaprastha mode of life. Your head would have been severed in seven, if you had discharged the weapon knowingly at such an ascetic staying in austerities and versed in the Vedas. It is because you have done this through ignorance that you (still) live, else the race itself of the Rāghavas should be not, and where are you? He then said, 'Do you, o king, take us to the scene. To day will we look our last on our son besmeared with blood, his deer-skin garb falling off (from his body), lying senseless on the earth, and come under the subjection of the lord of righteousness.' Thereupon I alone taking them exceedingly disconsolate to the spot, made the ascetic and his wife touch their son. And having approached their son and touched him, ascetics fell on his person, and then his father addressed him thus. You salute me not to-day, nor did you speak to me. Why, my child, did you lie down on the ground? Art you angry (with us)? If, my son, you do not feel kindly to me, do you look up to your virtuous mother. And why, O son, do you not embrace me? Do you speak tender words. At the small hours, form whom engaged in study, shall I hear the scriptures sweetly read in a way coming home to the listener's mind? Who, having performed his daily devotions and offered oblation to the sacrificial fire, will bathe me, afflicted with grief for my son? Who procuring Kandas, fruits and roots, will feed me like an welcome guest, incapable of and doing anything and furnishing provisions, and without any one to take care of myself.? And, my son, how will I maintain this blind ascetic mother of yours, proud of her son, who is passing her days in misery? Do you stay my son, in my behalf. Tomorrow you will go to Yama's mansion with me and your mother. Distressed with grief and rendered miserable in the forest, both of us deprived of you shall soon repair to the abode of Yama. Seeing Vivasvata's son, I will say to him, Do you, O lord of justice forgive me, and let this my son, continue to maintain us, his parents. It behove you, O righteous and illustrious guardian of the words, to confer on me reduced to such a pass this one enduring dakşiņā capable of removing our fear. You, my son, are sinless, although slain by this one who has done an unrighteous act; and by the force of this truth , do you repair to the world of warriors. Do you, O son, go the supreme way that is gone by heroes who without turning back from the fight, are slain in open encounter. Do you, O son, go the way that has been gone by Sagara and Saivya and Dilīpa and Janamejaya and Nahusa and Dhundhumāra. Do you, O son, go the way that is gone by all creatures, even by ascetics engaged in the study of the Veda, by bestowers of lands, by those performing fire-sacrifices, by individuals each devoted to a single wife, men giving away a thousand kine, persons tending their preceptors, and individuals renouncing lives by fasting. He that is born in such a race cannot come by any evil case. Such a condition be his that has taken the life of you, my friend.' Having thus piteously wept, he along with his wife set about performing the watery rites on behalf of his son. Thereupon speedily assuming a celestial shape, the virtuous son of the ascetic by his own actions ascended heaven in company with Sakra. Then (returning) along with Sakra, the ascetic comforting his aged parents, addressed them, sa ing. I have attained a high state in consequence of having served you. Do you also without delay come to me. Having said this, the ascetic's son of restrained sense ascended heaven by means of an excellent and commodious car. Having performed the watery rites, the highly energetic ascetic along with his wife speedily said to me staying with joined hands. Do you, O monarch, slay me on the instant. I do not grieve to die', you have by your shaft rendered me who had an only son, absolutely sonless. Since this sorrow arising from the calamity that has befallen my son, is at present mine (through your instrumentality), I curse you. You shall even in this way find your death from grief born of separation from your son. As you a Kşatriya has through ignorance slain an ascetic, the sin, O lord of men, of slaying a Brāhmaṇa will not envelope you speedily; but you shall shortly come by this dreadful and mortal condition, like a donor of Dakşiņās (coming by the things given away).' Having thus inflicted on me the curse and piteously lamented long, the coupe ascended the funeral pile and went to heaven. O noble dame, the crime that I hitting by help of sound, had committed in my boyhood, has reverted to my recollection in course of thought. O exalted lady, even as a disease generated by one's taking rice with unhealthy curry, this danger is imminent in consequence of that act. O gentle one, the words of that noble-minded person are about to be verified in me. Having said this and weeping, the king said to his wife, “I shall renounce life through grief for my son. And I shall no more behold you with my eyes. Do you, O Kausalyā, touch me." People going to the mansion of Yama no more behold (their friends): If Rama touch me directly or otherwise, obtain the exchequer, and be installed as the heir-apparent, Meseems, I may yet live. O noble lady, what I have done to Rāghava in not surely like myself; but what (on the other hand) he has done by me is worthy of him. What sensible man for sake his son, albeit he may be wicked? And what son being banished, does not bear ill will towards his father? But I do not see you with my eyes, and my memory fails. These envoys of Vivasvata's son, OKausalya, urge speed upon me. What can be an object of greater regret than that I during my last moments cannot behold the righteous Rāma having truth for prowess? Even as the sun dried up a drop of water, grief for not seeing my son of incomparable acts dried my spirits. Those are not men, those are gods who in the fifteenth year shall again behold Rāma's countenance graced with elegant and burnished ear-rings. O you of graceful eye-brows, blessed are they who shall behold Rāma's countenance furnished with eyes resembling lotus-petals, with excellent teeth and a shapely nose, like to the lord of the stars himself. Blessed are they that shall behold that fragrant face of his like to the autumnal moon, or the fullblown lotus. Thrice-blessed they who with delighted hearts, shall behold Rāma returned from the forest and come back to Ayodhyā, like to Sukra crowning the zenith? O Kausalyā, my heart is weighed down with grief; and I do not perceive objects of hearing, feeling, or taste. My senses are growing dim in consequence of the mental stupor, like the rays of a lamp reduced to smoke, becoming dim when the oil has been exhausted. As the violence of a river wears away its banks, my grief occasioned through my own agency is destroying me, who am helpless and insensible. O mighty-armed Rāghava! O you remover of my troubles! O you that do delight in your father! you are my stay, O my son, that have gone away. O Kausalyā, I do not see. O wretched Sumitrā! O cruel one, you enemy of mine, you Kaikeyī, who have befouled your line! Having thus lamented in presence of Rāma's mother and Sumitrā, king Daſaratha breathed his last. Thus that distressed lord of men, smitten with 1e exile of his beloved son, that one possessed fa gracious presence, when the night had been alf spent, wrought up with the violence of his notion, departed this life.