As Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi was thus burning in grief, that foremost of those skilled in speech, the saint Vasistha, endowed with excellence of language, said. Do not weep, good betide you, O illustrious prince. Do you perform the funereal rites of the departed king. Hearing Vasistha's words, Bharata cognisant of duty, bowed down to the ground and despatched the ministers for performing the last rites. And raising from under the oil the body of the king with a sallow countenance, and appearing to be asleep. Bharata placed it on the ground upon a couch in front adorned with various gems. Then overwhelmed with grief, Dasaratha's son bewailed him thus. O king, what was it that you had intended to do, I absent and away from home, by banishing righteous Rāma and the powerful Lakşmana? Whither wend you, O mighty monarch, forsaking these aggrieved people, who have already been deprived of the lion like Rāma energetic in action? O father, you having ascended heaven and Rāma having taken refuge in the woods, who now in this city of yours shall protect what the people possess and secure to them what they have not? Widowed in consequence of losing you, this earth does not look graceful. The city appears to me like the night deprived of the Moon As Bharata was lamenting thus in dejected mood, the mighty ascetic Vasiştha again addressed him, saying. O mighty armed one, do you without indulging in any reflections, perform those funeral ceremonies of the monarch which ought to be performed. Thereupon honouring his words by saying, "So be it,” he urged speed upon all the Rtvigs, priests, and Acāryas. And then those that had brought the king's corpse out side from the fire chamber, instructed by the Rtvigs and priests according to the ordinance began to offer oblations into the fire. Next placing the king deprived of life on a car, the servants with their throats oppressed with vapour and with their minds weighed down with dejection carried him. And scattering gold and silver and various kinds of cloth, on the way people went in front of the king. Others procuring sandal, aguru and other sarala, padmaka and devadari, cast it (on the earth). And drawing near the king there, Rtvigs laid various other fragrant substances on the funeral pile. Then offering oblations into the fire, the Rtvigs began to recite japa; and as laid down in the scriptures, Sāma-singers chanted Sämans. By means of litters and other conveyances, each mounted according to her rank, the wives of the king went out from the city, surrounded by aged men. And Rtvijas went round the corpse on the king who performed many sacrifices leaving it on the left side. And kindling with grief, the females also headed by Kausalyā (circumambulated the pyre). And then there was heard the wail of women distressed with grief weeping piteously by thousands like to Krauñcis. Weeping again and again with their sense lost, the wives of the king alighted from the car on the banks of the Sarayu. Having performed the watery rites, the wives of the monarch as well as the counsellors and priests, in company with Bharata entering the city with tears in their eyes, spent ten days* in mourning lying down on the ground. *The Smrti: lays down twelve days of mourning for kings, and sixteen for Khatriyas. Parasara, however, fixes ten days for Ksatriyas in general.