Being addressed thus, Vaidehi, beloved and sweet speeched, spoke to her husband the following words, offended as it were on account of her great affection. It is that you speak me thus, thinking me, no doubt, mean minded. I can not but laugh at your words. Oh best of men; what you have said is not becoming of a mighty prince versed in military arts and is really very opprobrious and infamous. What more, it is not proper even to hear them. Oh dear husband, father, mother, son, brother, daughter-in-law, all of them abide by the consequences of their own actions, it is the wife alone, Oh best of men, that shares the fate of her husband; it is therefore that ever along with you I have been ordered to live in the forest. Neither father, mother, son, friends, nor her ownself is the stay of a woman in this or in after life, it is the husband along that is her only support. If do you repair today to the forest impregnable, I shall go before you, oh R훮ghava, treading upon the thorns and prickly grass. Confident do you take me with you, Oh great hero, renouncing jealousy and indignation, like to water left after drinking; there exists no sin in me that could justify forsaking. To woman is preferable under all circumstances the shade of her husband's feet to the tops of a palace, the celestial car or excursion in the airy path.* *It was generally believed that by certain processes of Yoga one acquired power to fly in the air. I have been taught by my father and mother to follow my husband in all conditions of life; and I shall carry out now what I have been taught; I shall not abide by any other counsel. I shall wend my way to the forest impassable, devoid of men, inhabited by various deers, tigers and other voracious animals. Happily shall I live there as if in my paternal house, giving no thought upon the prosperity of the three worlds, thinking only of the services that are to be rendered to my husband. I shall sport with you, O great hero, in that forest impregnated with the fragrance of flowers, tending you constantly, having my senses subdued, and being engaged in austere performances. Oh great hero, capable are you to maintain many thousand others in the forest, what of me. Surely shall I go to-day to the forest with you; there is no doubt about it and you shall not be able. Oh great hero, to dissuade me from so doing. Undoubtedly I shall always live upon roots and fruits, living with you always I shall not bring about your affliction. Always I shall precede you when walking, and shall take my repast after you have taken it willing am I to view mountains, rivulets, lakes and ponds. Being fearless in your company, Oh my intelligent husband and great hero, I shall behold on all sides ponds filled with wild geese and ducks and beautified with a collection of fullblown lotuses, and shall bathe there every day, pursuing the same vow with you. And greatly gratified, I shall, Oh you having expansive eyes, amuse there with you, in this manner, even for hundred or thousand years. I shall never experience the reverse of fortune, inasmuch as I do not like to live in the abode of celestials, Oh R훮ghava, if I am to dwell there without you; no, it is not pleasing to me, Oh best of men. I shall go there in that dense forest full of deers, monkeys and elephants and live there as if under my paternal roof cleaving to your feet and abiding in your pleasure. Do you accept my entreaty whose heart is entirely yours, knows none else, and is ever attached to you, and who am resolved to die if forsaken by you; thus repairing I shall be in no way a burden to you. That best of men, reluctant to take S카t훮 with him, who had spoken thus and who was greatly attached to virtue, related to her about the many miseries consequent upon dwelling in the forest, with a view to prevent her from following him.