On that foremost of those capable of charming people, the righteous Rāma, repairing to the forest, Kausalyā crying in grief said to her husband. Your great fame has spread over the three worlds; and the descendant of Raghu is kind, munificent and fair-speaking. Why then have you forsaken those foremost of men along with Sītā? Brought up in happiness, and now brought to misery, how can they bear it? How can the youthful daughter of Mithilā of slender make, tender, and deserving of happiness, bear heat and cold? Having formerly partaken of (excellent) rice with curries, how will Sita feed on wild rice? Having heard excellent vocal and instrumental music, how will Sītă hear the frightful cries of carnivorous lions? Resembling the gonfalon of the great Indra, where sleeps the mighty-armed and exceedingly powerful Råma, making his arm like to a mace his pillow? When shall I behold Rāma's countenance hued like the lotus, with his hair ending beautifully (in curls), and his breath impregnated with the fine perfume of the lotus, and his eyes resembling lotus leaves? Surely my heart, without doubt, is made of the essence of the thunderbolt, since not beholding him, it is not cracked in a thousand fragments. It is because of your sad act that mine own, being thwarted, although worthy of happiness, are miserably ranging the wilderness. If after the expiration of the five and ten years, Rāghava does return, it does not appear likely that Bharata will renounce the kingdom and the exchequer. Some on the occasions of the Sradha (first) feast their own friends, and having done this, they mind the choice Brāhmaṇas. But those twice-born ones that are meritorious, learned, and like to celestials, do not at the last moment regard even viands resembling ambrosia. Brāhmaṇas of high respectability endowed with wisdom never bear being entertained after the other twice-born ones have been feasted, even as bulls never quietly bear to have their horns cut off. Why will not an elder brother and one who has sterling merits, O monarch, disregard a kingdom which has been thus enjoyed by his younger brother? A tiger does not like to feed on food procured by others. Even so that tiger-like personage does not regard anything that has come to be tasted by another. Clarified butter, sacrificial cakes, Kusa, stakes of catechu having been used in one sacrifice cannot be used in another. Even so this kingdom which has been already enjoyed, like to liquor deprived of its essence or a sacrifice whose soma has been eaten, cannot be accepted by Rāma. Such an ill treatment Rāghava will not put up with, even as a powerful tiger cannot bear the rubbing of its tail (by another). This world aided by the gods fear to encounter him in high conflict; but he restrains himself, thinking any such action on his part as unrighteous. Indeed, that righteous one brings back people to morality. Surely, that mighty-armed one endowed with exceeding prowess, can with his golden shafts burn all creatures and the oceans, like the Day at the dissolution of all. But such a man of men, possessed of leonine strength, and graced with the eyes of a bull, has been destroyed by his father, like a fish destroying his offspring. If you had believed in the morality prescribed in the scriptures, and which is followed by the twice-born ones, you would not have banished your son. But disregarding such morality, you have banished your virtuous son. One of the refuges of a woman is her husband, a second is her son, and a third is her relatives; and a fourth she has none. But you cease to be mine; and Rāma has been sent to the woods. I do not like to go into the forest; so I am entirely undone by you. This kingdom, your own kingdom, has been destroyed by you; destroyed are all along with the counsellors; destroyed am I with my son; and destroyed are the citizens: your son and your wife are alone delighted. Hearing these words uttered in heart-rending accents, Dasaratha exceedingly distressed, became senseless. And being afflicted with grief, he again remembered his evil act.