Being addressed by Rama thus, Laksmana, the mighty hero, hanging down his head with half reluctance, pondered for sometime, and placed midway between joy and grief, with frown drawn in between his brows, began to sob hot and hard, like to an angry serpent in a cave belonging to another. Nobody could eye his face, having terrible frowns, which looked like that of an angry lion. Moving the extremities of his hands like to the trunk of an elephant, variously altering the altitude of the neck above his frame, glancing a look awry, thus spoke he to his brother. To avoid the transgression of righteousness, and the degradation of the people (consequent upon a bad example), you are eager to repair to the forest. This your eagerness is certainly misplaced. Was not you under error, how could one like yourself, being heroic among the Ks atriyas, and capable of overcoming destiny, speak in such a strain as behoves one that is impotent. Why do you extol destiny which is powerless and weak. For what reason do you not apprehend (unrighteousness) in those two (Dasaratha and Kaikeyi), addicted to vice. Do you not understand that there are many people who feign piety outwardly (to deceive the simple.) With a desire to renounce you by fraud, they simulate piety which is but selfishness. Had they not purposed thus, Oh, Rāghava, things would not have taken such a turn. If this story of the vows be true, then why had it not been declared before Surely has the monarch engaged in an action hateful to the people, namely the installation of a younger brother neglecting you (the eldest one). Pray, pardon me, oh great hero, I cannot brook all this. Even that so called virtue do I loathe, which has, O high-souled one, fascinated you, and made your mind run from one extreme to another. *Formerly the mind was for accepting the kingdom, and now for going to the forest as an exile. These are the two extremes here meant. Why shall you, being capable of work, conform to these impious and cursed words of your father, who is sadly under the influence of Kaikeyi. Here lies my sorrow that you did not admit that this disturbance of the installation has arisen out of the pretext of boon-giving; your idea of virtue is indeed an object of censure. People will mark this your forsaking of the kingdom for redeeming the vows of your father, with opprobrium. Who else, save you, even thinks of compassing the desires of the monarch and the queen Kaikeyî who are of unrestrained habits, ever intent on our mischief and are our enemies known by the name of parents. Even if their throwing obstacles in the way of your installation you considers, as the inevitable action of Destiny, pray disregard it, that does not please me. He, who is tremulous, weak and powerless, follows the track of Destiny; they pay no regard to it who are mighty heroes and whose। prowess is held in esteem by the people. He, who can avert the consequences of destiny by dint of his manliness, does not lose heart even in the face of his interest being endangered by it. People shall witness to-day the power of destiny and manliness; this day shall appear which of them is more powerful. Those who have witness before the prevention of your installation by the evil agency of destiny, shall see it defeated, even this very day, by my manliness. Thwart shall I that assailing destiny by my prowess like to a terrible elephant, freed of its shackles, past the restraining power of a goading hook and inflamed with the juice issuing out of its temples. What of the father, not even all the protectors of the regions nor the entire population of the three worlds shall be able to present any obstacle in the way of Rāma's installation. Those who have, with one voice oh king, settled about your exile to the forest, shall be banished to-day for fourteen years. Burn shall I down that hope of my father and Kaikeyi that they want to place Bharata on the throne by hindering your installation. Influence of destiny shall not bring my opponents that amount happiness, as the misery inflicted on them by my terrible prowess. Yourself retiring to the forest after governing the people for a thousand years, your sons shall resume the administration. Dwelling into the forest is permitted after making over(the charge of) the subjects to (the hands of the) sons, as did the Rājarsis of old. The monarch changing his mind, the kingdom shall be transferred into another's hands, do you, being afraid of this, want to fly as an exile to the forest? And is it for this, that you Oh virtuous souled Rāma, do not wish to have kingdom for you. I do promise to you, Oh great hero, that I shall protect your kingdom like to shore protecting the sea, or else I shall not attain to the region of heroes. Do you perform the rites of installation with things necessary for benediction, do you engage in these affairs, myself alone shall be able by force to thwart the opposition of the kings. These hands of mine are not intended for enhancing the beauty of my body, this bow is not meant for an ornament only this sword is not for binding woods together with, and these arrows are not for carrying the weight of woods, these four belonging to me are for the use of killing the enemies. Never do I desire that I shall not cut them into pieces with sharp-edged swords, brilliants the lighting, whom I do consider as my enemies, though they be redoubtable as Indra, the wielder of thunder-bolt. Cover thick shall I the field of battle and make it impassable by cutting asunder the trunks of the elephants, thighs of the horses and heads of the infantry. Being beheaded by my swords like to the flaming fire and besmeared with blood resembling the clouds with lightning, my enemies shall fall down to the ground. Who is there, proud of his own prowess, that ! shall be able to withstand me when I shall appear at the battle field with bows and leathern fences of fingers. Killing one with a number of arrows, and sometimes many with a single one, I shall drive shafts into the vital organs of men, horses and elephants. Today shall I display my skill in arms in destroying the supremacy of the monarch and establishing you. That hand, which is fit for the smearing of the Sandal, for wearing armlets, distributing wealth and maintaining relations, shall be engaged today, Oh Rāma, in performing its worthy action, the discomfiture of them who want to throw obstacles in the way of your installation. Pray tell me now, which of your enemies shall be cut off by me from wealth, life and relatives? I am your servant: do you give me instruction that the whole earth may be brought under your subjection. That descendant of Raghu, wiping tears off the eyes of Lakşmaņa and consoling him repeatedly, spoke to him saying “Oh gentle one, I have thought it to be the best way by all means that I shall abide by my father's orders."