On Bharata having returned, while Rāma was dwelling in the woods, he noticed affright among the ascetics, added to a desire to remove to another place. And those ascetic that were living happily in the asylum in Citrakuța, relying upon Rāma (for their protection), he found to be wrought up with anxiety. And by means of signs by the eye and contractions of the brow, they, afflicted with fear, were, alluding to Răma, slowly speaking to each other. Perceiving their anxiety, Rāma apprehensive of himself, with joined hands addressed the patriarchal ascetic, saying. O reverend one, do you find me deviating from the path of former sovereigns, or acting contrary to their practice, which has perplexed (the minds of) these ascetics? Have the sages seen my younger (brother), the high-souled Lakṣmaṇa, do anything from inadvertence that in unworthy of him? Does not Sītā engaged in serving you, having to serve me, now minister to you as a woman should? Thereat a certain aged and decrepit ascetic, with his frame trembling said to Rāma ever kind towards creatures. Where is the falling off of that one of excellent character, engaged in offices of beneficence,-more specially with reference to ascetics? This fear arising from Rākşasas afflicts the ascetics because of you; and they, extremely agitated, converse with each other (on the subject). A Rākşasa named Khara, a younger brother of Rāvana, has been harassing the ascetics dwelling in Janasthāna. And Dhrsta also a fearless and wicked Rākṣasa feeding on human beings, and the unrighteous Avalipta, cannot bear you, my child. As long, my child, as you have been residing in this asylum, the Rākşasas have been plaguing the ascetics. And they show themselves sometimes in disgusting shapes, sometimes in horrible and dreadful ones, in various frightful forms capable of frightening folks. And they throw execrable and unclean things among the anchorets, and torment those that happen to come before them. And they take delight in approaching asylums unperceived, and slaughtering ascetics, after having bound them by means of their arms. And on the occasion of sacrifices, they throw away the vessels containing sacrificial articles, pour water on the sacrificial fire and break vessels containing water. Eager to renounce this asylum infested by those wicked ones, and removing to another place, the sages today have been exhorting me (on the subject). And, O Rama, ere this, those wicked ones have slain ascetics. Therefore would renounce this asylum. Not far from here is a picturesque wood abounding in fruits and roots. Thither shall I betake myself together with my own folks. Khara shall also annoy you. If you think it proper, go hence in company with us. we O Rāghava, although you are vigilant, able, and in all ways capable, it would be unpleasant for you to dwell here now in doubt. When the anxious ascetic had said this, Rāma could not console him by his words. Then having paid homage to Rāma, and spoken to him and encouraged Rāghava, the patriach ascetic renouncing the asylum, went away along with his own people. And Rāma having (for a time) followed the sage who was departing from that place, and having paid him respects, being permitted by them, well-pleased, and advised (as to what it behoved him to do), came to his quarters reposing there. (Thenceforth) Rāghava never for a moment left that asylum forsaken by the sages., Rāghava having such qualities in his character as were likely to stand the sages in stead, the ascetics (that remained behind) ever followed Rāghava.