Pacifying Sumitrā's son, Laksmana, transported with rage and eager for encounter, Rama addressed him, saying. When the mighty Bharata possessed of high spirits has himself come here, what is the use of the bow or the sword or the shield? Having promised to maintain my father's truth, what, O Laksmana, shall I, having slain Bharata in battle, do with the kingdom with a stain attached to it? That thing which falls to my lot on the destruction of friends and adherents I never accept, even like food mixed with poison. I swear to you, I wish for the (possession of) righteousness, interest, desire and the earth, in your interests alone, O Laksmana. O Lakşmaņa, I swear by my weapon that it is for the maintenance and happiness of my brothers that I wish for the kingdom. O mild one, this Earth herself is not difficult of being attained by me; but, O Laksmana, I do not through unrighteousness wish to possess myself of Sakra's state. May fire reduce to ashes any happiness of mine that, O bestower of honour, happens to be dissevered from Bharata, or yourself, or Satrughna. I think Bharata attached to his brothers had come to Ayodhyā; and then, following the morality regulating the race, that one dearer to me than life, hearing of me banished, bearing matted locks and bark, together with Jānakī, O hero, and yourself, you foremost of men, has, with his heart surcharged with affection, and his senses overwhelmed by grief, come hither for seeing us. He cannot have come on any other account. And having got wroth with Kaikeyī, and given her rough speech, that auspicious one, having gratified my sire, has come hither to make the kingdom over to me. And the season being fit. meet it is that Bharata should see us. He does not even in thought act against us. Has ere this Bharata done you any bad turn? Or did he tell you any thing so alarming that today you stand in fear of him? Certainly you ought not to say cruel or unpleasant words in relation to Bharata, if wrong be done to Bharata, I shall consider myself as wornged. Do sons, in times of peril, ever slay their father, or brothers their brother like to their life, O son of Sumitrā? If you speak thus for the sake of the monarchy, on seeing Bharata, I will say to him, "Make over the kingdom to this one/" Earnestly exhorted by me, saying, “Do you place the kingdom in his hands', he will say, "Very well'." Thus addressed by his brother of a virtuous disposition, Laksmana ever engaged in Rama's good, from shame seemed to enter into his body. And hearing those words, Lakşmaņa affected 'by shame, answered, I conceive our father Daśaratha himself has come to see you. And finding Lakşmaņa overcome with shame, Rāghava replied, I think that mighty-armed one has come hither to see us; or I take it for certain that, considering that we are fit for ease only, and taking our banishment to heart, he will take us home. Or it may be that graceful descendant of Raghu, my father, will go away, taking form the forest Videha's daughter brought up in the lap of luxury. There are seen these graceful and well-bred steeds, courageous, swift, and furnished with the speed of the wind, the best of horses. And this huge elephant belonging to our aged sire, named Satrunjaya, proceeds in the van of the army. But, you exalted one, I do not see the splendid white umbrella of our father known among men. Therefore, doubts arise in my mind. Do you descend from the top of the tree, O Laksmana. Do my bidding. Thus did the righteous Rāma accosts Sumitra's Descending from the top of the Sāla tree, that conqueror in battles, Lakşmaņa, stood by Rāma with joined hands. son. Commanded by Bharata, Let not (Rāma's asylum) by trampled by the forces, the army took up its quarters at a distance from the hill. And the Ikşvāku host filled with elephants and steeds covering half a Yojana, encamped at the side of the mountain. And keeping morality in their fore-front, and renouncing pride, the disciplined forces schooled by Bharata in view of pleasing that descendant of Raghu (Rāma), stayed in Citrakuța.