Hearing their words, Vasiştha said to the Brāhmaṇas and the adherents and counsellors (of the king) Bharata, on whom the king has conferred the kingdom, along with his brother Satrughna, is living happily in the house of his maternal uncle. Let envoys by means of fleet coursers speedily repair thither and bring those heroic brothers. What shall we decide? "Let them go", said all to Vasistha. Hearing their words, Vasistha spoke to them, saying. Come here, you Siddhārtha, and Vijaya, and Jayanta, and Asokanandana. Do you hear. I well tell you what you are to do. First going speedily to the royal residence by means of swift horses, do you, renouncing grief, by my order speak these words of mine to Bharata. The priest as well as the counsellors have enquired after your welfare. Do you at once set out. A business is at hand that brooks no delay on your part. But you must on no account communicate to him the exile of Rāma, or the demise of the monarch, or the destruction that has befallen the Raghu race through this occasion. Do you, speedily taking silk apparel and excellent ornaments for king Bharata, set off. Thereupon, having been furnished with the necessaries for the journey, they bound for Kekaya went to their respective abodes, mounted on goodly horses. Then having supplied themselves with the necessaries of the journey, the envoys in consonance with Vasiştha's injunction, speedily went away. Having proceeded by the west of Aparatāla, they in the middle crossed the Mālinſ, and went towards the north of Pralamba. Then crossing the Gangā at Hastināpura, and arriving at Pāñcāla, they proceeded west ward through Kurujāngala. And beholding watery expan'ses filled with blown blossoms, and rivers containing pellucid waters, the envoys proceeded apace on account of the errand they had on hand. And they darted past the Saradanda overflowing with delightful water, beautiful, and haunted by fowls of various kinds. Then on the western bank of the stream, coming upon a tree called Satyopayācana presided by a deity, and bowing down to the tree and going round it, they entered the city of Kulinga. And having passed Tejobhibhavana and arrived at Abhikāla, they crossed the sacred stream Ikşumatī belonging to the Ikşvākus for generations. Beholding here Brāhmaṇas versed in the Vedas drinking water with their joined hands, they went through Vahllika towards the mount Sudaman. There seeing the foot-print of Visnu, they desirous of doing the bidding of their master, proceeded a long way, viewing the Vipasa and the Salmali and rivers and tanks and pools and ponds and sheets of water and various kinds of lions and tigers and deer and elephants. And with their vehicles fatigued, the ambassadors, on account of the great distance of the way; speedily reached that best of cities, Girivraja. And for pleasing their master, for the preservation of the people, and enabling Bharata to assume the reins of government, those envoys, casting aside negligence, swiftly entered the city in the night.