Having for a long time conversed with Sumantra, Guha distressed at heart on Rāma reaching the southern bank, retraced his steps homewards. Learning from envoys at (Śrngaverapura) all about Rāma's visit to Bharadvāja at Prayāga and his reception (at Bharadvāja's place) as well as their destined journey (to Citrakuta), Sumantra, taking the permission (of Guha), yoked those excellent horses and with a heavy heart directed his course to the city of Ayodhyā. And beholding perfumed woods and rivers and watery expanses and towns and villages, he eagerly proceeded on his way. And on the third day at dusk the charioteer arriving at Ayodhyā saw it bereft of happiness. And beholding it empty and still, Sumantra afflicted with exceeding sorrow, and overwhelmed with grief, thought, “Perhaps the city with her elephants and horses and men and king has been consumed by the fire of grief on account of Rāma." Having thus reflected, the charioteer drawing up to the city-gate by means of those fleetcoursing horses, speedily entered the city. Thereupon, people by hundreds and thousands rushed after the charioteer, Sumantra, asking, "Where is Rāma?” To them he replied, “Having asked Rāghava on the Gangā and being permitted by him, I have been sent away by that high-souled righteous one." Learning that they (Rāma and the rest) had crossed over (the Ganga), the men with tears in their eyes, sighed forth “O fie!" and began to bewail, exclaiming, “Ah Rāma." And he heard crowds exclaim, Not seeing Rāma in the car, we cease to exist. We shall no longer see the righteous Rāma in the midst of mighty assemblies engaged in charity, sacrifice or nuptial rites. What was necessary for this body? What was dear to them and what did they delight in?, (constantly revolving all this in his mind), Rāma ruled this city even as father. Then proceeding past the stalls, Sumantra heard the lamentations of females at windows, burning in grief for Rāma. With his face muffled, Sumantra proceeded on the highway towards the palace of Daśaratha. Swiftly alighting from the car and entering the royal residence, he went past seven apartments thronged with people. And beholding Sumantra returned to the city crowned with edifices, seven-storied houses, and palatial mansions, the women, stricken with the absence of Rama, set up a cry of "Oh" and "Alas." Waxing still more aggrieved, the females looked at each other with their expansive and transparent eyes fast flooded with tears. And then he heard the talk, as toned down it proceeded from the royal mansions, of the wives of Dasaratha afflicted with grief for Rāma. Going in company with Rāma, and returning without him, what will the charioteer answer Kausalya bewailing (for her son)? Surely life is miserable, yet is incapable of being renounced, since, although her son leaving (the installation) has gone away, yet Kausalyā still lives. Having heard those words of the queens, fraught with truth, Sumantra burning as it were in grief, at once entered the (next) apartment. And entering the eighth apartment he beheld in a gloomy chamber the king distressed and in a pitiable plight, woe-begone for grief for his son. Thereupon presenting himself before the monarch, Sumantra saluted him and then conveyed to the king the words of Rāma as he had uttered them. Hearing them silently, the monarch with his mind exceedingly wrought, dropped down to the ground in a swoon, afflicted with grief for Rāma. On the lord of earth swooning away and falling to the ground, the inmates of the inner apartment raising their burst into lamentations. arms of an Kausalyā availing herself of the aid of Sumantra, raised up her fallen lord and addressed him, saying. This, O eminently virtuous one, is the envoy of that one an exceedingly arduous achievement returned from the forest. Why do you not accost him? O descendant of Raghu, you are ashamed today, having done this wrong. Do you rise: merit be yours (arising from this act.) Let not your adherents come to naught (because of your sorrow). O worshipful one, she from fear of whom you do not speak to the charioteer, Kaikeyi, is not here. Do you therefore speak to him without fear. Having said this to the monarch, Kausalyā overwhelmed with grief, with her voice oppressed with the vapour begot of emotion, all on a sudden fell to the earth. Behoiding Kausalyā fallen on the ground bewailing, as also their husband, the ladies seated around, began to Lament, Hearing the sounds of wailing arise from the inner apartment, old and young as well as females, set up lamentations all round; and the city was again filled with them.