Then ſatrughna, the younger brother of Lakşmaņa spoke to Bharata burning in grief as he was revolving in his mind the (intended) journey (to Rāma). Need it be said that Rāma is the refuge both of himself and all creatures in trouble? That Rāma possessed of strength has been exiled into the woods by a woman! And powerful and having prowess, why did not Laksmana deliver Rāma by checking our father? The king bent upon following an unrighteous course through the influence of a woman, should, the justice or otherwise of the measure being fully weighed, at the very outset have been checked. As Lakşmaņa's younger brother Satrughna was speaking thus, appeared there at the door in front the hump backed one adorned with every kind of ornament, with her body besmeared with sandal paste, wearing regal apparel, and variously decked out with a variety of ornaments. And adorned with elegant zones, and divers other superb ornaments, she looked like a female monkey tethered with a rope. At that time seeing that one of horrible misdeeds, (Bharata) who stood near the door, seizing the hump backed one ruthlessly, took her to Satrughna, and said. That one through whom Rāma has gone to the wood and our father has renounced his body this is that wicked and remorseless one. Do you deal with her as you like. At Bharata's command Satrughna observing vows waxing exceedingly aggrieved, addressed all the inmates of the inner apartment, saying. This one has occasioned intense misery to my father and brothers Let her now take the fruit of her fell deed. Having said this, he furiously fell upon the hump backed one surrounded by her maids. Thereupon she with her cries made the chamber resound. Concluding Śatrughna fired with rage, her associates extremely pained, fled away in all directions. Then her companions in a body took counsel of each other, saying, “considering the way in which he has entered upon it, he will annihilate us quite." Let us therefore seek the protection of the tender hearted generous, pious and illustrious Kausalyā. Even she is our sure refuge. Overpowered with rage, that chastiser of foes, Śatrughna, dragged the shrieking hump backed one to the ground. As Mantharā was pushed this way and that, her various ornaments were scattered over the floor. And strewn with those ornaments, the graceful chamber of the palace looked like the autumnal firmament. And that foremost of men possessed of strength holding her, began to reprove Kaikeyī with harsh speech. Extremely hurt by those rough words, Kaikeyi terrified on account of Satrughna, took refuge with her son. Thereupon casting his eyes on Satrughna, Bharata said, “A woman is incapable of being slain by any. Do you therefore excuse her.” I myself would have slain this wicked Kaikeyi of impious deeds, if the righteous Rāma should not be displeased with me on account of my slaying my mother. If Rāghava knows that the hump-backed one has been slain, he sure' will speak neither with you nor me. Hearing Bharata's words, Satrughna, younger brother to Lakşmaņa, refrained from that wrong and set free the hump-backed woman in a swoon. Thereat, sighing hard in exceeding grief, Mantharā flung herself and Kaikeyi's feet, weeping piteously. Seeing the hump-backed one deprived of her senses in consequence of the pushing she had received at the hands of Satrughna, Bharata's mother consoled that distressed woman, who appeared like a Krauñci that had been entrapped.