Thus addressed by Anasūyā, Vaidehī devoid of malice, honouring her words, began, “That you should instruct me is no wonder in you." I know that a woman's spiritual guide is her husband. Even if a husband should be poor and of a disreputable character, he should be ungiudgingly obeyed by the like of me. one And to be said of one that is crowned with qualities, kind, self-controlled, of steady affection, righteous-souled, and who is dear as a father or a mother? The exceedingly strong Rāma bear himself towards the other wives of the monarch as he does towards Kausalyā herself. Renouncing sense of self-importance that heroic conversant with righteousness, devoted to his king, regards as his mothers those on whom the monarch once cast his eyes. What my mother-in-law instructed me at the time that I was leaving for the lonely and fearful forest, is constantly present in my mind. And what also my mother taught me in presence of fire on the occasion of the bestowal of my hand, is also remembered by me. And, O you engaged in acts of righteousness, I have not forgotten the words that my relatives said to me, viz, the asceticism of a woman is ministering to her husband. They did not teach any thing else. Having served her lord. Sāvitri is highly honoured in heaven; and you also, following the same course, by virtue of having served your husband, has secured heaven. And this foremost of females, this goddess of heaven, Rohiņi, is not seen for a moment without the moon. And prime women of this sort, firm in their husbands, are highly respected in the celestial regions by virtue of their pious acts. Hearing Sītā's words, Anasuyā, exceedingly delighted, smelling her head, spoke thus, pleasing Maithili. By observing restrictions, I have earned great asceticism. By resorting to that energy, I would, O Sīta, confer a boon upon you, O you of pure vows. O Maithili, your words are just and proper. I am well pleased (with you). Tell me, O Sītā, what good shall I do you? Hearing her words, Sītā, surprised, said with a smile, to that lady equipped with ascetic strength, “All this has been done by you." Thus accosted, that one cognizant of virtue, was still more pleased, and said, “I am exceedingly pleased (with your words). I will attain a desire of mine." This noble and grand garland, this apparel, these ornaments, and this precious paste for adorning the person, presented by me, let these, O Sītā, grace your person. These, worthy of you will never be tarnished. O daughter of Janaka, daubing your person with this excellent paint, you will grace your husband even as Śrī does the undeteriorating Visnu. Thereupon Mithila's daughter accepted those things presented to her out of love, viz., the apparel, the paint, the ornaments and the garland. Having accepted those accepted those presents conferred on her from love, that illustrious one, Sītā, quietly sat beside the female ascetic with joined hands. Then as Sītā was sitting, Anasūyā firm in vow asked her concerning a thing that was near her heart, saying. I have heard, O Sītā, that you were won by the renowned Rāghava on the occasion of a selfchoice. O Maithili, that story I should like to hear, related at length. It therefore, behoves you to relate that to me in detail. Thus address, Sītā, saying to the ascetic engaged in pious acts, "Listen!" began to tell the story. Mithila's lord, the heroic Janaka, justly rule the earth, engaged in observing the duties of Ks atriyas. As he was ploughing a plain intended for a sacrifice, I rose from under the earth; and (in this sense) I am the daughter of that king. Tending me, with my body covered with dust, Janaka, engaged in throwing handfuls of dust (to level hollow spots), was struck with amazement. Being childless, he took me on his lap from affection, and saying, 'This is my daughter', conceived affection for me. Then there were uttered words in the welkin, resembling those of a human being,! 'O king, in all righteousness, this is your daughter'. Then well-pleased, my righteous father, the king, lord of Mithilā, receiving me, attained mighty good fortune. Consigned to the pious eldest noble one (queen), desirous of having offspring, I was brought up by that mild lady, with the tenderness of a mother. (In time) seeing me fit for the company of a husband, my father in distress was plunged in thought, like a poor man that has lost his wealth. Even if the father of a girl be like to ſakra himself on earth he reaps odium at the hands of his equals and inferiors. Perceiving this obloquy at a short distance, the king was plunged in a sea of anxiety, but could not cross it, like one that has no raft. Knowing me as unborn from any female vessel, the lord of earth reflecting upon it, could not come upon a suitable and fit husband for me. Then as he reflected, this thought occurred to him 'I will righteously celebrate the self-choice of my daughters'. In the great sacrifice of Daksa, the highsouled Varuna had well-pleased conferred on Devarata an excellent bow with inexhaustible arrows and a couple of quivers. Incapable of being moved on account of its weight, the kings could not even dream of bending the bow. Having obtained the bow, my truthful father said, 'No fear!' inviting at the same time the kings to an assembly of sovereigns. He that, raising the bow, shall string it, shall doubtless receive my daughter for his wife. Seeing that best of bows in weight resembling a hill, the kings saluting it, go away, unable to move it. It came to pass that after a long time, this highly effulgent Rāghava came to witness the sacrifice in company with Viśvāmitra. And Rāma having truth for his prowess, and the righteous Viśvāmitra were respectfully received by my sire. Then Viśvāmitra said to my father, 'The descendants of Raghu, sons of Daśaratha, Rāma and Lakşmaņa are anxious to behold the bow.' Thus accosted by the Vipra, my father brought the bow, and showed that celestial bow to the princes. Thereupon, in the twinkling of an eye, bending it, the powerful (Raghava) stringed the bow and drew it. And as he drew it vehemently, it broke in the middle in twain. And the sound of it was dreadful like to the bursting of a thunder-bolt. Then raising an excellent vessel of water, my truthful father prepared to bestow me on Rāghava. And bestowed on Rāghava, I was accepted of him, after he had consulted the wish of his father, that lord, the master of Ayodhyā. And inviting my father-in-law, the old king Dasaratha, my father bestowed me on Rāma having knowledge of self. And my father bestowed on Lakşmaņa for his wife, my younger sister, the beauteous and chaste Urmila. Thus was I bestowed on Rāma on the occasion of that self-choice. And ever since I have been devoted to my husband, the foremost of those possessing prowess. And my father bestowed on Lakşmaņa for his wife, my younger sister, the beauteous and chaste Urmila. Thus was I bestowed on Rāma on the occasion of that self-choice. And ever since I have been devoted to my husband, the foremost of those possessing prowess.