Having heard everything, Bharata in company with the counsellors went to the foot of the Ingudi tree and saw the bed of Rāma. And he said to his mothers, That high-souled one lay down here on the ground during the night, and his limbs pressed this spot. Begot of that foremost of monarchs, the exalted and intelligent Daſaratha, Rāma does not deserve to sleep on the earth. How can that chief of men having reposed in beds furnished with pillows made of deer-skins and having superb cloths, have lain down on the earth? Always reposing in mansions and in upper apartments paved with silver and gold and supplied with excellent bed-cloths, decked with heaps of flowers, perfumed with sandal and aguru, hued like to pale coulds, resonant with the notes of many parrots, in palaces going before the choicest of their class, ringing with music, and perfumed, like to Meru itself, with their bases composed of gold, Rāma used to be awakened with vocal and instrumental music, the tinklings of elegant ornaments and the peals of goodly mydargas, that subduer of foes being in due season hymned by the eulogists, and friends, bards and genealogists, with worthy ballads and panegyrics. (This assertion of Rāma's lying down on the ground) appears to me incredible: It does by no means look to me like truth. Forsooth, I am amazed. I take it, this is a vision. Verily, no destiny is superior to Time, since Dasaratha's son, Rāma himself, had to repose on the earth, and the beauteous beloved daughter of Videha's king, and the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha, had to lie down on the ground. This was the bed of my brother; on this hard spot did he turn his lovely limbs, and this grass was pressed by them. I think that the graceful Sītā adorned with ornaments slept in this bed, for here and there are scattered particles of gold. It is clear that Sītā had spread her sheet at this spot, hence it is that fibres of silk are discoverable here. I deem that the bed of her lord appears agreeable to a wife, since a girl tender and in affliction, the chaste daughter of Mithilā experienced no inconvenience (in sleeping in one such). Ah, I am undone! baleful am I, for it is on my account that Rāghava along with his wife, lay down in such a bed, like one forlorn. Born in the imperial race, and capable of conferring happiness on all, the bringer-about of all good, why did Rāghava of dark blue hue like that of a lotus, graceful, and crowned with red eyes, the inheritor of happiness and undeserving of misery, having left his dear consummate kingdom, lie down on the ground? Surely the mighty-armed Lakşmaņa graced with auspicious marks is blessed, he who in the time of dire adversity follows his brother Rāma. And blessed is Videha's daughter who follows her husband into the woods. Bereft of that magnanimous one, we have all been brought into jeopardy. The Earth without her helmsman seems to me quite empty, on Dasaratha having ascended the celestial regions and Rāma taken refuge in the wilderness. On Rãma having set up his dwelling in the forest, one (like me) does not even mentally covet this earth which had been protected by the immense prowess (of Rāghava). With her walls undefined, her horses and elephants unrestrained, and her gates left open, the defenceless metropolis deprived of her power, placed in peril and without any protection, is surely not regarded by the enemies, like food mixed with poison. From this day forth I will lie down on the ground, or on the grass, daily subsisting on fruits and roots, and bearing matted locks and a cloth of bark. And for his sake I will in future live happily in the woods. (By my doing so), the promise of that high-minded one shall not be rendered null. Me residing in the forest in the interests of my brother, Satrughna shall bear company; while my noble one will rule Ayodhyā assisted by Laksmana. The twice-born ones will sprinkle Kākutstha in Ayodhyā. May the deities realize this desire of mine! Propitiated by me personally in various ways with bent head, if he do not consent, then shall I ever stay with Rāghava in the woods. Surely he cannot long persist in putting me off.