Guha, acquainted with the forest, described to Bharata of immeasurable prowess the regard the high-souled Laksmana bore to Rama. To Lakşmaņa crowned with every virtue, waking up, holding the bow with the arrow fixed on it for the purpose of guarding well his brother. I said, “This easeful bed has been prepared for you, my child. O son of Raghu's descendant, cheer up! Do you lie down at ease. All these people can bear hardship; but you are meant for comfort. For protecting him religiously, we shall wake. To me also there is none that is dearer on earth than Rāma. Do not be anxious. This I tell you truly, through his grace I expect high fame among men, and immense religious merit, and interest and desire in entirety. Bow in hand I shall along with my kin protect Rāma lying down with Sītā. To me always ranging in this forest, nothing whatever is unknown. I can even cope in battle with an army of fourfold forces. Thus accosted by us, the magnanimous Laks maņa with his gaze ever fixed on virtue, humbly observed. How, Dasaratha's son sleeping on the earth with Sītā, can I attain sleep, or life, or happiness? How see him who is capable of bearing in battle the onslaught of the gods and the Asuras combined, sleeping in a cave on grass? It is by virtue of mighty austerities and uncommon exertions that Dasaratha has obtained this son of his crowned with every auspicious sign. He being banished, the king shall not live long; and the Earth shall certainly be widowed soon. Having bewailed aloud, by this time have the women got exhausted; and surely the king's mansion is to-day still. I do not expect that either Kausalyā or the king or my mother is alive. If they live, it can be for this night only. Even if my mother live seeing Satrughna, that mother of a hero, the afflicted Kausalyā, will (surely) resign her existence. Saying, All is lost, All is lost, with his desire unattained, my father having failed to install Rāma in the kingdom, will resign his existence. Blessed are they that when the time shall come for the same, shall perform the funeral ceremonies of the king, my deceased sire. Then shall they with happy hearts range the looking terraces, with the highways laid out orderly, crowned with lordly edifices, adorned with various gems, crowded by cars and elephants and horses, resounding with the notes of trumpets, abounding in auspicious things, filled with fat and contented people, having gardens and pleasure-houses, and possessed of divers classed of men indulging festal mirth. Shall we, on the occasion of Rāma's return, with glad hearts peacefully enter the city in company with that one firm in his promise? As the magnanimous son of the king was thus lamenting, the night passed away. In the morning, with an unclouded sun, both, having made matted locks on the banks of the Bhāgīrathi, crossed the river along with me. Wearing matted locks and clad in barks of trees, those persons possessed of mighty strength, like to leaders of elephant-herds, equipped with excellent arrows and quivers and bows, those repressors of foes, expecting (their return form exile), departed with Sītā.