Issuing from the palace, the blazing Bharata endowed with prowess went in an easterly direction, and seeing before him the river called Sudāmā, crossed it. Then the auspicious descendant of Iksvāku crossed the broad Hrādinſ coursing westwards, as also the river Satadru. Then crossing a river at Eladhana,' and coming to Aparaparvata”, he crossed the Sila? and the Akurvatī, and arrived at Agneya* and Salyakarsanam. 1. Some read Eladhani. 2. Some read Apharaparyata. 3. The river, according to some is so named because it transforms the surrounding objects to stone. 4. Some make Agneya an epithet to Salyakarsana, meaning, relating to the south-east. And having purified himself and seen Silavaha,' that one of truthful purposes passed the Mahacailas,' and entered the forest of Caitraratha. 1. According to Tirtha, Silavaha is a strcam having Āgneya on one side and Salyakarşaņa on the other. 2. Lit, mighty mountains. Then coming upon the confluence of the Ganga and the Sarasvati, Bharata entered the forest of Bhārunda lying to the north* of Vīramatsya. *Uttarān, lit. north. Some text read uttaram. It would mean countries lying to the north of Viramatsya. Next crossing the rapid river Kulingā and the Hrādinſ surrounded by hills, as well as the Yamunā, he ordered the forces to halt. Then cooling the limbs of the fatigued horses (with water) and refreshing them, Bharata himself bathed there and drank of the water; and then resumed the march, furnished with the water. Then the gentle prince by means of an excellent car, like to the wind-god himself, entered the mighty forest inhabited by various races of men. Seeing that the mighty river Gangā was hard to cross at Ansudhāna, Bharata speedily went to the famous city of Prāgvața. Having crossed the Gangă at Prāgvața, he went over to the Kuţikoșthika. Having with his forces crossed that river, he proceeded to Dharmavardhana. Then proceeding by the south of Toraņa, he came to Jambuprastha. Then Dasaratha's son went to the beautiful village of Varūtha. Having for a while stayed at that romantic wood, he proceeded eastwards, and presented himself at the villa of Ujjihānāya, where abound trees (called) Priyaka. Coming to the Priyakas, Bharata speedily yoking the horses, set out without delay, issuing his orders to the forces. Then sojourning at Sarvatirtha and crossing the river there flowing north-wards as well as others abounding in various kinds of mountainous horses, Bharata arrived Hastiprşthaka. And at Lohitya that foremost of men crossed the Kapivati, at Ekasāla, the Sthanumati, and at Vinaya the Gomati. And Bharata arriving at a forest of Sala trees in the city of Kalinga, speedily passed it with his forces way-worn. And having passed the forest swiftly over night, he at sunrise saw Ayodhyā built by king Manu. Having spent seven nights on the journey, that chief of men beheld Ayodhyā. Before him and thus addressed the charioteer, O charioteer, from the distance Ayodhyā at seemeth like a mass of black earth, albeit she boasts of sacrificial priests crowned with every virtue, Brāhmaṇas versed in the Vedas and opulent people, and albeit she is maintained by Rājarșis. Formerly one could hear a great and mighty tumult all round Ayodhyā proceeding from men and women; but I do not hear this today. The gardens where from persons having sported in the evening used to rush out (at day break) wear a different aspect now. Forsaken by the pleasure-seekers, the garden appear to weep. O charioteer, the city appears to me like a wilderness. And I do not as formerly behold the flower of the city leaving or entering her on cars or elephants or horses. Gardens which, frequented by people inebriated with the honey of love, met together for purposes of sport, looked charmingly blooming, I find as utterly void of cheerfulness, with the trees as if lamenting with tremulous leaves. Still do I not hear the inarticulate though sweet and delicious voice of beasts and birds crying in chorus.* *Some text read muhus, momentarily. Why, as before, does not the blameless* and bland wind blow mixed with the perfume of sandal and faint with Dhūpa? *Some texts read atula in place of amala, incomparable. And why, again, have the sounds of Vīņās and Mļdangas developed by beating sticks, which continually flew in a never-ceasing vigorous courses, ceased to-day? I witness various evil, unsightly, and unpleasant* omens, and hence my mind is depressed. *The commentator renders amongnani, inauspicious. I venture to differ from him., O charioteer, complete good fortune with my friends is hardly to be realised. But although no apparent cause exists for my depression of spirits, yet my heart droopeth. Then Bharata depressed and cast down and with his senses afflicted, speedily entered the city ruled by Ikşvāku. And Bharata having his vehicles fatigued, entered by the Vaijayanta* gate, and went on, followed by the gate-keepers, who enquired after his welfare. *Vijayantena. Another meaning is, By the gate resembling that of Indra's palace. Then courteously telling the warders to desist, he with an agitated heart spoke to the tired charioteer of Aśvapati, “O sinless one, why have I been brought in this haste without any (adequate) reason?" My heart apprehended some evil; and my disposition gives way. O charioteer, I see around me all those signs which I had heard told as occurring on the occasion of he death of monarchs. I behold the houses of the citizens unswept and unsightly with the doors flung open, and destitute of grace, without sacrifices and other religious ceremonies, without the incense of Dhūpa, the citizens fasting, and the people appearing with faded countenance, displaying no flags, etc., The abodes of the deities are not decorated with garlands, and their courts are unclean; and remaining vacant, they look. no longer beautiful as formerly. The images are not worshipped; and the places of sacrifice are in a like condition. And garlands are not displayed in the shops where they are sold. And traders looking anxious, with their business stopped, do not look as before. And in temples and Caityas birds and beasts appear dispirited. And in the city I behold men and women pale and woe-begone and emaciated and anxious, with tears filling their eyes. Having said this to the charioteer, Bharata, beholding these inauspicious sights, entered the palace of the king with a depressed heart. Beholding the city resembling the city of Indra, with her crossings and houses and roads void of people, and the doors and hinges covered with dust, Bharata was filled with greater grief. And witnessing many unpleasant things which he had never seen during the life of the monarch, that high-souled one entered the mansion of his father, bending his head, depressed in spirits, and with his mind extremely aggrieved.