That lover of virtue, thinking of the miseries of the forest, resolved no to take Sītā with him, who was versed in religious lore's and had spoken thus. And consoling her whose eyes were stained with tears, that virtuous-souled one spoke to her the following words with a view to prevent her from going. Oh Sītā, you are born of an illustrious family and ever intent on the performance of religious deeds; do you practise virtue here as it may conduce to the happiness of my mind. Oh Sītā, Oh you of the weaker sex, Do you act up to my counsels; there are evils enough in the forest, do you learn them from me who am about to dwell in it. Renounce therefore, Oh Sītă, your intention of flying as an exile to the forest, which for its impenetrableness is said to abound in evils. It is for your welfare that I give utterance to these words; happiness there is none, it is always covered with miseries. The roarings of the lions living in the caves of mountains, swelling with the sounds of the water-falls, produce a very painful impression upon the ears; so the wood is full of misery. Animals, all maddened, sporting in solitude, seeing (man), approach to attack him; so the wood is full of misery. The rivers are full of crocodiles, sharks, and other fearful animals, muddy and impassable and always infested with infuriated elephants; so the wood is full of misery. There the wayfarers are covered with creepers and thorns they are void of drinking water ever resounded with the noise of the wild fowls, so the wood is full of misery. Being exhausted with the toil of the day, the dwellers of the wood have to sleep in night on the bed made of leaves fallen from the trees on the surface of the ground; so the wood is full of misery. With the (supply of) fruits that have fallen from the trees man of self discipline must content himself morning and evening; so the wood, O Sītă, is full of misery. One has to fast, O Maithili, according to his might, to wear matted hair and bark, to adore the deities and his ancestors according to due rites, every day to serve the guests that come to him, and observing the rules of asceticism, to bathe every day thrice, namely, in the morning, in the mid-day and in the evening; so the wood is full of misery. One has to offer presents of flowers collected by his ownself to the altars, O Sītā, according to the rites of the ascetics; so the wood is full of misery. Those that dwell in the forest will have to remain content, having practised moderation in food, O Maithill, with whatever edibles are attainable in the forest; so the wood is full of misery. There are always violent winds, darkness hunger, and great fear; so the wood is full of misery. Reptiles, many and of various kinds, creep there on the path, O excellent lady, with haughtiness; so the wood is full of misery. And snakes living in the rivers and of crooked course like them, always await the wayfarers, hindering the passers-by: so the wood is full of misery. Birds, scorpions, insects mosquito's and wild gnats, always disturb the dwellers, O fair one' of the weaker sex; so the wood is full misery. There are trees full of thorns, having their branches moving to and fro, and the kusa and kāsa grasses with thorny blades constantly undulating; so the wood is full misery. There are various physical afflictions and divers fears and great misery consequent upon living in the forest. Anger and desires are to be renounced, the heart is to be set on ascetic austerities, fear in the fearful objects is to be cast off; so the wood is full of misery. You should not therefore go to the forest, it forebodes no good to you. Weighing well, have I concluded that the forest abounds in innumerable evils. While the high-souled Rāma, resolved thus not to take Sītā with him to the forest, she, greatly sorry, did not accept his words and spoke to him in the following way.