Seeing Räma determined upon carrying out his father's behest's, Kausalya with her voice choked with vapour begot of tears, spoke to him the following pious words. How shall this virtuous-souled one, beloved of people and who has never experienced misfortune before, live on grains gleaned, being born of me to Dasaratha? How shall that Rāma live upon fruits and roots, whose servants and attendants fare on well cooked rice? Who shall believe, or believing who shall not be afraid, that his highly accomplished descendant of Kākutstha, favourite of the king, is going to be exiled? Certainly Destiny, who crowns or afflicts people with happiness or misery, is the most powerful agency in the world, or why shall you, Oh pleasing Rāma, fly as an exile to the forest? This great and incomparable fire of sorrow issuing from my mind, inflamed by the wind of your absence, increased by the fuels of lamentation and pain, and kindled by hard sobs, obtaining the oblations of tears, vomiting the smoke of vapour begotten of anxious thoughts, the result of counting upon the days of your return, shall consume me, making greatly lean, when deprived of your presence, as does the fire burn the dry grass in summer. Like to a cow following its young one shall I follow you, Oh my darling, wherever shall go. Hearing those words of his mother, Rāma that best of men, spoke the following words to her, who was greatly troubled with sorrow. "The monarch has been duped by Kaikeyi” myself resorting to the forest, surely shall he resign his life, if cast off again by you. There is nothing more cruel for women than the forsaking of their husband; it does not behove you therefore, to think even of this opprobrious action. Do you serve this descendant of Kākutstha, my father, and the lord of the earth as long as he lives, know you this to be the eternal virtue Thus addressed by Rāma, Kausalyā of auspicious looks, being gratified greatly, spoke to him, the remover of her sorrows. “Truely it is." Rāma, the foremost amongst religious men, being spoken thus, said to his mother, who was greatly disturbed with sorrow, again in the following strain. “Proper it is both for you and me to carry out father's words” he is your husband, and my best preceptor and the lord and master of all people. With great pleasure shall I abide in your words after passing these nine and five years in the great forest. Thus addressed, Kausalyā, bearing great affection for her son, sorely pained and having her eyes full of tears, spoke to her beloved son the following words. Oh Rāma, I shall not be able to live amongst these co-wives, if are you resolved to go to the forest for the discharge of your father's behest; do you take me with you, Oh Kākutstha, like to a wild hind. Rāma, suppressing his feeling, spoke to his mother who was lamenting, thus, saying:, Husband is the deity and master of the wife as long as she lives; so the monarch being the lord can deal with you and me in any way he likes. That highly intelligent lord of men living, we should not consider ourselves as without a master. Bharata is also pious and beloved of all people in speech, he, intent on the performance of religious service, shall attend upon you always. Do you now take care that on my retiring the monarch does not wear away by the pangs of my separation, that this terrible sorrow may not kill him. Do you look after the welfare of the old king always. The woman, who serves not her husband, being engaged in excellent religious rites and fasts, shall fare wretchedly in the life to come; and a woman gets at the excellent abode of the celestials by serving her husband. Even those who do not worship and bow to the celestials should serve their husbands alone being intent upon their welfare. Such is the virtue that should be always pursued by women according to the Vedas and Smſtis. Do you beguile your time, Oh worshipful one, expecting my return, by worshipping the celestials with flowers and oblations to the fire and serving well the Brahmins. Engaged in discipline and fasting and devoted to the services of your husband you shall attain your best desire, on my return, if this foremost of pious men lives then. Being thus accosted by Rāma, Kausalyā being distressed with the thought of separation from her son, spoke to him with tears in her eyes the following words. Oh my darling! it is beyond my power to dissuade you from your firm resolution for going to the forest; it is impossible to avoid this hour of separation. Go you my son, with an earnest heart; may you fare well; my anxiety shall be removed on your return. Attain shall I then great happiness, when you, Oh great one, shall return after satisfying your vows and making yourself freed of debts to your father. Incomprehensible is the action of Destiny in this world, Oh my son, as it drives you away to the forest, Oh Raghava, neglecting my request. Do you now repair Oh mighty hero, and come back in peace, and console me with soulsoothing, tender words. Oh my darling, shall that day ever come, when I shall see you return from the forest, wearing bark and matted hair. With great earnestness, the worshipful one began to eye Rāma, determined to go as an exile to the forest and spoke to his auspicious words and became desirous of performing benedictory ceremonies.