Desirous of seeing Rama, Vasistha, taking before him the wives of Dasaratha, proceeded towards the hermitage. And as the wives of the king were going slowly by the Mandākinī, they discovered the landing-place which was used by Rāma and Laksmana. Thereupon Kausalyä, with her eyes filled with tears and her countenance rendered pale, observed to the forlorn Sumitra as well as the other wives of the king, sacred like to a first wife, in this forest this is the landing-place of those unfortunate ones of untiring energy, who had been deprived of the kingdom. From here, O Sumitrā, does your son, Saumitri, ever vigilant, personally procure water for my son. Although your son performs a servile office, yet he is not to blame: (the performance of) that alone which serves no purpose of his brother possessed of many perfections, could bring blame upon him. To day let your son, who does not deserve such toilsome work, cease to perform that office which is fraught with hardship fit only for the base. That lady of expansive eyes happened to see on the earth the Ingudī piņņa, which had been placed by Rāma for his sire on the darbha with their tops pointing south-wards. Seeing this, which had been placed on the ground by Rāma disconsolate for his sire, the noble Kausaly, addressed all the wives of Dasaratha. Do you behold this that has been duly offered to the high-souled descendant of Raghu, lord of the Ikşvāku race, by Rāghava. Do not deem this as fit fare for that magnanimous monarch resembling a celestial, who had enjoyed every luxury (in life). Having enjoyed this earth bounded by the four seas, how can that. lord of the world, resembling on earth the mighty Indra, feed on this Ingudī pinda? Nothing appears to me more deplorable in this world than this that the auspicious Rāma has offered an Ingudi cake to his father. Seeing the Ingudi pinda offered by Rāma to his father, why does not my heart break into a thousand shivers? Now the tradition in vogue among men, appearth to be true, viz., that “the fare that is pareaken by a person, is also partaken by his deity." Then those that were co-wives with her, consoled the distressed Kausalyā; and, (entering the asylum), beheld Rāma like an immortal dropped from the celestial regions. Seeing Rāma, who had been deprived of every comfort, his mothers, overwhelmed with grief and distress, began to shed tears, lamenting. Raising his mothers, that foremost of men, Rāma, true to his promise, took hold of those lotus feet of theirs. And those ones furnished with expansive eyes, (on their turn) by means of their fair hands of delicious feed furnished with soft fingers and palms, fell to rubbing the dust off Rāma's back. After Rāma had done, Sumitrā's son also, seeing all his mothers, with sorrow gently paid his reverence to them with affection. Thereat, as they had treated Rāma, all the ladies treated that one sprung from Daśaratha, Laksmana, graced with auspicious marks. Sītă also with her eyes filled with tears, law, stood before them in distressful guise. Embracing that woeful one in banishment, even as a mother does her daughter, Kausalya, smitten with grief, said. The daughter of Videha's King, and the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha, and the wife of Rāma himself, why does such a lady undergo misery in the lone forest? O Vaidehi, beholding your face like to a lotus heated under the sun, or a lily that has been crushed, or like to gold covered with dust, or the moon enveloped by clouds, grief begot of this vortex of disaster that is in my mind, fiercely burns me, as fire consume a structure. As his wretched mother was thus speaking, Bharata's elder brother, Räghava, approaching, took the feet of Vasiştha. Having taken hold of the feet of the priest resembling a flame, and of accumulated energy, like to that lord of the immortals, Indra, taking the feet of Bșhaspati, Rāghava sat down with him. Then behind them (Rāma and Vasistha), along with his own counsellors, and principal citizens, and generals, and persons of eminent piety, sat the virtuous Bharata in the presence of his elder brother. Seeing Raghava in the guise of an ascetic, flaming in grace, the exceedingly powerful Bharata with joined palms sat down in company with his brother, like the great Indra of controlled faculties in presence of Prajāpati. "What will Bharata, having bowed to Rāghava and paid him homage, will say to him?", this intense curiosity arose in (the mind of) all the noble persons present there. And Rāghava having truth and forbearance, and Lakşmaņa endowed with magnanimity, and Bharata possessed of righteousness, surrounded by their friends, appeared (there) like to the three fires surrounded by Sadasyas.