As Bharata was again ng in this strain, his graceful elder brother, having been highly honoured, answered Bharata in the midst of his relatives, saying. Having been born as a son to Daśaratha, foremost of monarchs, by Kaikeyſ, this speech of yours is worthy of you. O brother, formerly when our father espoused the hand of your mother, he promised her the kingdom as her marriage portion. Then on the occasion of the war between the gods and the Asuras, that master, the king, well pleased (with her), being besought, granted her a boon. Having been thus promised, that virtuous lady, your illustrious mother, O foremost of men, asked for two boons (of the king), viz., your enthronement, O best of men, and my banishment. Thus besought by her, the king conferred on her the boon. And, you foremost of men, I have been enjoyed by my sire to stay in the woods for fourteen years, in consequence of his having granted her the boon. And, having, in company with Laksmana and Sītā, come to the lone forest, I in humble guise am staying in the truthful speech of my father. You too, you foremost of kings, should in the same way speedily render our father truthful, by getting yourself installed. O Bharata, for my sake, do you free that lord, the king, from his debts. Do you, O you cognizant of morality, deliver our father and gladden your mother. O child, we hear that in Gaya, formerly the famous Gaya, engaged in a sacrifice, chanted this Vedic hymn, for pleasing his departed ancestors. Since a son delivers his sire form the hell named Put, a son goes by the appellation of putra, he protecting his (departed) ancestors in every way. One should wish for many sons crowned with qualities and versed in various lore, for the chance is that one at least of these may repair to Gayā. O son of the Raghu race, the Rājarşis have delivered their decision on the point. Therefore, you foremost of men, do you, O lord, rescue your sire from hell. O Bharata, go to Ayodhyā, and please the subjects, in company with Śatrughna, O hero, and all the regenerate ones. I also, O hero, without delay shall have to enter the forest of Dandaka in company with Lakşmaņa and Sītā. O Bharata, be you yourself the monarch of men. I shall become the king of kings of deer. Go you to that foremost of cities with a glad heart: with a glad heart will I enter Dandaka. O Bharata, let the umbrella barring out the rays of the sun, afford cool shade to your head: I shall happily seek the dense shade of these forest trees. Śatrughna endued with cleverness is your helper: Sumitrā's son is well known as my best friend. We four worthy sons of that foremost of monarchs will keep him established in truth, O Bharata. Let not your mind despond.