Rising with the morrow, Bharata anxious to behold Rāma, speedily set out ascending an excellent car. Before him went the councillors and priests, ascending cars resembling that of the Sun yoked with steeds. And a thousand elephants duly consecrated went in the wake of that son of the Ikşvāku line as he was proceeding. And six thousand with bow-men furnished with various weapons followed the illustrious prince Bharata as he was proceeding. And a hundred thousand horses mounted (by riders) went in the wake of that descendant of Raghu intent upon truth and having his senses under control. Kaikeyi and Sumitrā and the highly famous Kausalyā rejoicing at the prospect of the bringing of Rāma, went in an effulgent car. cars And the honourable persons (belonging to all the three orders) went with the object of beholding Rāma in company with Lakşmaņa. They with glad hearts variously conversed with each other, “When shall we see the mighty armed Rāma sable like to a cloud, of steady strength, firm in vows, the remover of the world's grief? As soon as we shall see him, Rāghava will remove our sorrow; even as the Sun arising dispels the darkness of the entire world. Thus cheerfully carrying on an auspicious talk, the citizens embracing each other went along. And all other, and the foremost merchants as well as all the principal classes, joyfully went in quest of Rāma. And number of gem-cutters, and goodly manufacturers, bathers in tepid water, shampooers, physicians, makers of Dhūpas, and wine-sellers, washermen, and tailors, and actors in numbers with females, and Kaivartas, and persons versed in Vedas having their minds in control, and Brāhmaṇas of reputed character, and persons well dressed and attired in pure habits, with their bodies daubed with coppery unguents, by thousands followed Bharata on carts. All these gradually followed Bharata by means of excellent vehicles. And the army delighted and in high spirits went in the wake of Kaikeyi's son attached to his brother, going to bring back his brother. Going far by means of cars, vehicles, elephants, and horses, they arrived at the Gangā near Śrngaverapura, where was peacefully staying that friend of Rāma, the heroic Guha, surrounded by his relatives ruling the realm. Having come to the banks of the Gangā graced with Cakravākas, the army which was following Bharata halted. Seeing the army inactive as well as the Gangā of sacred waters, Bharata versed in speech spoke to the courtiers. Do you communicating to all our intentions, encamp the army. Having been fatigued, we shall cross the ocean-going Gangā on the morrow. Having crossed the stream, I am anxious to offer its water to the monarch, who has gone to heaven in behalf of his spiritual body. When he had said this, the courtiers with collected minds saying, “Be it so,” disposed their forces, each according to his wish. Having on the mighty stream, Gangā, quartered his forces furnished with all appliances for the journey, Bharata remained there, revolving the means of making the high-souled Rāma turn back.