When having been ministered to and when his senses has returned after the swoon, the king summoned Sumantra for hearing tidings of Rama. Thereupon the charioteer with joined hands spoke to the mighty monarch, lamenting for Rāma, influenced by grief and sorrow, aged, burning in grief, like a newly-taken elephant, sighing heavily, plunged in thought, and resembling an elephant that is indisposed. Then the king like one exceedingly distressed, spoke to the charioteer, who had presented himself, covered over with dust, with tears starting from his eyes, and in pitiable guise. Where stays that righteous one, taking refuge under a tree? lapped in luxury, what, O charioteer, will Rāghava feed on? Unworthy of privations, and worthy of excellent beds, how, O Sumantra, a king's son, he is sleeping on the ground like one forlorn? How is Rāma passing his days in the lone forest, he who when he went out used to be followed by foot-men and elephants? How are the princes in company with Vaidehi living in the woods, ranged by serpents and beasts and inhabited by black snakes? How, O Sumantra, having descended from the car, the princes along with the tender and unfortunate Sītā are proceeding on foot? O charioteer, surely you are blessed, for you have beheld my sons enter the forest, like the Asvins entering the Mandāra hill. And what did Rāma say? And what did Laks mana? And, O Sumantra, arriving at the forest what did Mithila's daughter? Do you, O charioteer, describe to me what Rāma lives on and where he lies down. Hearing this, I shall live, like Yayati in the midst of saints. Thus urged by the king, the charioteer spoke to the king with his voice faltering and suppressed with the vapour of grief. O mighty monarch observing morality, Rāghava with joined hands and bowing down his head, said, “O charioteer, do you in my name salute with your head the feet of my high-souled sire worthy of being saluted, and famed (in the world).” And, O charioteer, do you in my name as each deserves salute the ladies of the inner apartment and communicate to them tidings of my health. Having saluted my mother Kausalyā and conveyed to her news of my welfare, as well as of my unswerving adherence to morality, do you tell her these words, Do you remaining steady in virtue, at the proper hour bestir yourself in behalf of the chamber of sacrificial fire. And, O revered one, do you minister to the feet of that worshipful one, (the king), as if they were very deities. Banishing pride and self-love, do you bear yourself towards my mothers. And, O mother, do you show respect to Kaikeyi, who is followed by the king himself. You should behave towards Bharata as one should towards one's king. Kings (although juveline), are really senior by virtue of their royalty; and do you remember the duties touching sovereigns. Do you communicate to Bharata news of my welfare and say in my name, Do you behave properly with all your mothers. And to that delight of the Ikṣvāku line do you further say, Having been installed as the heirapparent, be you, looking upon the king as the supreme authority in the state, obedient to him. Do you not deprive the king of authority, as he has grown old. O Prince, do you grant him satisfaction in the kingdom and do you proclaim his mandates. And shedding copious tears, he again addressed me, saying, Do you look upon my mother as on your own proud of her son. Having said this, the mighty-armed and illustrious Rāma furnished with eyes resembling lotus-petals, shed plenteous tears. Thereupon Lakşmaņa waxing wroth, breathing hard, said, For what fault of his has the Prince been banished? Observing the worthless command of Kaikeyſ, whether the king has done well or ill, we have been exceedingly pained thereby. Whether Rāma has been exiled through Kaikeyi's lust for dominion or through the exigencies of the bestowal of the boon, there cannot be any doubt that the king has acted most unrighteously. Even if this has been done in harmony with the wish of the Lord, I do not perceive any reason for the banishment of Rāma. The king through lack of sense has done herulessly what is opposed to morality; and this banishment of Rāma will but bring upon him woe here and hereafter. Fatherhood find I none in the monarch. My brother and feeder and friend and father is even Rāghava. Renouncing one that is universally dear, and that is ever engaged in the good of all, how by such an act will the king please the people? How by banishing the righteous Rāma dear to all the subjects, and thus withstanding the wishes of all, will he retain his royalty? O mighty monarch, Janaki also, unfortunate that she is, sighing heavily, stood wildered like one that had been possessed. And not having experienced any calamity before, the famed princes weeping because of this misfortune, told me nothing. Looking up to her lord with a blank countenance, she suddenly let fall tears, perceiving the destruction of the subject. Thus said Rāma ministered to by Lakşmaņa, with a tearful countenance; and thus stood the unfortunate and weeping Sītå beholding the royal car and myself.