Hearing the words of Guha, exceedingly unpleasant, Bharata as soon as he heard them, became plunged in thought. And then taking heart for a while, that tenderfamed one possessed of immense strength, gifted with leonine shoulders and length of arms, having expansive eyes resembling white lotuses, young in years, and endowed with a handsome presence, afflicted with great grief, was overpowered, like an elephant wounded in the heart with a goad. Seeing Bharata deprived of his senses with his countenance covered with pallor, Guha became exceedingly agitated, like a tree during an earth quake. Seeing Bharata in that condition, ſatrughna who was near, taking the former on his lap, began to cry, almost deprived of his senses and oppressed with grief. Thereat, all the mothers of Bharata, fasting, undergoing distress, and afflicted with the calamity that had befallen their lord, came forward, and surrounding Bharata, began to lament him fallen on the ground. And the distressed Kausalyā drawing nigh embraced him like a cow approaching her calf; and weeping from excess of grief, spoke to Bharata, saying. My son, does any malady afflict your body? Now the life of this royal race is, without doubt, in your hands. Ráma having gone away along with his brother, I shall, O son, live, seeing you. King Dasaratha having departed this life, you alone are our lord. Have you, my son, heard anything unpleasant concerning Lakṣmaṇa; or the son of that one having an only son,* who has gone to the forest along with his wife? *Meaning herself. Having taken comfort for a while, that one of high fame weeping, and solacing Kausalya, spoke to Guha, saying. Where did my brother pass the night? And where did Sītā? And where did, again, Laks maņa? And in what bed did he sleep, and what did he previously partake of? Do you, O Guha, tell me this. Thereat, well pleased, Gulha, the lord of Nişādas, related to Bharata how he had acted in respect of Rāma, his dear guest, studious of his welfare. I procured for Rāma's use rice and fruits and roots and various kinds of food. All these Rāma having truth for his prowess accepted, but observing Ksatriya morality, he did not take them. 'O friend, we ought not to take anything: ours is always to give.' Thus did that magnanimous one beseech us. On the high-souled Lakşmaņa bringing water, Rāghava having drunk it, fasted along with Sītā. Then Lakşmaņa drank up the water that remained. Then the three with fixed minds silently performed their adorations to the Twilight. After that, Sumitrā's son prepared a goodly bed for Rāghava, himself bringing Kuća grass. And in that bed lay down Rāma in company with Sītā. Next washing their feet, Lakşmaņa turned away. This is the foot of the Ingudī, and this that grass. On it both Rāma and Sītā lay down that night. Fastening on his back a pair of quivers filled with arrows furnished with finger-fences, and taking his mighty bow, Lakşmaņa all night kept watch around. I also taking an excellent bow, remained where remained Lakṣmaṇa, and surrounded by my kindred who stayed there vigilantly, equipped with bows, guarded him that resembled the mighty Indra.