When the ascetics had gone away, Rāghava reflected (as to his stay at that place); and from diverse reasons, he did not relish remaining there any further. Here have I seen Bharata and my mother in company with the citizens. Overwhelmed with grief on my account, they ever recur to my memory. And in consequence of the troops of that highsouled one having quartered here as well as the dung discharged by his elephants and horses, this place has got exceedingly dirty. Therefore will I go to another quarter. Having settled this in his mind, Rāghava departed along with Videha's daughter and Laksmana. And having arrived at Atri's asylum, that renowned one paid obeisance (to the sage); and the reverend Atri also on his pare received Rāma asason. And having personally given Rāma respectful reception and entertainment, the ascetic regarded the exalted Lakşmaņa and Sītā with a gracious eye. And his aged wife having come there, Atri greeted her; and after she had been paid homage, the sage cognizant of virtue ever engaged in the good of all creatures, gladdened her (by presenting Sītā to her.) And that best of sages said to the pious female ascetic, Anasüyā, engaged in offices of virtue, “Do you accept Videha's daughter." And Atri related to Rāma matters connected with the female ascetic, engaged in offices of virtue, The people were ceaselessly burning in consequence of a drought extending over ten years. O sinless one, that one resembling your mother is this, by whom furnished with rigid asceticism and adorned with voluntary penances, were created fruits and roots and the Jāhnavi was made to flow through the asylum; by whom were performed mighty austerities for ten thousand years, in virtue of whose pen ances, disturbances to the asceticism of the sages ceased, by whom ten nights were brought within the compass of a single one. Let Vaidehī always resort to this aged ascetic devoid of anger, who is worthy of being bowed down to by all creatures. When the saint had spoken thus, Rāghava saying, “So be it," turned his eyes to Sītā, and thus spoke to that one knowing morality. O princess, you have heard what has been uttered by the ascetic. For the sake of your own welfare, do you speedily resort to the female anchoret. Do you without delay resort to the ascetic Anasuya, who is worthy of being associated with, and who has by virtue of her acts attained renown among men.f Hearing these words of Rāghava Mithila's daughter, the illustrious Sītā, drew near the righteous wife of Atri. Thereupon Sītā, announcing her name, saluted the pious and chaste Anasuyā old with slackened joints, with folds all over her skin, and her hair hoary from age, whose frame shook perpetually, like a plantain-leaf in the wind. Having paid homage to that ascetic with her senses subdued, Vaidehi glad at heart, with joined hands, enquired after her welfare. Seeing the virtuous Sītā engaged in righteous acts, the old lady consoling her, said "By luck it is that you regard righteousness." O Sita, having left your kindred, and banishing pride, you have o honoured lady, followed Rāma staying in the woods. They that love their husbands, whether living in the city or the forest, whether well or ill disposed towards them, attain great state. Wicked, ur libidinous, or indigent, a husband is a supreme deity to a wife of noble character. Than the husband a greater friend find I none, O Vaidehī, who is worthy of being served both in this world and the next, and who is like imperishable asceticism. But bad women whose hearts hunger after carnality, and who lord over their husbands, do not get acquainted with the virtues and demerits (of their husbands); and range at their will. O Mithilā's daughter, surely women of this sort who are given to doing evil acts, reap infamy and fall off from righteousness. But worthy women like you furnished with excellence, see a superior and better world, and range the celestial regions, like pious people. Therefore following this one, and adopting the course of chaste women, do you prove the associate in virtue of your husband, and then shall you attain both fame and religious merit.