Then taking the pair of sandals on his head, Bharata in company with Śatrughna well pleased, ascended the car. And Vasiştha, and Vāmadeva and Jāvāli steady his vow as well as the minister, honoured on account of their counsels, went before. And going round the charming Mandākinī, they went eastwards, circumambulating (at the same time) the mighty hill, Citrakuta. And beholding various kinds of beautiful minerals by thousand. Bharata accompanied by his army went by the side (of the hill). At a short distance from Citrakuța, Bharata beheld the spot where the ascetic Bharadvāja had built his habitation. Approaching the asylum, the puissant Bharata descended from the car, and the son of Raghu then paid homage to the saint's feet. Thereat Bharadvāja well pleased said, Have you, my child, on meeting with Rama, done what it behoved you to do? Thus addressed by the intelligent Bharadvāja, Bharata attached to righteousness answered the former, saying. Solicited by our preceptor as well as by myself, Rāghava of steady prowess highly pleased spoke to Vasiștha. I would faithfully perform my father's promise for fourteen years; for even this is the promise of my father. Thus accosted, the eminently wise Vasiștha skilled in speech replied to Rāghava in these pregnant words. Do you well pleased confer (on Bharata) your sandals decked in gold. Thereby, exceedingly wise one, you will be able to protect what the people have and secure to them what they have not. Thus addressed by Vasiştha, Rāghava facing the east, conferred on me his sandals decked in gold, in order that I mighty carry on the government of the kingdom. Commanded by the magnanimous Rāma, I retrace my steps. I will go to Ayodhyā, taking the sandals along with me. Hearing these auspicious words of the highsouled Bharata, the ascetic Bharadvāja said to Bharata. It is no wonder that Rāma has acted nobly by you, foremost among men and possessed of an (excellent) character and disposition, even as water poured out, flow downwards. Your father Dasaratha has become freed from his debts, since he has a son like to you, righteous and attached to virtue. When the ascetic had said this, Bharata with joined palms paid his respects to that highly wise one, by taking hold of his feet. And after having again and again gone round Bharadvāja, the graceful Bharata went to Ayodhyā accompanied by his counsellors. And returning by means of cars and carts, horses and elephants, that army marching in the wake of Bharata, spread wide. And after having crossed the beautiful river Yamunā flowing in waves, they again beheld the river Gangā of auspicious waters. And having along with his friend crossed over that river filled with beautiful waters, Bharata together with his army entered the charming city of Srigavera. And from the city of Śộngava he went to Ayodhyā and again beheld it. And seeing Ayodhyā bereft of his father and mother, Bharata burning in grief, said to the charioteer. O charioteer, behold that Ayodhyā, which shorn of its splendour and decorations, and plunged in grief, forlorn and silent, does not appear delightful.