When the night has gone away, on the morning of the next day, eulogists, accomplished ards, genealogists skilled in reciting, and singers versed musical permutation, in presenting themselves at the place of the sovereign, began to perform separately. And as they eulogized the monarch with benedictions loudly uttered, the palace resounded with the sounds of the eulogies. And as the bards hymned the monarch, palmplayers celebrating the deeds of the kings of the Raghu race, began to play with their palms. And awakened by those sounds, birds on boughs and in cages worthy of the royal race, uttered notes. And the sacred words uttered by these), the notes of Vinas, and the valedictory songs of singers filled that mansion. And as on former occasions, men practising purity and well up in serving, with numerous women and eunuchs entered appearance. Persons acquainted with the ceremonials connected with bath, according to the ordinance and in due time, in golden vessels brought water impregnated with Hair sandal powder. Pure females together with many virgins brought kine &c, which were to be touched, Ganges water for sipping, mirrors, cloths, ornaments and other areicles. All the things that were procured (for presentation to the monarch) were worshipped in accordance with prescription, were furnished with auspicious marks, and were of excellent virtues and possessed of auspiciousness. As along as the sun did not rise, all these people remained expecting the presence of the king; but then they were alarmed as to what had occurred. Those ladies that were beside the bed of the lord of Kosala, were consoling their husband. And engaged in tending the monarch with mild and pliant words, those females knowing the condition of sleep, feeling him as he lay in his bed, did not perceive any action in the evermoving pulse. Thereupon apprehensive for the king's life, they began to tremble like a blade of grass on a torrent. Filled with doubts at sight of the king, the ladies at last concluded that what had been apprehended (by the monarch) had certainly taken place. Overcome by grief for their sons, Sumitrā and Kausalyā were sleeping as if they were dead, and had not awaked. Deprived of lustre, pallid, stricken by sorrow, and lying with her limbs contracted, Kausalya looked like a star enveloped in darkness. After Kausalyā, the king, and after him, Sumitrā; and with her countenance faded from grief this noble lady did not look particularly lovely. Finding these two ladies asleep and the king seeming as if sleeping, the inmates of the inner apartment showed themselves as if their lives had departed out of them. Thereupon exceedingly distressed, those paragons of their sex, like she-elephants in the forest deprived of their leader of the herd, broke out into wailing. At the sounds of their lamentations, both Kausalya and Sumitrā suddenly regaining consciousness, awoke from their sleep. And Kausalya and Sumitrā looking at the king and feeling him, fell down to the earth, exclaiming, "Ah lord.” As the daughter of Kosala's lord rolled on the ground, she covered with dust did not appear in all her loveliness, like a star fallen from the sky to the earth below. And when the king had departed this life, the women saw Kausalyā fallen on the earth like the slain mate of an elephant. Then all the wives of the monarch headed by Kaikeyī, burning with grief and weeping, were well nigh rendered senseless. And the loud sounds emitted by these, mingling with those (who had been lamenting before them), attained greater proportions and filled the hall. The mansion of the king became filled with people exceedingly excited and frightened, eager to know all about the matter, became filled with lamentations, with friends afflicted with distress, its joy instantaneously vanished, a scene of distress and dole. Knowing that the lord of earth had departed, his wives surrounding that illustrious one, smitten with excess of sorrow and weeping bitterly and piteously, holding the king's hands indulged in lamentations, like forlorn ones.