As that best of ladies, Kausalyā, was thus lamenting, Sumitrā ever abiding in virtue, spoke to her these words consistent with righteousness. O worshipful one, your son is crowned with all qualities, and is the best of men. Why then do you bewail thus, or weep bitterly? Since, O revered one, renouncing the kingdom, your mighty son wendeth (to the woods) with the view of fulfiling the intention of his high-souled and truthful sire, the worthy Rāma staying in the duty that is completely observed by the good and the performance of which always bringeth welfare in the next world, should by no means be lamented. That sinless one, Laksmana, kind to all creatures, will minister to Rāma in the best way possible, and this is to the advantage of that high-souled one. And experiencing the hardships that come of living in the forest, Vaidehi deserving of happiness follows your righteous son. What is wanting to that maintainer of all, your son of subdued senses, intent upon truth and the observance of vows, who is spreading his banner of fame over the world? Acquainted with Rāma's manifest purity and high magnanimity, the Sun himself will not dare burn his body with his rays. And issuing from the woods at all hours, the delicious air impregnated with heat and cold will serve Raghava. And when he will lie down at night, the Moon touching him with his beams and embracing him even like his own father, will gladden his heart. That hero of mighty energy on whom Brahma had conferred celestial weapons, seeing that foremost of the Dānavas, the son of Timidhvaja, slain in battle, that tiger-like one, relying on the native strength of his arms, will fearlessly abide in the forest as if in his own home. And why should not the earth remain in the sway of him coming within the range of whose arms enemies find destruction? Considering Rāma's grace, heroism and auspiciousness, (there cannot be any doubt that) returning from the forest, he will speedily regain his own kingdom. He is the sun of the sun, the lord of the lord, he is the auspiciousness of priine auspiciousness, the fame of fame, the forbearance of forbearance, the god of the gods, and the foremost of creatures. What evil qualities, O noble lady, will be perceived in him, whether he remains in the city or in the forest? And that best of men, Räma, will soon be installed in the kingdom, in company with these three, the Earth, Vaidehī, and the goddess of victory. Although overwhelmed with grief, the people of Ayodhyā, seeing that noble unvanquished one retiring to the woods clad in Kuśa and bark, are shedding tears begot of sorrow; yet accompanied by that Lakşmī, what is there that is incapable of being attained by him? And what is there that is incapable of being obtained by him before whom goes that foremost of bowmen himself bearing arrows, swords and other weapons? You will again see him returned from the forest. O exalted one, chase your grief and sadness. I tell you this truly. O blameless one, you will again, O auspicious lady, see your son, like to the new-risen moon, paying homage to your feet with his head. And again seeing him returned and crowned with great auspiciousness, you will speedily shed the dew of delight. O noble lady, do not grieve or lament. Evil cannot touch Räma. You will soon behold your son along with Sītā and Lakşmaņa. O sinless one, it is for you to console these people. Why then, O revered one, do you suffer your heart to be thus overpowered? O eminent one, you ought not to bewail, inasmuch as Rāghava is your son. In this world there is not another residing in honesty that is superior to Rāma. Beholding your son surrounded by his friends, bowing to you, you will soon shed blissful tears, even like a rain-cloud. And soon will your son conferring boons, returning (to this place), press your feet with those soft and plump hands of his. And even as a Chain of clouds speaks to a hill, you will speak to your worshipful and heroic son, surrounded by his friends. bowing to you. Having thus addressed Rāma's mother and inspired her with hope in various words, the noble and pleasant and blameless Sumitrā, clever in speech, paused. Hearing those words of Laksmana's mother, the wife of the best of men, Rāma's mother, had her sorrow destroyed in her person, even like and autumnal cloud surcharged with slight rain.