As Rāma cognizant of righteousness was thus encouraging Bharata, Jābāli, best of Brāhmaṇas, addressed him in words divorced from morality, saying. O Rāghava, endowed with a noble understanding and leading a life of asceticism, do not suffer your intellect to entertain inanities, like any low person. Who is whose friend ? And to what is one entitled and by virtue of what relation? And who is such ? Since a creature is born alone and dies alone, a person that cherishes his father and mother with affection, must, O Rāma, be looked upon as a madman. No individual has any one (in the world). As on the eve of setting out for another country, a person stays somewhere (outside the village he lives in), and the next day goes away, renouncing that abode, even such are a man's father and mother, house and wealth. O Kākutstha, worthy people never bear affection towards a mere abode. Therefore, O best of men, leaving your ancestral kingdom, you ought not to abide in the disagreeable forest filled with dangers and difficulties. Do you get yourself sprinkled in the prosperous Ayodhyā. The city expects you wearing a single woven braid. O king's son, enjoying costly regal pleasures, do you sport in Ayodhyā, like Sakra in the celestial regions. Dasaratha is none to you, and you too are none's to Dasaratha. He is quite other than your sire; and you have no connection with him. Therefore, do you act as I tell you. A father is merely an instrumental cause (touching the generation of his child). A father's semen coming in contact with a mother's blood, at the time befitting conception, a person is brought into being. The king has gone the way he should. This is the nature of all creatures. But you for naught deny yourself (the manliness of monarchical power). Those that disregarding interest are devoted to virtue, do I mourn, and not others; for having suffered misery here, they in the end meet with extinction. People engage in Aştaka* in behalf of ancestors and deities. Behold the waste of edibles. Does any dead person feed? *The lunar days and months for propitiating the manes. If food partaken by one is transferred to the body of another, offer Śrāddha to one going to a distant and, that shall serve for his provender on the way. Works (on morality) enjoining, Worship,' 'Give away,' 'Be initiated,' 'Observe rites,' "Renounce', have been composed by intelligent persons, for inducing people to be charitable. O magnanimous one, assure yourself there is no hereafter. Do you remain grounded in the evident, turning your back on what is beyond our ken. Placing in front the intellect of the good, and approved by all, do you, propitiated by Bharata, accept the monarchy.