Having placed his mothers in Ayodhyā, Bharata steady in his vow, kindling in grief, said preceptors. I shall go to Nandigrāma, and therefore greet you all. There I shall suffer all this grief on account of Rāma's absence. The king has gone to heaven, and my superior is staying in the woods. I shall remain in expectation of Rāma, assuming the reins of government. Verily that illustrious one is the king. Hearing this excellent speech of the highsouled Bharata the counsellors as well as the priest Vasiştha said. What, О Bharata, influenced by affection for your brother you say, is worthy of you and is highly commendable. Who will not endorse what has fallen from you, ever engaged in serving your friends, established in fraternal love, and who have entered upon a noble course? Having heard the words of the counsellors acceptable and welcome, Bharata said to the charioteer, Do you yoke my car. Then with a cheerful countenance having spoken to his mothers, that graceful one ascended the car in company with Satrughna. Having swiftly ascended the car, both Satrughna and Bharata, right glad at heart, set out surrounded by counsellors and priests. And going ahead, all the preceptors headed by Vasiştha proceeded eastwards, in which direction lay Nandigrāma. And the forces, filled with elephants and horses and cars, although not called, set out on Bharata proceeding, as well as all the citizens. And ascending the car, the virtuous Bharata attached to his brother, speedily went to Nandigrāma, holding the sandals (of Rāma) on his head. Then entering Nandigrāma in a short time, Bharata swiftly alighted from the car and addressed his preceptors, saying. This monarchy has been consigned to me as a trust; and these gold-decked sandals shall carry on the work of government, protecting what the people have and securing to them what they have not. Then bowing to the sandals which represented the trust. Bharata burning in grief addressed the entire body of the subjects, saying. Do you speedily bold the umbrella (over these sandals). These represent the dear feet. of the exalted one. Through these sandals of my superior, will be established the regal morality (of the kingdom). This kingdom from love has been conferred on me as a trust; therefore I shall govern it until Rāghava comes. Again speedily putting these sandals on Raghava's feet, I shall behold them with the sandals on. On Rāghava coming (back), I shall, my burden being cast upon him, making over the kingdom to him, engage myself in serving my superior. And having rendered to Rāghava the trust in the shape of these sandals, this kingdom, and Ayodhyā, I shall be washed form my sin. Henceforth wearing bark and matted locks, and in the guise of an ascetic, the heroic Bharata dwelt in Nandigrāma along with his forces. Having consigned all rule to the sandals, Bharata himself held the umbrella and the chowri furnished with hair.. And the graceful Bharata, Having installed the sandals of the noble one, always carried on the government in subordinations to them. Having consigned all rule to the sandals, Bharata himself held the umbrella and the chowri furnished with hair.. And the graceful Bharata, Having installed the sandals of the noble one, always carried on the government in subordinations to them.