Having showed to Mithila's daughter the river belonging to the mountain, Rāma sat down on its table-land and, gratifying Sita with meat, said to her. This clean meat tastes sweet, having been roasted in fire. The righteous Rāghava was thus seated in company with Sītā, when Bharata's followers came there. And filling the heavens, there arose clouds of dust raised by the army as well as an uproar. And at this time mad leaders of elephant-herds accompanied by the latter, scared by the terrible tumult, scudded on all sides. And Rāghava heard the noise raised by the army; and also saw all those leaders of elephantherds scampering away. And having seen them running away and heard that hubbub, Rāma spoke to Sumitrā's son, Lakşmaņa of flaming energy. Ha! Lakşmaņa, in whom Şumitrā has been blest with a worthy son, hark! A tremendous and dreadful uproar resembling the rumbling of clouds is being heard; and in the woods and mighty forest, deer and buffaloes and herds of elephants being accompanied by lions are suddenly scampering away in all directions. O Sumitrā's son, it behoves you to learn whether any king or prince is hunting in the forest, or any ferocious beast is (ravaging the woods). O Lakşmana, this mountain is even incapable of being frequented by fowls. Therefore it behoves you to learn all about it, as has actually been the case. Thereat, hurriedly ascending a flowering Säla tree, Laksmana surveying all sides, fixed his gaze on the east. to And viewing the east, he discovered a mighty army, abounding with elephants, horses and cars, and consisting of equipped infantry. Thereupon, Lakşmaņa communicated Rāma tidings concerning that army filled with elephants and steeds, and decked with cars and streamers; and spoke to Rāma, saying. O noble one, do you put out the fire; and let Sītā go into the cave. And do you string your bow and make ready the arrows and don on your mail. Thereat, Rāma-chief of men, answered Lakş mana, saying O son of Sumitra, do you (first) ascertain whom this host belongs to. Thus accosted by Rama, Laksmana, as if consuming that army by his wrath resembling fire, said. Having got himself installed, Kaikeyi's son, Bharata, anxious to render his royalty perfectly safe, is coming hither for the purpose of slaying us both. Yonder is seen the graceful tree. By the same apr-ars on the car the Kovidāra standard, having a shining top. And men riding swift coursers are at their riders, riding on elephants, are also cheerfully directing their course hither. Let us, O hero, taking our bows, station ourselves on this hill. I will (to day) see Bharata, for whom we have come by this mighty misfortune. Or let us rather remain where we are accoutred in mail and with our arms ready. Shall he of the Kovidāra banner in conflict come under our sway? O hero, we have met with that foe of ours for whom, O Rāghava, you, Sītā and myself have (experienced such misery), for whom, O Rāghava, you have been cast off from the entire kingdom. Surely, Bharata should be slain by me. O Rāghava, fault find I none in slaying Bharata; slaying a former wronger, one does not reap unrighteousness. O Raghava, there is religious merit to be reaped by slaying Bharata, who had formerly done us wrong. On this one being slain, you will rule the entire earth. To day shall Kaikeyi lusting after the kingdom, with grief behold her son slain in battle by me, like a tree riven by an elephants. I will also kill Kaikeyi along (with the humpbacked one, and her friends. Let the earth today be freed from foul sins. To day will I, O bestower of honour, vent my restrained ire and bad blood upon the hostile hosts, like fire set to a heap of hay. To day with sharpened shafts will I cut the bodies of the hostile hosts and drench the woods of Citrakuta with their blood. The ferocious beasts shall drag away elephants and steeds and men slaughtered by me with arrows penetrating into their hearts. I will, without doubt, in this forest pay the debt I owe to my bow and arrows, by slaying Bharata together with all his forces.