On Rāma having stopped after speaking these pregnant words, the virtuous Bharata addressed the righteous Rāma attached to him subjects in an excellent speech on the banks of the Mandākinī, saying, “O vanquisher of foes, who is there is this world like to you?" Pain does not afflict you, nor does pleasure exhilarate. Yourself the exemplar of even aged people, you refer to them on doubtful point (of morality). ‘Living like to dead and existing like to nonexisting', what shall make a person that has attained this intellectual state, grieve? O lord of men, he that like to you understands the nature of the soul and its environment coming by any calamity, ought not to despond. You resemble, O Rāghava, the god in strength, and are magnanimous, and truthful in promise, and know every thing and are endued with intelligence, Calamity, however unbearable it may be, should not overpower a person like yourself furnished with such virtues and cognizant of life and death. The sin that in my absence from home has been perpetrated by my mean-minded mother does not find favour in my sight. Be you therefore propitious to me. I am bound by the fetters of religion. For this it is that I do not by a severe penalty slay my wicked mother deserving of chastisement. How having sprung from Dasaratha of righteous deeds and born of immaculate race, and knowing virtue and vice, can I commit such a reprehensible action? Dasaratha is our superior, of meritorious acts, aged our king, a departed spirit, and our father, it is on account of this that I do not censure our father who is a deity to us. O cognizant of virtue, what virtuous person conversant in morality, should, seeking the pleasure of his wife, commit such a sinful act devoid of both righteousness and interest? 'Creatures, as their end approaches, lose their sense this ancient adage has been illustrated in the world by the course the king has taken. Do you, intent upon bringing about good, redeem the wrong that has been done by our sire through anger, ignorance and recklessness. The son that repair the wrong done by his father by acting contrary to the latter is in this world considered really a son; but not he that acts otherwise. Be you that (real) son (of the monarch). Do you not approve the action of your father, since what he has done is divorced from righteousness and is blameworthy. Do you rescue all these, Kaikeyī, myself, my father, our friends and adherents, and the whole body of the citizens as well as the inhabitants of the provinces. Where is the forest? And where is Ksatriya morality? Where are matted locks? And where is your government of the country? It behoves you not to act in such an untoward way. Even this is the first duty of a Ksatriya, viz., getting oneself installed, by means of which, O highly wise one, he can compass the government of the people. What base Ksatriya setting aside this indubitable morality, resorts to a dubious and inauspicious course, which should be followed by the old alone? But if you be bent upon practising this austere morality, do you undergo this trouble, after having righteously ruled the four orders. O you cognizant of morality, those versed in duty say that of the four modes of life, the life of the householder is the foremost. Why then do you wish to renounce the same? I am inferior to you in learning, in position, and in birth. How can I then govern the earth, you existing? Void of sense and quality, a body, and inferior to you in point of years, I, deprived of you, can not live. O you cognizant of morality, do you, along with your friends, according to your proper morality rule this entire ancestral kingdom rid of its thorns and enjoying tranquillity. Even here, O you cognizant of the Mantras, let all the subjects and the Rtvijas with Vasiștha, versed in the Mantras, install you. Having been installed, go to Ayodhyā for the purpose of governing it, having with our assistance conquered your enemies by they strength, like Vāsava conquering (his foes) with the help of the Maruts. Having freed yourself from the threefold debts, do you govern me, repressing your foes, and propitiating your friends with every gratification. O noble one, to-day let your friends rejoice in consequence of your coronation. To day let those that intend to do you harm, being frightened, fly to the ten cardinal points. O foremost of men, wiping out the disgrace of my mother, do you emancipate our sire from sin. I beseech you with bent head. Be you merciful to me, to all our friends, and, O great lord, to all creatures in general. But, if disregarding my solicitations, you wend from here to the forest, I shall go along with you. Although thus besought and propitiated by Bharata with bent head, that lord of the earth, Rāma, possessed of strength, established in the words of his father, did not decide for going. Witnessing that wonderful firmness in Rāghava, the people were at one and the same time delighted and depressed. They were aggrieved because he would not go to Ayodhyā; they rejoiced on seeing his firm resolution. Then the Rtvijas, the citizens, and their leaders, and the mothers with their senses lost and with tears in their eyes, extolled Bharata as he was speaking thus; and, bowing down to Rāma, they directed their solicitations together.