Arising after a long while he had regained his consciousness, Bharata endowed with prowess, regarding his distressed mother with eyes filled with tears, began to tax her in the midst of the courtiers: “I had never desired the kingdom. I had never consulted my mother. Nor did I know the installation that had been thought of by the monarch. I was then living in a far country in company with Satrughna." I did not know the banishment of the magnanimous Rāma to the woods, or the exile of Sumitra's son; nor did I know how Sītā came to be banished. As the high-souled Bharata was thus wailing, Kausalyā recognizing his voice spoke to Sumitra. Come is Bharata, the son of that one of crooked ways. I am desirous of seeing the farsighted Bharata. Having said this to Sumitrā, that one emaciated and with a pallid countenance, trembling and almost deprived of sensation, went to where Bharata, was. And it came to pass that the king's son, Bharata, along with Śatrughna had just then by the way that led to the same, been proceeding to Kausalyā's quarter. Then Śatrughna and Bharata seeing the aggrieved Kausalyā, embraced the stricken and fallen lady wellnigh deprived of her senses. Thereupon, weeping from grief, the noble and intelligent Kausalyà exceedingly afflicted, embracing them as they indulged in sorrow, said to Bharata. Thus have you, that had desired the kingdom, received it rid of its thorn. Alas! it has been speedily obtained through the crooked act of Kaikeyi. What is the good that is perceived by Kaikeyi of tortuous sight in sending away my son clad in bark to the woods? It behoves Kaikeyi to send me also speedily to where is staying my illustrious son furnished with a gold-gleaming navel. Or first performing the fire-sacrifice, I followed by Sumitrā, will myself happily seek the way by which Rāghava (has gone to the woods). Or it behoves you to yourself bring me to the place where that foremost of men, my son, is performing austerities. This spacious kingdom abounding in corn and wealth, and filled with elephants, horses, and cars, is yours, having been conferred on you (by Kaikeyi). Thus reproached by many a harsh word, the sinless Bharata felt exceeding pain like to that produced by pricking a sore with a needle. Exceedingly agitated, he fell at Kausalya's feet, lamenting much, and well nigh deprived of his Bharata then regained his consciousness, and with joined hands answered Kausalya lamenting thus and overcome with excess of sorrow, saying. O noble lady, what for do you censure me who am without sin and who know nothing of this? You know that profuse is my delight in Rāghava. May the sense of him never follow scripture, that had approved the exile into the woods of that foremost of the good, the noble Rāma intent senses. on truth! May such a person as had approved the exile to the woods of the noble one undergo servitude at the hands of the sinful, answer the calls of nature facing the Sun, and kick a sleeping cow with his feet! May he that had approved the exile of the noble one into the woods come by the sin that is reaped by a master who withholds salary from servants after the ceremony is over! May that one that had approved the exile of the noble Rāma to the woods, be guilty of the sin that is his that injures a sovereign engaged in ruling his subjects like sons! May the person that had approved the exile of the noble one to the woods, reap the sin of his that having taken a sixth pare of their incomes, does not protect his subjects! May he that had approved the exile of the noble one to the woods, come by the demerit that is his that denies Dakșiņās to ascetics in a sacrifice, after having promised them the same! May he that had approved the exile into the woods of the noble one, never discharge the duty of the good in the field thronged with elephants and horses and cars, and bristling with arms! May the wicked wight that had approved the exile of the noble one to the woods bring to naught the subtle scriptural knowledge which has been carefully taught him by his intelligent preceptor! May that one that had approved the exile of the noble (Rāma) to the woods never behold the long-armed and broad-shouldered (Rāghava) resembling the Sun and the Moon in energy (on the throne)! May that one void of aversion, that had approved of the exile of the noble one to the woods feed on Payasa, Krsara, and goat's flesh, which have not been offered in sacrifice; and may he insult his spiritual precept. Or! May he that had approved the exile of the noble one to the woods touch a cow with his feet, revile his superiors, and injure his friends! May that one of wicked soul that had approved of the exile of the noble one into the woods divulge any defects (of another's character) that have been communicated to him in strict confidence! May he that had approved the exile of Rāma to the woods, never repay any good act, be ungrateful, abandoned by all, the object of universal execration. May he that had approved of the exile into the woods of the noble one, eat alone in his home, although surrounded by sons and wives and servitors! May he that haå approved of the exile of the noble one, die without obtaining wives worthy of him, without sons, without any good works performed! May he that had approved the exile of the noble one into the woods, never see his own offspring, and not attaining ripe age, may he mourn his wives! And may he come by the sin that is reaped by slaying a king, a woman, a boy, or an old man, or by renouncing those who have claims on his maintenance! May he that had approved the exile of the noble one into the woods always feed his family with lac, honey, meat, iron, and poison! May that one that had approved the exile of the noble one into the woods, while flying from the engagement while it is waxing furious with the foe, come to be killed ! May he that had approved of the exile of the noble one into the woods, clad in tatters with a skuil in hand, like a madman range the earth abegging! May he that had approved the exile of the noble one into the woods, be always addicted to wine, to women, and to dice; and may he be swayed by lust, anger, etc! May he that had approved of the exile of that noble one into the woods, never relish virtue, and go after unrighteousness; and may he shower his wealth on the unworthy! May he that had approved the exile of the noble one into the woods, have his various accumulated riches by thousand carried off by robbers! May he that had approved of the exile into the woods of that noble one, come by the demerit that is his who sleeps during both the twilight's! May he reap the sin that is reaped by an incendiary or him that Leith with his preceptor's wife; or him that wrongs his friend! May he that had approved the exile of that noble one into the woods, never serve the gods or the manes of the ancestors or his father and mother! may he that had approved the exile of that noble one into the woods, be speedily shut out from the world of the good, from their fame, and from their acts! May he that had approved the exile of that long armed and broad breasted one, renouncing the ministration of his mother, turn his thoughts to evil! May he that had approved the exile of the noble one, becoming improved the exile of the noble one, becoming impoverished yet having to support a large family, and suffering from fever, be always miserable! an May he that had approved the exile of that noble one render fruitless the hopes of poor people cherishing them and looking up (wistfully). May he that had approved the exile into the woods of the noble one remaining (always) wicked, cruel and impure, leading unrighteous life and being in (continual) fear of his sovereign, maintain himself by deceit for ever and a day! May that wicked person that had approved the exile into the woods of that noble one disregard his chaste wife remaining near, after she has performed her ablutions at the end of her season. May his that had approved the banishment into the woods of that noble one be the sin that is incurred by a Brāhmana that has rendered himself sonless. May that one of befouled senses that had approved of the exile into the woods of that noble one disturb the worship of Brāhmaṇa and milch a cow that has a calf. May that foolish person that had approved the exile of that noble one forsaking all pleasure in virtue, seek others wives, renouncing his own wedded with sacred rites! May he that had approved the exile into the woods of that noble one come by the sin that attaches to a wine biber or one that administers poison to another! May he that had approved of the exile into the woods of the noble one bear the sin that is his that serves a thirsty soul with deceit. May he that had approved the exile into the woods of that noble one reap the demerit of them that from devotion to their respective faiths wrangle from their own points of view, as well as that of them that listen to the disputation! Having thus consoled Kausalyā bereft of her son and husband, the prince afflicted with distress fell down. Then Kausalyā addressed the aggrieved Bharaia (well-nigh) deprived of his senses, swearing strong oaths, saying. O son, it grieves me more that you are afflicting my heart by taking oaths. Lucky it is that graced with auspicious marks, you swerves not from virtue. My child, for this reason you will attain the regions of pious person, drawing into her lap Bharata attached to his brother, and embracing the mighty armed one, gave way to grief. And bewailing thus, the mind of the high souled (Bharata) wrought with sorrow, was overcome with the burden of grief. And fallen the ground, lamenting, senseless, with his intellect overpowered, and momentarily heaving sighs, Bharata passed away night in grief.