Then the ascetic asked Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, when he had decided for staying there, to receive his hospitality. Thereat Bharata said, “You have for certain done this, (have offered me) water for washing my feet, Arghya, and hospitality with what can be procured in the forest. Then Bharadvāja as if in jest, said to Bharata, "I know you to be of a complacent disposition; and that you are pleased with anything and everything." But I wish to feast your forces. And, O best of men, it behoves you to act in harmony with my desire. Why did you coming higher, leave your army at a distance:? And, you man of men, why did you not come accompanied with your forces? Bharata replied to him, saying, “I had not come accompanied with my forces, from fear of you, O reverend Sir.” O worshipful one, kings and their sons should always carefully avoid the regions of ascetics. Choice steeds, men, and mad elephants of the best kind, covering a spacious tract of country, come in my train, respected Sir. That these might not injure trees or water or the grounds of the cottages pertaining to the asylums, have I come hither alone. "Bring the forces here,", thus desired by the mighty ascetic, Bharata accordingly caused the troops to be brought in. Then entering the chamber of the sacrificial fire, (Bharadvāja) having sipped water and rubbed his lips therewith, invoked Viśvakarmā for the purpose of entertaining his guest. I invoke Visvakarmā; even Tvasta himself. I wish to entertain guests. Let him accomplish this for me. I invoke the three guardians of the worlds, gods headed by Sakra. I wish to entertain guests. Let them accomplish this for me, Let those rivers that flow westwards, and those that move tortuously on the earth and in the sky, come hither in a body. And let others run Maireya, and others refined wine, and others again cool waters resembling the juice of the sugarcane. I invoke the celestials and the Gandharvas and Viśvāvasu and Hahā and Huhu and also the divine Apsaras and Gandharvis all. And Ghịtâcī, Viśvācī, Misrakesi and Alambuşā; and Nāgadattā and Hemā and Somā residing in the mountain. And those ladies that attend Sakra, and those that attend Brahmā. I invoke all these females well attired, in company with Tumuru. And let that beautiful forest of Kubera in the north Kuru, having its foliage resembling attires and ornaments, and its fruits debonair damsels, exist even at this very spot. And here let the worshipful Soma yield me excellent viands of diverse kinds in plenty; things; that may be eaten or enjoyed, sucked or licked; and variegated blossoms growing in the trees, and wines and (other) drinks, and meats of various kinds. Thus, furnished with unrivalled ascetic energy, did that anchorite observing excellent vows, express himself orthoepically in consonance with Śikṣā. And as he sat with joined hands facing the west with a rapt mind, there came separately all those deities. And then touching Malaya and Dardura, and laden (with perfumes), a delicious and welcome wind began to blow delightfully, removing sweat. And the clouds poured down a pleasant shower of blossoms; and from all sides were heard sounds of celestial kettle-drums. And a rare breeze set in, and the multitudes of Apsaras danced; and the celestials and the Gandharvas sang, and the Vinas let out their notes. And the dulcet sounds high and low furnished with Sama and measure, entered the Earth and the firmament and the ears of all creatures. When that celestial symphony delightful to the ears of men, had thus developed itself, Bharata's forces saw the workmanship of Visvakarman. That spot widening into a level plain measuring five Yojanas was covered with thick grass resembling blue lapises. And on it stood Bilvas, and Kapitthas, Panasas, citrons, and Amalakas, and mangoes, embellished with fruits. From the north Kuru had spread a wood capable of conferring every enjoyment; and a beautiful river coursed through bordered by many a tree. And there had arisen white edifices having four divisions; and stables for horses and elephants; and grand gateways belonging to places and mansions; and royal residences with graceful gates, resembling white clouds, bearing white garlands and washed with fragrant waters, having four corners, and spacious, fitted up with beds, seats, and vehicles, having every kind of excellent sapid food, stocked with excellent edibles and apparels, having every variety of food, possessing washed and bright vessels, with every description of seats, graceful, and accommodated with choice beds with coverlets. Permitted by the Maharsi, Kaikeyi's son, Bharata, entered that mansion abounding in gems. And he was followed by the counsellors and the priests; and the latter beholding the arrangements of the palace, were filled with delight. And Bharata in company with the counsellors there went round the august royal seat, the chowri, and the umbrella, worthy of a king. And having bowed down to Rāma, he worshipped that seat. And then holding the chowri of hair, he sat down on the seat of a minister. Then the counsellors and priests seated themselves according to rank. And thereafter the general and the protector of the encampment (got themselves seated). Then at Bharadvāja's command, came into being near Bharata streams having Pāyasa for their slime. And at the pleasure of the Brāhmaṇa, on both their banks arose charming dwellings, covered with pale clay. And at that very moment there came twenty thousand women commissioned by Brahma, adorned with divine ornaments. And there came also twenty thousand females sent by Kuvera, decked out in gold and gems, pearls and corals. The sight of these was capable of filling men's mind with enchanting ravishment. And there came from Nandana twenty thousand damsels; and Nārada and Tumburů and Gopa, resembling the sun in splendour. The Gandharba kings began to sing before Bharata. And Alambusa, and Misrakesi, and Puņdarīka, and Vāmana danced before Bharata, at the command of Bharadvāja. And those blossoms that are in the celestial regions, and that bloom in the forest of Caitraratha, became visible in Prayāga at the energy of Bharadvāja. And Vilwas did the office of players of the Mặdanga, and Bibhitakas, that of keepers of Soma, and Asvatthas became dancers, at the energy of Bharadvāja. And Saralas, Tālas, Tilakas, and Tamālas, being delighted, became hump-backed ones and dwarfs. And Sinsapās, Āmalakīs, Jambūs and other plants of the forest, wearing the forms of females, stood at the mansion of Bharadvāja. Let wine-drinkers drink wine, the hungry eat Pāyasa, and those that are inclined to it, feed on clean meat. And every seven or eight females taking a man, bathed him on the lovely banks of the rivers. And damsels furnished with expansive eyes, having wiped the persons (of the bathers), pressed their legs, and those magnificent women made them drink (wine). And the keepers duly fed excellent horses, elephants, camels and Surabhi's sons (oxen), with their (proper) food. And some persons possessed of mighty strength, being directed thereto, fed the bearers of the foremost Ikşvāku warriors with sugercanes, honey, and fried paddy. And the groom forgot his horse, and the elephant-keeper his elephant: that army there became transported with wine and exhilaration. And sumptuously entertained with every enjoyment, with their bodies decked with red sandal, the soldiery in the company of bevies of Apsaras, exclaimed. To Ayodhyā will we not go, nor yet to Dandaka. Peace be to Bharata, and may Rāma reap happiness! Thus did footmen and the riders and keepers of elephants and horses, as well as others, having experienced such a state, utter words. And men by thousand, exceedinly delighted, sent up shouts. And saying. “This is heaven,” the retiune of Bharata, the soldiers, began to dance and laugh and sing; and bearing garlands, they on all sides rushed by thousands. And beholding the inviting viands resembling ambrosia, they although already fed, became desirous of eating once again. And wearing new clothes, all the servants, and maids, and females of the household, became exceedingly well pleased. And elephants, and asses, camels, kine and horses, and beats and birds, being fed their fill, did not hunger after anything else. And there appeared no one who wore a soiled habit, or who was hungry, or melancholy, or whose hair was covered with dust. And the people with wonder beheld before them vessels of precious metals by thousands graceful with chaplets of flowers, filled with essences of fruits and fragrant soups and curries and the flesh of goats and bears, and white rice. And there were on the skirts of the wood wells having Pāyasa for their slime; and the kine yeilded whatever was asked and all the trees dropped honey. And the tanks were filled with Maireya as well as with clean hot meat of dear, peacocks, and cocks, dressed in pans. And there were rice-holders by thousands, and curry-pots by hundred thousands, and golden vessels by Arbudas. And there were pitchers and water-pots and cleaned vessels for churning curd, filled with the same. And there were tanks of savoury and yellow butter-milk, well-tempered. And there were tanks filled with Rasāla;* and others filled with milk, and with sugar. *A preparation of butter-milk. And men saw sediments, acrid powders and various others things in vessels, for the purpose of bath, on the terraces of tanks; and toothcleaning sticks of Ansuman and other (trees); and white sandal paste lying before; and cleaned mirros; and lots of cloths; and sandals; and shoes in pairs by thousand; and collyrium-pots; and combs; and brushes; and bows at some places; and mail; and various kinds of seats and beds. And they saw reservoirs for asses, camels, elephants, and horses, with easy descents, filled with water to assist their digestion; and pools furnished with lotuses, of the hue of the firmament, with transparent water, comfortable for ablutions; and tender (plots of) grass all around coloured like blue lapises, to serve as pasture for beasts. Witnessing the wonderful hospitality provided by the Maharşi Bharadvāja, like to a vision, the men marvelled. Thus entertained like to celestials in Nandana, they passed the night at the hermitage of Bharadvāja. Then taking the permission of Bharadvāja, all the Gandharvas as well as the superb damsels went away as they had come. And the men remained intoxicated and highly inebriate with the liquor, their persons daubed with goodly aguru and sandal; and the various elegant garlands beautiful to behold, lay by themselves all around, crushed by the people.