Knowing Bharata as devoted to his superior Răma along with his brother Lakşmaņa, asked him. What for is this (visit of yours to the woods)? I wish to hear as clearly related by you the reason why clad in blackdeerskin and wearing matted locks, you, leaving your kingdom, have come to these regions. It behoves you to tell me all this. Thus accosted by the high-souled Kākutstha, Kaikeyi's son, suppressing his grief by a strong effort, with joined hands said. O noble one, forsaking us all, our father possessed of mighty arms, having performed this terrible task, in consequence of being urged by a woman, my mother Kaikeyi, has gone to heaven afflicted with grief on account of his son, O repressor of foes. And she has committed a signal sin capable of destroying her fame. And without obtaining the kingdom which she had coveted as the fruit of her action, a widow tried with grief, my mother will fall into a terrible hell. Now it behoves you to extend your favour to me who have become your slave. Do you this very day get yourself installed in the kingdom, like to Indra himself. All these subjects and our widowed mothers have come to you. It behoves you to show your favour to them. You are the first-born; and meet it is that you should get yourself installed, O bestower of honour. Therefore do you receive the kingdom righteously and fulfil the desire of your friends. And like the autumnal Night on having the unclouded moon, let the entire Earth cease to be a widow on having you counsellors. It behoves you to show your favour to your brother, disciple, and slave. Therefore, O chief of men, you ought not to pass by this honoured band of ancestral ministers, who have always been serving this race. Having said this, with tears flooding his eyes, the mighty-armed son of Kaikeyi, Bharata, again took Rāma's feet on this head. Thereupon Rāma embracing his brother Bharata resembling a mad elephant, and sighing again and again, said. Of a high race, possessed of strength, endowed with energy, and vowed to sterling worth of character, how can one like me commit sin for the sake of dominion? Fault find I none ever so small in you, you destroyer of foes. Nor does it become you from puerility to tax your mother. O exceedingly wise one, O you that are sinless, superiors may act as they list in relation to those wives and sons of theirs that are after theirs heart. And this also you should learn that wives, sons and disciples should always be obedient as has been held by the emancipated ones. O mild one, the monarch is competent to make me stay in the woods clad in black deerskin, as to establish me in the monarchy. O you conversant with morality, O foremost of those observing righteousness, in respect of virtuous conduct a mother should be as much regarded (by a son) as a father is. How can I, O descendant of Rāghava, having been told by my righteous father and mother, 'Go to the woods', act otherwise? You ought to receive the kingdom, Ayodhyā, honoured of men; and I ought to dwell in Dandaka dressed in bark. Having made this division of duties in the presence of all, and also enjoined this, the mighty monarch, Dasaratha, has ascended heaven. That superior of all, even the virtuous king, is your evidence. It behoves you to enjoy that which has been assigned to you by your sire. And, O mild one, taking refuge in the forest of Dandaka for fourteen years, I will act the part that has been set apart for me by my magnanimous father. What has been assigned to me by that one respected by all men, my high-souled father resembling the lord of celestials himself, is my prime good; the masterdom of all the worlds I would decline (should it be opposed to the will of my sire).