Hearing those piteous words uttered by Bharata in connection with the demise of their father, Rāghava was deprived of his senses. On that thunder-bolt of a speech being uttered by Bharata, like to a (real) thunder-bolt hurled in battle by the enemy of the Dānavas (Indra), that subduer of foes, Rāma, stretching his arms, fell down to the earth, like a blossoming tree that has been hewn by an axe. Seeing that lord of the world and mighty bowman, Rāma, fallen, like a sleeping elephant fatigued with turning up earth with its tusks, his brothers exercised with sorrow, broke out into lamentations, and along with Videha's daughter began to sprinkle water (on his face). Then regaining his consciousness, Kākutstha shedding tears from his eyes, distressfully addressed himself to speech. And hearing that lord of earth, his sire, had gone to heaven, that righteous one said to Bharata words fraught with virtue and interest. What shall I do with Ayodhyā, my sire having gone the way ordained by the gods? And who will govern her, now that she has been deprived of that foremost of monarchs? Of fruitless birth that I am, what can I do for that magnanimous one? And of him that renounced his life from grief on my account I have not even performed the last rites. Ah! Bharata, you, O sinless one, are blessed, since by you as well as by Satrughna have been performed all the funeral rites of the king. To Ayodhyā, bereft of the monarch, having none to preside over her destinies, and many rulers, will I not return even when the term of my abode in the woods has been passed. My father having gone to the other world, who, O subduer of enemies, will again counsel me when, my stay in the forest being over, I shall have returned to Ayodhyā? And from whom shall I hear those words grateful to the ear, which my father gratifying me used to speak to me when I happened to do something well? Having thus addressed Bharata, Rāghava burning in grief spoke to his wife, with her countenance resembling the full moon, saying. O Sītā, your father-in-law is dead and, O Laks inana, you are fatherless. Bharata has communicated to me that sad intelligence that our father has ascended heaven. When Kakutstha had said this, tears began to shower forth from the eyes of the renowned princes. Then all those brothers pacifying as best they could Rāma stricken with sorrow, said to him, “Do you perform the watery rites of that lord of the earth, our sire." Having heard that her father-in-law, the king, had gone to the celestial regions. Sītā with her eyes filled with tears, could not see her beloved. Thereupon, pacifying the weeping daughter of Janaka, Rama moved with grief, spoke to the distressed Laksmana, saying. Do you bring Ingudi fruits as well as a piece of new bark. I will go to perform the watery rites of our high-souled sire. Let Sītā go first. do you follow her. I shall go last. Even this is the course of those in mourning. Then that magnanimous one, having a knowledge of the soul, mild, graceful, capable of controlling his senses, steady in his regard for Rāma, and ever following him, Sumantra, in company with those sons of the auspicious river, Mandakini. Then those illustrious ones, having in distress arrived at the river Mandākini, Mandākini, having convenient descents, charming, ever furnished with blossomag woods, and of rapid currents; and approached it descents, goodly and void of mud, offered water to the monarch, uttering, “May this be so!" The protector of the earth (Rama), holding water with his joined hands, facing the south, said weeping, “O foremost of monarchs, may this clear water knowing no deterioration, reach you, who have gone to the world of the ancestral manes.!" Then drawing nigh to the marge of the Mandākinī, the energetic Rāghava along with his brothers, offered the Pinda to his father. And placing the Ingudi Pinda mixed with jujube on a bed of darbha, Rāma crying in distress, said. O mighty monarch! do you well pleased feed on this, which we also live upon. That which is the fare of an individual, is also the fare of his divinities. Then that forernost of men ascending the bank of the stream by the self-same way, got up on the charming side of the hill. And having arrived at the gate of the cottage of leaves, that lord of the earth held both Bharata and Laksmana with his hands. And there the hill reverberated at the sounds raised by the brothers wailing along with Vaidehi; like to lions roaring. And perceiving the loud uproar of those mighty ones engaged in offering water to their sire, indulging in lamentations, the army of Bharata became agitated. And they said, “For certain Bharata has met with Rāma; and this mighty noise proceeds from them, as they are bitterly mourning their deceased sire.” Thereat leaving aside their vehicles, they with one mind, rushed towards the spot wherefrom proceeded the uproar. And of those that were tender, some went on horses, and some on elephants, and some on ornamented chariots, while others went on foot. And eager to behold Rāma staying away for a short time though seeming to do so for a long period, all the men at once went to the hermitage. And desirous of witnessing the meeting of the brothers (with Rāma), they with all despatch proceeded by means of various vehicles consisting of beasts and cars. And the ground trodden by the wheels of innumerable cars, emitted loud sounds, like those emitted by the sky on clouds gathering. And frightened by the uproar, elephants accompanied by female ones, perfuming all sides (by the fragrance of temporal juice), went to another forest. And boars, and deer, and lions, and buffaloes, and Srmaras, and tigers, and Gokarnas, Gavayas and Prşatas were stricken with panic. And wild with alarm, Chakravakas, and swans, and Natyuhas, and Plavas, and Karandavas, and male coels, and Kraunchas, fled away in all directions. And the welkin was enveloped by birds frightened by the noise, as the earth was covered by men, and both the sky and the land then gave out great effulgence. As the people suddenly saw that foremost of men, the sinless and illustrious Rāma seated on the ground, accusing Kaikeyi as well as the vile Mantharā, the people apprached Rāma, with their countenances discovering tears. Seeing those men oppressed with grief with their eyes filled with tears, that one cognizant of virtue like fathers and mothers, embraced those that deserved it. And he embraced some persons; and some offered him salutations. And the king's son, as each deserved, properly received them along with their friends and equals in age. And the sounds, produced by those high souled persons lamenting, resounding the earth and the sky, and the mountain-caverns, and all the cardinal points, were heard like peals of Mrdangas. And the sounds, produced by those high souled persons lamenting, resounding the earth and the sky, and the mountain-caverns, and all the cardinal points, were heard like peals of Mrdangas.