Kausalyā subduing her sorrow, and touching holy water, began to perform auspicious ceremonies for Rāma, and spoke to him saying Do you, Oh best amongst the descendants of Raghu, repair now, as I cannot dissuade you, but do you return speedily and, follow the footsteps of great ones. Let that virt'e, Oh best of Rāghavas, protect you, which you have followed with gladness and self-discipline. Let the deities, whom you worship every day in the temple, together with the Maharsis protect you in the forest. Let those weapons conferred upon you by the great Viśvāmitra protect you always, gifted with good qualities. Do you of mighty hands live forever, being protected by the truth and merit of your continual services to your father and mother. May the holy fuel, sacrificial grass, sanctified altars and court-yards, the sacred ground of mendicant Brahmins, mountains, trees great and small, lakes, birds, serpents and lions protect you. Oh best of men, may Sādhya, Viśvedeva, Marut, the great ascetics, the sustainer, and the preserver of the creation, Pūşan, Bhaga, Aryamā, Lokapālas, headed by Indra and others, the six seasons, the months, day, night, moments Srutis, Smrtis, and virtue protect you, Oh my son, on all sides. May the great deity Skanda, Soma, Brhaspati, Saptarsi, Narada, Moon and other ascetics protect you. May the encircled regions with their lords, being pleased with my eulogy, protect you, Oh my son, always in the forest, When shall you repair to the wood, may the mountains, oceans, Varuna, the heaven, sky, earth, air, things movable and immovable, planets and stars with their presiding deities, day, night, and evening protect you. May the six seasons, months years and all the divisions of time confer upon you pleasure always, when you of great intelligence shall wander away into the forest in the attire of an ascetic. May the deities and demons ever minister to your happiness and may not fear proceed to you, Oh my son, from the terrible Rākṣāṣās and Piśācas intent on committing cruel deeds, and other animals living on flesh. May the apes, scorpions, wild gnats, reptiles and insects make you no harm; may not the elephants, tigers, terrible looking bears, hogs, buffaloes and other horned animals hurt you. Being worshipped by me from here may the ferocious cannibal races of all kind bring you no injury. May your course be crowned with auspiciousness and your powers with success. Do you, oh my son, repair to the forest, being profusely provided with fruits, roots and other things. May all the creatures of the sky, all those who breathe on this Earth, and all those deities who are hostile to you, contribute to your welfare. May Sukra, Soma, Sun, the lord of wealth and Death, protect you, Oh Rāma, resorting to the forest of Dandaka. May fire, air, smoke and the Mantras uttered by the Rșis protect you, Oh descendant of Raghu, at the time of your bathing. May the lord of creation, Rșis and all the remaining deities defend you when dwelling in the forest. That best of women Kausalyā, of great renown and having expansive eyes, after propitiating the celestials with garlands, fragrant odours and praises, began to offer oblations to the fire by the help of eminent Brahmins for the welfare of Rāma, collecting clarified butter, white garlands, religious fig trees and white mustard seeds for this purpose. The spiritual preceptor, after offering oblations to the fire with due rites for his peace and health, presenting what was then left as offerings to the lords of the four cardinal points and others,* and giving the Brahmins a dish of curd, ghi and honey, made them benedictory prayers for Rāma who was going to the forest. *The Gürhyasthabuli or the daily offering of the householder, meant here, may be thus explained. After the performance of oblation to the fire, the householder should present offerings to the lords of the four cardinal points. Indra, Yama Varuņa, Soma and to their retinue. The offering for the Marutas should be placed on the threshold; for the presiding deities of the water in water; for the lords of the forest to the wooden pestle and mortar; for Śrī and Bhadrakäli on the grounds adjacent to the beddings on the side of the head and that of the feet respectively; for Brahmanaspati and Vāstupati on the site of the habitation; for Viśvedeva and for day and night thrown in the air of the house, for Sarvātmabhūta scattered on the terrace. After offering to all these what remains should be thrown on the south for the manes. The offerings to the dogs, the fallen, the drags of the people, the lepers, the crows and the worms and the insects should be placed on uncovered ground. Then that renowned mother of Rāma, after conferring upon the Brāhmaṇa's dakșinas, in accordance with heir desires, accosted Rāghava with the following words. May that blessing crown you, which was attained by the thousand eyed Indra, honoured of all the deities on the occasion of killing the mighty Asura Vſtra. May that blessing attend you, which was invoked in olden times by Vinatā, for that king of birds Garuda, praying for nectar. Do you attain that blessedness, for which Aditi prayed, on behalf of the wielder of thunder-bolt intent on the discomfiture of the giants at the time of ransacking the ocean for nectar. May that prosperity wait upon you, Oh Rāma, which crowned the mighty Vişnu, while perambulating with his three steps the heaven earth and the regions as a dwarf. May the Rsis, the great oceans, islands, the three worlds, Vedas, the regions, lend their might in the advancement of your welfare. Saying this Kausalyā, the foremost of all women, having expansive eyes, placed the grains on Rāma's head; sprinkled his body with fragrant substances, and tied to his hands, as amulet, twigs of such auspicious plants as Viśalyakaraṇī, with due mental repetition of mantras. That excellent one of high renown, embracing Rāma and smelling his head, with her voice choked, as if all pleased, though placed under the influence of dire distress in reality, uttered mantras and spoke to him thus. Oh my son, Oh Rāma, have your desires attained, and do you go, wherever you like. I shall see you. Oh my darling, with great delight, when shall you, returning Ayodhyā in excellent health and having all your ends satisfied, resume the administration of your kingdom. Myself having sorrows removed and having my face glowing with joy, shall see you coming from the forest like to the rising of the full moon. Continually shall I eye your good self. Oh my son, sitting on an auspicious seat, and returning from the forest after making good your father's behests. May you returning from the forest and being dressed with royal robes and ornaments, satisfy the desires of my daughter-in-law. Worshipped have I deities headed by Siva and others, the great ascetics, the Bhūtagaņas and the snakes; may they all and the four cardinal points, Oh Rāghava, contribute to your welfare, who are going to the forest for a long time. Kausalya, having her eyes full of tears, and performing the benedictory ceremonies with due rites, went round Rāghava with solemnity, and seeing him again and again sighed hot and hard. Being gone round by his mother thus, Rāghava, of great lame, and resplendent with the splendour of beauty, proceeded towards the abode of Sītā, after bowing down to the feet of his mother repeatedly.