Hearing the words of that worthy, Rāma conversant with modesty, humbly addressed Dasaratha, saying. What O king, have I, that am renouncing everything and am going to dwell in the forest subsisting on what the forest yields, to do with a following? Of what avail is a person's attachment for the tether of a goodly elephant, when the elephant itself is renounced by him? Thus it is with me, O foremost of righteous ones. What shal! I do with the army, O lord of men? I will confer everything on Bharata. Let them bring me a venture of bark. And for me who will go to the forest and reside there for fourteen years, bring a hoe and a basket. Thereupon Kaikeyi herself brought a bark dress and that shameless one said to Rāghava in the presence of all, “Do you wear this.” On this, that foremost of men taking those two pieces of bark from Kaikeyi, left his fine attire and put on the ascetic garb. And Lakşmaņa also, renouncing his choice raiment, put on the dress of an anchorite before his father. Then Sītā clad in silk apparel, eyeing the ascetic covering meant for her, became agitated, like a doe at sight of a noose. And afflicted with shame, that one graced with auspicious marks, Jänakī, sorrowfully took from Kaikeyī the Kuća and bark; and with tears flooding her eyes, that one cognizant of virtue and having her gaze ever fixed upon it, thus addressed her lord resembling the king of the Gandharvas, “How do the ascetics dwelling in the woods put on their dress? Saying this, Sītā, ill at ease became embarrassed. Putting on one piece on her neck and holding the other in her hand, the daughter of Janaka, feeling uneasy, stood overpowered with shame. Thereupon that best of righteous persons, Rāma, speedily coming up to her, fastened the monastic garb over Sītā's silk attire. Beholding Rāma fastening that goodly garb on Sītā, the females of the inner apartment began to shed tears. And waxing exceedingly aggrieved, they spoke to Rāma flaming in effulgence:, Child, do not take this virtuous one to the forest. So long as you will reside in the forest in accordance with the wishes of your father, we shall behold her; and by this means let our lives attain their object, o lord. O son, taking Lakşmaņa for your help, go you to the forest. This auspicious one does not deserve to live in the woods like an ascetic. O son, grant our prayer. Let the fair Sita remain. Ever steady in virtue, you do not yourself intend to stay here. Hearing these words, Dasaratha's son tied the dress on Sītā having a similar character with himself. When she had put on the upper and under garments, the preceptor of the king, Vasiştha, his voice choked with the vapour of sorrow, dissuading Sita, said to Kaikeyi. O you whose desires outrun your sense of honour, O you of perverted understanding, O befouler of your line, deceiving the monarch, you stay not within the pale of the promise. O you bereft of good behaviour, that noble lady, Sītā, should not go to the forest, Sītā will occupy Rāma's seat. Of all those that marry, the wife is the (other) soul. Șītā will govern the earth, as she is Rāma's self. But if Vaidehī goes to the forest with Rāma, we will follow him, and the inhabitants of the city will also repair thither. And the warders of the inner apartment, and the people of the kingdom and the city taking with them their necessaries and servants will accompany Rāghava and his wife. Bharata and Śatrughna wearing ascetic clothes and ranging the forest will live like their elder brother resident in the woods. Then alone you of vile ways and intent upon harming the people will govern this empty earth deserted by the inhabitants, along with the trees. That can never be a kingdom where Rāma is not the monarch, and that forest where Rāma will reside will flourish into a monarchy. Bharata never wishes to govern a kingdom that has not been conferred upon him by his father; nor, if he has really been begotten by the monarch, will he any further act by you as a son. Even if you leaving the earth fly to the air, that one cognizant of the character of his ancestry, will never act otherwise. Therefore although intent on advancing your son, you have really brought about his injury. There exists not a person in the world that is not partial to Rāma. O Kaikeyi, do you to-day behold beasts and snakes and birds journeying in the wake of Rāma, and even the trees stand with their heads turned towards him. Do you, O noble lady, removing the ascetic guise, confer elegant ornaments on your daughter-in-law, for such a dress suits not this one, Saying this Vasistha prevented Kaikeyi. O daughter of king Kekaya, you have asked for the abode of Rāma in the woods, and decked out in ornaments let Sītā daily engaged in adorning herself, reside in the forest with Rāghava. And let the daughter of the king go to the forest, surrounded by excellent cars and servants, and taking with her attires and other necessary things. When you demanded the (fulfilment of the) promise, you had not your eye on Sita. When that foremost of Brāhmaṇas, that preceptor of the king possessed of unparalleled potency had said this, Sītā, desirous of serving her beloved lord, did not turn from the ascetic dress (presented by Kaikeyi.) preceptor of the king possessed of unparalleled potency had said this, Sītā, desirous of serving her beloved lord, did not turn from the ascetic dress (presented by Kaikeyi.)