Having stationed his troops, that best of men, the master, became anxious to go on foot to the Käkutstha honouring his superiors. And the forces having with humility took up the quarters assigned, Bharata addressed his brother, Satrughna, saying. O mild one, it behoves you at once to search this forest all round in company with a large body of men as well as these Nişadas. And let Guha himself accompanied by a thousand of his kindred bearing in their hands arrows and bows and scimitars, also search for the Käkutstha in this forest. Accompanied by by counsellors, citizens, preceptors and twice-born ones, I will on foot range every direction. So long as I do not see Răma, or the mighty Lakṣmaṇa, or the highly exalted daughter of Videha, I shall not attain peace of mind. And so long as I do not see that face of his fair as the moon, with eyes expansive like lotuses, I shall not attain peace of mind. Surely, Sumitra's son, Laksmana, who beholds Rāma's countenance like the stainless moon, with eyes resembling lotuses, and beaming in effulgence, is blessed. So long as I do not take on my head those feet of my brother bearing royal marks, I shall not attain peace of mind. So long as established in the kingdom of his father and grandfather, that one worthy of the monarchy is not sprinkled with the water on installation, I shall not attain peace of mind. Blessed is Vaidehī, the eminently virtuous daughter of Janaka, who follows the lord of this Earth bounded by the seas. This Citrakuța is fortunate, this hill like to the monarch of mountains, in which resides Kākutstha, like Kuvera in Nandana. And blessed is this deep forest inhabited by ferocious animals, where abide the great king Rāma, the foremost of those bearing arms. Having said this, that best of men, the mightyarmed and highly energetic Bharata, on foot entered the vast forest. And that best of speakers went over the mountain-side through ranks of blossoming trees. Then swiftly ascending a Sāla on Citrakuta, he descried the high column of smoke belonging to Răma's asylum. Having seen this, like one that has crossed over the ocean, the graceful Bharata, concluding that Rāma was there, rejoiced exceedingly along with his friends. Having heard that Rama's asylum containing pious people lay in Citrakuta, that high-souled one again stationing his forces, speedily went (in that direction), accompanied by Guha.