Rāma stricken with grief spoke to Lakşmaņa the following piteous words saying, O Laks mana, do you speedily repair to the river Godaverſ and learn if Sītā has gone there to fetch lotuses. Being thus addressed by Rāma, the quickpaced Lakşmaņa went to the pleasant stream Godaveri. Reconnoitring full well the river containing many a watering-place Lakşmaņa spoke to Rāma saying, Searched have I all the watering-places but have found her nowhere-anon I cried aloud but she did not hear. I cannot trace whither has Vaidehi of slender waist repaired ever assuaging our mental affliction. Hearing Laksmana's words, Rāma, aggrieved and overwhelmed with sorrow repaired in person to the river Godāverī. Arriving there cried he where is Şītā? Neither did the world of creatures nor the river Godāvarī apprise Rāma of Sītā's being carried away by the Lord of Rākşasas worthy of being slain. Thinking of the terrible figure and monstrous action of that vicious-souled Råvaņa, that river did not dare relate to him anything about Sītā, albeit appointed by the creatures to relate the story concerning her and accosted by Răma in piteous accents. Being thus disappointed by the river in beholding Sītā, Răma racked with her separation spoke to Lakşmaņa. O you of auspicious looks, this river Godāvarī dose give no reply. But O Laksmana, returning without her what shall I say to Janaka and Vaidehi's mother? Where has that Vaidehi gone who used to assuage my grief who had been deprived of kingdom and living in this forest on wild fruits and vegetables? Nights shall appear too long to me, keeping late liquors being deprived of my kinsmen and relatives and not beholding Vaidehi. I can range this Mandakini, this Janasthāna and this Pasravana hill if I can find Sītā there. Behold, O hero, the high deer have been casting their looks again and again at men; methinks from their gestures, they intend speaking something to me. Beholding them, Rāghava, the best of men, looked at them and said in accents choked with vapour-Where is Sītā? Being thus addressed by that Lord of men the deer rose up all on a sudden and looked up to the sky facing the south and proceeded to the direction by which Maithili had been carried away. Moving by that way these deer eyed the Lord of men and again and again fixed their looks upon that way and earth and passed along emitting cries which was marked by Lakṣmaṇa. He marked with attention their movements and cries and spoke to his elder brother like one aggrieved saying-Being accosted by you with—'Where is Sītā?' these deer have stood up all on a sudden and have been pointing to the south and earth-let us therefore proceed in this direction—it may be that we shall either meet with that worshipful madam or find some mementoes concerning her. Thereat Kākutstha, gifted with supreme beauty, proceeded towards the south being followed by Laksmana and casting his look upon the earth. While proceeding thus, conversing with each other the two brothers beheld some flowers scattered on the high-way. Beholding a collection of flowers scattered on earth, Rāma, exceedingly sorry, spoke to Laks mana in piteous accents. O Lakşmaņa, I have come to know that these are the flowers of the forest I gave Vaidehī; with these she decorated her hair. Me-thinks the sun, the air and the famed earth have preserved them for my well-being. Having spoken these words to Lakşmaņa, the best of men, the virtuous-souled Rāma, of mighty arms, addressed the mountain in front of him containing many fountains. O you the best of mountains, have you beheld in this picturesque forest-land, that exquisitely fine damsel racked with my separation? Exceedingly wroth he accosted the mountain like to a lion addressing a little deer, saying Show me my graceful Sītā hued like gold before I crush down your summits. Being thus addressed by Rāma on Maithili's account the mountain did not show him Sītā. Again addressed him Rāma—You shall by the fire of my arrows, be reduced to ashes-your twigs and leaves shall be totally destroyed and no one shall resort to you. O Lakşmaņa, I shall dry up this river Godāvari if it tell me not about Sītā having a moon-like countenance. Rāma, exceedingly wroth, cast his looks around as if desiring to burn everything with his eyes and beheld footprints of the Räkşasas on the earth as well as those of Sītā moving wildly hither and thither, terrified and desirous to see Rāma, while pursued by the Rākşasas. Beholding these foot marks, the snapped bow, the quiver and the chariot broken into many pieces, Rāma, terrified spoke to his dear brother. Behold O, Laksmana, the remnants of Vaidehi's golden ornaments, strewn hither and thither, and diverse garlands. Behold O Saumitrī, the earth covered with drops of blood resembling golden drops. Methinks, O Laksmana, Vaidehi has been devoured by the Rākşasas assuming shapes at will, having sundered her in pieces. O Saumitrī, there took place a terrible conflict between the Rākṣasas, fighting with each other on Sita's account. O gentle one, whose is this snapped bow lying on the breast of the earth adorned and crested with pearls and diamonds? O brother, this belongs either to the celestials or to the Rākşasas. Whose is this golden armour lying shattered on earth, resembling the newly risen sun, in colour and adorned with sapphire? Whose is this umbrella lying broken on earth, containing a hundred rod and adorned with celestial garlands? In whose conflict have these terrible asses, of large proportions, having faces of demon and with breast plates, been killed? Whose is this shattered war-car lying upset on the ground and broken flag resembling in lustre the burning gold? Whose are these terrible arrows feathered in gold, measuring four-hundred fingers, lying without blades on earth? Behold, O Laksmana, these two quivers have been totally spoiled though filled with arrows. whose charioteer is this who has been killed with reins and lash in hands? These foot-marks must be some Raksasa's. I made these Rākşasas my fatal enemies, assuming shapes at will and of crooked hearts. Poor Sītā must have been either dead, carried away by them or devoured. Virtue did not save her from being carried away in this mighty forest. O Lakşmaņa, while virtue did not protect Janakī being devoured or taken away by stealth, what person else gifted with heavenly power, on this earth shall bring about my well-being? For this it is that people through ignorance disregard the ever kind Almighty-the lord of creatures and the best of the celestials. Truly shall the celestials regard me as one devoid of prowess, who am mild-tempered, kind, ever engaged in the welfare of the humanity, and have controlled all my senses. Observe, O Laksmana, obtaining me as the stay these accomplishments have been turned into so many blemishes. Truly shall my prowess manifest itself to-day overshadowing all my other accomplishments for the destruction of the Rākşasas and all created beings like to the rising of the Sun casting the Moon into shade on the day of dissolution. None shall enjoy felicity, O Lakşmaņa,-Yaksas, Gandharvas, Pisacas, Raksasas, Kinnaras, or human beings. Today shall the welkin be filled up with my arrows. Motionless shall I make all the animals inhabiting the three worlds. I shall arrest the movement of the planets and overshadow the Moon. Stopping the course of the wind and destroying the rays of the Sun and fire I shall envelope the earth with darkness, crush down the summits of the mountains, dry up the pools, blow up the creepers, demolish the Ocean and eradicate the trees. If the celestials do not give me back my Sītā I shall bring about the dissolution of the three worlds which would else have been wrought by time. O son of Sumitrā, instantly shall the celestials headed by Indra, meet with my prowess, if they do not give back my Sītā, ever advancing my welfare. None shall be able to range the welkin. Behold O Lakşmaņa, being perpetually crushed down by my arrows shot off my bow, the world shall be disturbed and dislodged and the animals and birds shall be confused and destroyed. Stretching the bow to my ears I shall make the world, for Sita's sake, void of Pisacas and Raks asas with my arrows incapable of being withstood by created beings. To-day shall the celestials behold the power of my arrows coursing a long distance shot through my ire. Three worlds, destroyed on account of my wrath, celestials, Sanavas, Pisacas or Raks asas,-none shall be saved. The dwellings of the celestials, Asuras, Yaks as and Rākşasas shall fall down sundered by my arrows into diverse pieces. I shall dislodge the whole world by my arrows. If the celestials do not give me back my Vaidehī dead or carried away or as she was before, I shall destroy the whole world mobile or immobile and disturb all with my arrows until i see her. Having spoken thus, Rāma, with his eyes reddened with fire and lips swollen, tying fast his bark and deer-skin, braided his matted locks. Having done this, being exceedingly wroth he looked like Rudra about to destroy Tripura. Thereat taking his bow from Lakşmaņa and holding it fast, the effulgent Rāma, the conqueror of foes, fixed flaming arrows to it like so many serpents and said being exercised with ire like to fire on the eve of dissolution. O Lakşınaņa none shall be able to withstand me, who am inflamed with rage, as debility consequent on old age, death, time, duty are incapable of being averted from their destined ends by the animals. I shall bring about a mighty revolution in the world containing the celestials Gandharvas, human beings, Pannagas and the mountains, if I do not get back, in her pristine beauty, my Sītā, the daughter of the King of Mithilā.