Hearing that cry in the forest resembling her husband's voice Sítā spake to Laksmana saying Do you go and learn what has befallen Rāghava. He is crying aloud in pitiable accents; hearing them my life and soul are incapable of remaining any longer in their proper places. It behoveth you to save your brother who is crying aloud in the forest; do you immediately repair hence to save him, who is in need of your help. He has been over-powered by the Rākşasas like to a bullock brought under the power of a lion, Remembering the behest of Rāma, Laks maņa did not go, though accosted thus by Sītā. Extremely mortified, the daughter of Janaka spake to him saying O Son of Sumitra, you are an enemy to Rāma, in the grab of a brother. You did not proceed for the relief of they brother who has been reduced to such a plight. Truely being under the influence of lust for me you did not follow Rāghava! For this you did welcome Rāma's disaster; you have no affection for him. For this it is that you did sit here without anxiety not seeing the highly effulgent (Rāma). Råma, following whom you have repaired to this forest, being in danger, of what avail is life to me.?' Vaidehī speaking thus being influenced by sorrow, and with tears in her eyes, like to a deer, Laksmana spoke to her. O Vaidehi, celestials, Dānavas, Gandharabas, Raksasas, Asuras, or Pannagas, there is none who can defeat your husband. There is not the least doubt in this. Worshipful madam! Celestials, Danavas, Gandharvas, Raksasas, Pisacas, men, Kinnaras, animals, or birds, there is none among them, who can withstand Rāghava, who equals the lord of celestials in warfare. In fact there is none who can do away with Ráma in battle. It does not behove you therefore to accost me thus. Nor do I dare leave you here alone in this forest without Rāma. Even the mighty heroes, as the Lord of celestials, cannot subdue his prowess with all their strength. Even the Almighty Himself, with the celestials and the three world, cannot defeat him. Do you therefore renounce grief and console theyself. Sooner shall your husband return killing the best of deer. It is not his voice nor one sent by any deity. It is but an illusion of that Rākşasa (Mārīca). O Vaidehī, you have been left to my charge by the high-souled (Rama)-I therefore do not dare leave you behind, O you the jewel of a damsel. We have made these night-rangers our enemies. For compassing the destruction of Khara, O worshipful one, and devastating Janasthāna, Rākṣasas oftentimes use improper words to us in this extensive forest. O Vaidehī, to create mischief to the pious is the only amusement of these Rākşasas-you shoudst not therefore be anxious for this. Being thus addressed by him her eyes were reddened with ire, and she spake these harsh words to the truthful Lakşmaņa. O cruel one! O you the destroyer of your line! it is a disgrace to you that you wishest to protect me (killing Răma). Methinks, this mighty disaster of Rāma is welcome to you, or else why should you seeing this, speak thus, O Laksmana. It is not a wonder that an evil desire lurks in you who are a hypocrite and a cruel-hearted cnemy. Verily are you a monster of wickedness, that Rāma repairing to woods, you have, being lustful for me, followed him alone. Or hast you been engaged by Bharata to act thus? But your or Bharata's intention shall not be satisfied, O Saumitre. How shall I desire another man after serving the lotus-eyed Rāma of dark blue hue as my husband? I shall renounce my life before you, therefore, O Laksmana; without Rāma I shall not maintain my being for a moment on this earth. Hearing these brazen words of Sītā, capable of making one's down stand on end, the selfcontrolled Lakşmaņa with joined hands spake to her saying You are a very Goddess to me, I therefore dare not answer you. What you have spoken, O Maithelee, is nothing surprising-for fernales. Such is the nature of womankind on this earth. Women by nature are crooked, fickle, devoid of religious knowledge, and bring about difference between father and sons. O Vaidehi, O daughter of Janaka, truly am I incapable of putting up with these words of yours. They have pierced through both of my ears like a heated Nāraca. However the deities ranging in this woodland are my witnesses—may they hear you. I spoke what was fair and have been thus addressed by you with these harsh words. I do always obey my superior's commands. Fie on you! Your destruction is near at hand that do you suspect me, being influenced' by this womanish nature. I shall go where Kākutstha is, may good betide you, O you the best of damsel! May the deities of the forest protect you, O you of expansive eyes! many a bad omen appear before me. My I see you again when I shall come back with Rāina. Being thus accosted by Lakşmaņa the daughter of Janaka replied weeping and being bathed in tears. Without Rama, O Laksmana, I shall drink virulent poison, enter fire or dive into the Godāverī. I shall destroy this body either by hanging or by falling down from the top of a high object. I shall never be able to touch another man but Rāma. Speaking thus to Lakşmaņa, Sītā, being enveloped with grief, weeping, struck her belly* with her hands. Properly it should be Struck her breast. But it has a special significance here, i.e.-she would not be satisfied until her belly be filled with all the Raksasas salin.तामार्तरूपां विमना रुदन्ती Seeing the daughter of Janaka of expansive eyes weep thus in pitiable accents, Lakşmaņa losing his attention began to console her. Afterwards the pure-hearted Laksmana, having control over his senses, saluting Sītā with clasped palms and bending low a little proceeded where Rāma was, casting again and again his glance upon her as he went.