Cutting off the mace with his shafts, Rāghava attached to righteousness with a smile said to Khara these angry words. You vile of Rākșasas, this is the utmost of your might, which you have displayed. Rendered more nerveless at my hands, in vain do you storm. Riven by my shafts, your mace, belonging to you who are prolix in the matter of vocabulary, destroying your confidence, has sought the earth. And what you had said, will wipe the tears of the Rākşasas that have been slain, has also proved false. As Garuda stole ambrosia, will I deprive you, O Rāksasa, who are base, of a mean disposition and a false character, of your life. To day the earth shall drink the blood vitiated with foamy bubbles, of you, having your throat severed, and riven by my shafts. Having all your body covered with dust, and your two arms lopped off, you shall, difficult to win, take your nap, embracing the earth, like a damsel difficult to win. On you, disgrace of Raksasas, lying down, and being fast asleep, this Dandaka shall be refuge of those that shall resort to it for shelter. O Rākşasa, in your Janasthāna, with its (Rāks asas) slain by my shafts, ascetics shall fearlessly go about in the wood. Today Rākṣasas, capable of exciting fear in others, rendered forlorn and with their friends slain, shall from fear, with their faces wet with tears, fly (this place). To day your wives whose husband are you of such a nature, and who are of a like lineage (with yourself), shall experience the sentiment of sorrow, and be deprived of their all. You of a cruel disposition, you of ignoble soul, you that are aye a thorn (in the side) of Brāhmanas, it is for you that ascetics, frightened and dispirited, have so long been pouring the clarified butter. As Rāghava, influenced by anger, said this in the field, Khara f. wrath, with accents rendered harsher, fell to censuring (Rāma), You are wondrous proud; and you are fearless albeit fear is present to you. And come under the sway of Death, you do not understand what should be said and what left unspoken. Those persons that have been fast bound by the noose of death, do not in consequence of their senses having ceased to perform their functions, discern what is proper and what improper. Saying this to Rāma, that ranger of the night (Khara), pursing his brows, espied a mighty Sāla hard by. And looking about him on all sides in the field for a weapon, he uprooted it, biting his Nether lip. And raising up the tree with his arms, and uttering a roar, that exceedingly powerful one aiming at Rāma discharged it, exclaiming, Dead you are. And as it descended, the puissant Rāma cut it off by means of a multitude of shafts, got into a mighty rage for the purpose of slaying Khara is battle. Then Rāma perspiring, with eyes reddened in wrath, pierced Khara in battle with a thousand shafts. And blood mixed with froth gushed by the sides of the shafts, like torrents flowing from fountain in a hill* stupefied in battle by the shafts shot by Rāina, and maddened by the smell of blood Khara furiously inade for Rāma. The text varies slightly in other texts. And as he (Khara) was rushing on, bathed with blood, Rāma cquipped with arms, suddenly summoning his strength walked backward two or three paces. Then with the view of bringing about (Khara's end) Rāma took up in the conflict an arrow resembling fire or another weapon of Brahmã himself. And that righteous one shot at Khara, that (arrow), which had been conferred on him by the intelligent Maghavān. And discharged by Rāma from his bent bow, that mighty arrow with the roaring of the thunderbolt fell at Khara's breast. And burning in the fire of the arrow, Khara fell down on the earth, like the giant Andakha* in the forest of Svetā, consumed by Rudra. The Asura Andhaka was slain in the forest of Svetă by Rudra. This is related in the Purāṇas. Another reading is Svetarayge yathantaka like the Destroyer in the forest of Svetā. Sva, according to the Kūrma Purāņa Uttara Khanda, in the Kalanyara hill, by a kick with his left leg. slew the Destroyer, engaged in penance's, who had come to kill the Rajarsi Svetā, who was a great votary of Siva. And threat Khara slain fell down like Vritra slain by the thunder-bolt, or Namuci by foam, or Bala by Indra's Ašani. Namuci was slain by a thunder-bolt laid over with foam. After this, the celestials, assembled with the Cāraņas, struck with wonder joyfully sounded kettledrums and showered blossoms on Rāma. In over half a moment Rāma by means of sharpened shafts have slain in mighty encounter fourteen thousand shafts have slain in mighty encounter fourteen thousand Rākṣasas, wearing shapes at will, headed by Khara and Dūşaņa. Ah! mighty is the feat achieved by Rāma knowing self. Ah! this mighty prowess, this mighty firmness, show like to those of Vişnu himself. Saying this all the deities went to from where they had come. Then the Rājarşis in company with supreme saints, with Agastya (at their head), gladly paying homage to Rāma, said the following words. It is for this that the chastiser of Pāka, the great Indra, Purandra, had paid a visit to the sacred asylum of Sarabhanga. And the Maharşis had dextrously brought you to this place, for compassing the destruction of those foes-the wicked Rākşasas. And it is owing to this, that, O son of Dasaratha, you have performed this mighty deed. (Now) the Maharsis will carry on their proper pious offices in the Dandaka. After this, that hero, Laksmana, accompanied with Sītā came out of the mountain cavern, and joyfully entered the asylum. Then the victorious and heroic, Rāma, honoured by the Maharsis, entered the asylum, worshipped by Lakṣmaṇa. And seeing that destroyer of foes, and bringer of coinfort to the Maharsis, her husband, Vaidehi embraced him. And seeing the multitudes of Raksasas siain, Janaka's daughter, beholding the undeteriorating Rāma, ministered to him with supreme joy. And with a delightful countenance again embracing that destroyer of foes, who had been honoured by the delighted Maharşis, Janaka's daughter became exceedingly happy. honoured by the delighted Maharşis, Janaka's daughter became exceedingly happy.