Hearing Rāma's words capable of enhancing joy and manliness, Sugrīva highly honoured the former and extolled him, saying. Enraged, you, with your sharp and flaming shafts, capable of piercing into the vitals, canst burn up the worlds, like the sun at the universal dissolution. Heedfully hearing from me of Vali's strength, prowess and fortitude, do you afterwards, ascertain what is fit. Before the sun rises, Vāli can easily range the ocean from west to east and from south to north. Ascending the tops of mountains, Vāli possessed of prowess throws up their summits, and then again swiftly holds them. And displaying his strength, Vāli vehemently crushes in the woods various stout trees. There was one assuming the shape of buffalo named Dundubhi, resembling in splendour the summit of Kailasa. That one possessed of prowess had the strength of an hundred elephants. That wicked one of a gigantic body inflated by his prowess and blinded by the boon he had received once went to that lord of streams—the Sea. Passing beyond the Sea, with waves upon him, and containing heaps of gemsji e said to the mighty deep-Grant me battle. Thereat the righteous-souled and mighty Ocean arose and, O king, said these words to that Asura, who had been urged by Death. O you that are skilled in fight, I am not competent to offer you fight; but lister to me who will tell you who shall offer the fight. There is a monarch of mountains in a mighty forest,—the great refuge of asceticism, the worker of the weal (of all), an Asura, celebrated by the name of Himavān containing great cascades and furnished with many fountains and caves. He can compass your incomparable pleasure. Concluding that the ocean was afraid, that foremost of Asuras, presented himself in the wood of Himavān, like a shaft shot from a bow. Thereupon Dundhubhi began to throw down many white crags resembling the foremost of elephants; and sent up shouts. Then resembling white clouds, mild and possessed of a pleasing shape, Himavan, stationed on the summit, spoke, O Dundhubhi, O you that are attached to righteousness, it behoveth you not to distress me. I am the refuge of all those ascetics who are not expert in military arts. Hearing those words of that intelligent lord of mountains Dundhubhi, with reddened eyes, said. Afraid of me and hence void of energy if you are incapable of fighting with me, do you name him who is ready to fight with me who am desirous of entering into conflict. Hearing these words the virtuous-souled Himavān, skilled in speech, spoke to that great Asura, exercised with ire. O greatly wise one, there lives in Kişkindhā, of incomparable beauty, the mighty and highly graceful monkey—the son of Sakra, by name Vali. That mighty wise one, skilled in warfare, is capable of fighting with you on equal terms like to Namuci with Vasava. Do you speedily repair to him if did you wish for a conflict. He is always expert in military exploits and is hard to repress. Hearing Himavān's Himavān's words, Dundhubhi, inflamed with ire, went to Kişkindhā—Vāli's capital. Assuming the figure of a terrible buffalo, with sharpened horns like to a cloud big with water, ranging on the sky in the rainy season, and approaching the gate of Kişkindhā that highly powerful one set up a terrible roar, shaking the earth like to the sound of a kettle-drum. Like to an elephant he felled, out of haughtiness, the trees around, and rent the earth with his hoofs scraping it with his horns. Vāli was in the female-apartment at that time, and unable to bear the sound came out with his wives like to the Moon with stars. Thereupon thạt lord of monkeys and other wild anànals, spoke openly to Dundhubhi, saying, O Dundhubhi, obstructing this my city-gate, why did you set up a terrible roar? Did you know my mighty strength? Do you save your own life. Hearing those words of that intelligent lord of monkeys, Dundhubhi, with reddened eyes spoke. O hero, it becomes you not to speak thus before your wives. Do you enter into conflict with me and your prowess shall be ascertained thereafter. Or I shall suppress my wrath for this night and do you, O monkey, enjoy till the rise of the Sun. Embracing all the monkeys, inviting all your friends, do you, that are the lord of the monkey herds, honour them with gifts. Do you survey Kişkindhã and make your children kings. And do you enjoy with your wives-it is me that shall crush down your pride. He, who destroyeth a person who is given up to drinking, reckless, emaciated and deprived of weapons, and one like you, sunk in the abyss of voluptuousness, committeth the sin consequent upon the destruction of an embryo, Where to replied Vāli, laughing, to that wicked lord of Asuras, leaving aside all his wives, headed by Tārā. If you are not afraid of fighting, do not consider me as one given up to drinking only. Do you regard this my attachment as a draught in this conflict, to be drunk by the heroes. Saying this, Vāli, taking his golden garland, conferred on him by his father Mahendra, addressed himself for the conflict. Holding him by the horns, Vāli, that lord of monkeys, setting up a terrible roar, hurled Dundhubhi resembling a mountain. Alha beliowing a thundering voice, Vali crushed (him) down. And blood began to trickle down from the pores of his ears. Both of them desired to subdue each other and thus there arose a terrible conflict between Vali and Dundhubhi. Thereupon fought Väli equalling Śakra in prowess, by fists knees, legs, stones and trees. Thus there was a skirmish between the monkey chief and the Asura. And in this conflict Asura's strength was greatly reduced, while that of Sakra's son was highly enhanced. Holding up Dundubhi he threw him on the ground. And in that dreadful skirmish Dundhubhi was greatly reduced. There was a profusion of blood falling from the ears of that one crushed down. Thereupon that one of mighty arms fell down to the earth and breathed his last. And taking up with his arms that lifeless one, the mighty Vāli hurled him with great force at distance of a Yojana. While thus thrown down by force, drops of blood, falling from his mouth, driven by the wind, fell upon the asylum of the great Saint Matanga. O great one, beholding the drops of blood there, the great ascetic, angered, thought within himself-Who might be the author of this sprinkling of blood? Who is that wicked-souled, vicious-minded, stupid person, who has all on a sudden sprinkled me with blood? Saying this, that best of saints issued out (of the hermitage) and surveyed a lifeless buffalo lying on the earth, like to a huge mountain. And apprehending by virtue of his asceticism, that this has been committed by a monkey, he imprecated a mighty curse on the perpetrator (of that iniquitous deed). He shall not enter here who has spoiled the sanctity of my forest with showers of blood. And surely he shall be killed (on entering). Forsooth shall that wicked one cease to exist if he strideth within a Yojana around my asylum, who has felled these trees by throwing the body of the Asura. His counsellors or any one related to him, who shall resort to this my forest (shall meet with the self-same fate). They shall not live here; hearing this from me let them take their own ways. And even if they live here, forsooth, shall I curse them too. This my forest is being protected by me every day like to my own son—and the monkeys are always used to destroy its leaves, trees and roots. Forgive them I to-day-but if I find any tomorrow, he shall be turned into stone for many thousand years. Hearing those words of the saint, the monkey herd issued out (of the forest). And beholding them (coming out of the forest) Vāli spoke. Why have you all-the dwellers of the Matanga forest approached me-Is it all well with you? Thereupon they related to Vāli, wearing a golden garland, the cause of the Saint's curse by him and other monkeys.61 Hearing those words, Vāli approached that great ascetic and solicited him with folded hands. Disregarding him, the ascetic entered into his asylum and Vāli was overwhelmed with the fear of curse. O Lord of men, afraid of the curse that monkey chief purposed to repair to the mount Rş yamuka. Knowing for certain, O Rāma, that he shall not enter this forest, I have been living here with my ministers, devoid of fear and grief. Here is the collection of Dundhuvi's bones, killed on account of his own haughtiness, resembling a huge mountain. These are the seven huge Sāla trees, clothed in branches, which Vāli could simultaneously divest of leaves by virtue of his prowess. I have related to you, O Rāma, the incomparable prowess of his. Do you tell me now, O hero, how canst you destroy him in the conflict? Unto Sugrīva speaking thus, Lakşmaņa smiling replied:-Performing what shall you confide in (Rāma's ability) to destroy Vāli? Thereupon Sugrīva bespake him-These seven Sāla trees, before you, the mighty Vāli, formerly pierced, all at a time, with one shaft. If Rāma can aim at one of these only with one arrow and if he can, O Laksmana, throw the bones of this dead buffalo at a distance of two hundred bows-I shall consider Vali slain. Having addressed Rāma thus, Sugrīva, having blood-red eyes, thought aside for a moment and again spoke to Kākutstha. He is heroic and proud of his prowess-his heroism and strength are known all over the world. He is a mighty monkey and incapable of being repressed in a battle. His actions are such as are above the power of the celestials. Revolving them within myself and terrified I have repaired to this mount Rșyamuka. And thinking of that lord of monkeys, unconquerable and irrepressible I dare not leave this Rsymuka. And exercised with fear and anxiety, therefore, I have been wandering in this mighty forest along with my devoted counsellors, headed by Hanumān. And having secured in you a worthy and sincere friend, O best of men, O you that are loving to your friends, I have taken your shelter like to Himăvat himself. Cognizant am í of the prowess of my highly powerful and wicked brother, but I have never witnessed thine in a conflict, O Raghava. I do not compare you with Vāli, nor do I disregard or frighten you—forsooth have I greatly been alarmed by his terrible actions. O Rāghava, your words, patience and figure are the proofs of your heroism—truly do they bespeak of your valour like to fire hidden by ashes. Hearing those words of the high-souled Sugrīva, Rāma, smiling, spoke to that monkey, saying. O monkey, if you does not confide in my valour, soon shall I create your confidence about my war-like abilities. Having thus addressed Sugrīva and consoling him, the highly powerful Raghava, of mighty arms-Laksmana's elder brother, lifting up easily with his thumb the dried frame of that Asura-Dundhubhi-hurled it at a distance of ten Yojanas. Beholding that Asura's body thrown thus, Sugrīva, again addressed to the heroic Rāma, before Lakşmaņa and the monkey herd, the following pregnant words. Friend, formerly this body was wet and corpulent, and it was thrown with great difficulty by my brother Vāli, mad with voluptuousness. And O Rāghava, it is now divested of flesh and hence light like to grass and consequently it has been hurled by you with ease, O descendant of Raghu. And unable am I to ascertain who is the mightier? There is a good deal of difference, O Rāghava, between a body, wet and dried. There is still doubt, O worshipful one, which of you is the mightier? Truly shall your strength be manifested in the piercing of one of these Sala trees. Having stringed your bow like to the trunk of an elephant and stretching it to your ears, do you shoot this mighty arrow. Doubt there is none that this arrow flung by you shall bore this Sāla tree. There is no need of discussion any more; do you perform, O king, what do you think proper for me, contracted, as you had, friendship with me, with a solemn vow. Like to the sun among the planets, like to the Himālaya among the mountains, like to the lion among the quadrupeds you are the foremost of men in prowess.