Finding his own forces slaughtered, the mighty-armed Düşaņa speedily ordered five thousand Rākşasas, gifted with tremendous velocity, difficult of being approached, who never turned from the field. And from all sides they incessantly showered darts and pațțiśas, and scimitars, and stones, and trees, and shafts. Thereupon by means of shafts the righteous Rāghava resisted that mighty destructive shower of trees and stones. Resisting that shower, Rāma with his eyes staring and resembling a bull, flew into a great rage, for the purpose of slaying the whole body of Raksasas. Then influenced by wrath, and flaming in energy, he on all sides covered the army along with Düşana with arrows. Then the general, Dusana, destroyer of enemies, getting wroth, opposed Rāghava with arrows resembling thunderbolts. Then heroic Răma highly angered, severed his (Dusana's) mighty bow with shafts sharp as razors, and slew his four horses by ineans of as many shafts. And having slain the steeds, he (Rāma) cut off the head of the charioteer by means of a crescent-shaped weapon, and pierced the (Rakşasa Dūşaņa) in the breast with a brace of shafts. His bow cut off, his steeds together with the charioteer slain, and himself deprived of his car, he (Dūşana) took a parigha resembling a mountain peak, able to me one's down stand on end plated with gold, capable of afflicting celestial hosts, studded with sharp iron sankus, and graced with the fal of foes;-of the touch of a thunder-bolt, able to pierce the persons of enemies*. The text may also mean able to rend the cities of foes. And taking up in that encounter the parigha (an iron club) resembling a mighty snake, that ranger of the night of cruel deeds Duşaņa, rushed towards Rāina. And as Dūsuņa was rushing forward, Rāghava by means of a couple of shafts cut off his two arms with the ornaments. And the huge parigha (an iron club) escaping from (Dusana's grasp) fell forward on the field like the banner of Sakra. And like a nighty elephant whose husks have fallen off, Dūşana, on his arms having been severed, fell down to the earth. Seeing Dūşaņa down on the ground, and slain in battle, all creatures, saying, ''well done! well done!" paid homage to Kākutstha. In the meantime, three generals, getting wioth, being entrapped in the noose of death, rushed against Rāma in a body, viz; Mahakapāla, Stūlākșa, and the mighty Pramāthī the Rāksasa, Mahākapäla, upraising a large dart, and Sthulaksa, taking a pattisa, and Pramāthi all axe. And as Rāghava beheld them advance, he resisted them by means of sharp and keen-edged shafts, even as one receives guests that have come. And Raghu's son split Mahākapāla's head, afflicted Pramăthſ with countless shafts, and lodged the eyes of Sthūlāksya with sharp shafts. as soon And they fell down to the earth like mighty trees of many bough. Thereat instantly inflained with wrath, Räma by means of five thousand shafts, sent as many thousands of Dusana's followers to Yama's abode. Hearing that Dusana had been slain, Khara, waxing wroth, commanded his mighty generals, saying, Fighting with that vile man, Rāma, along with his mighty forces Düşana has been slain in battle, together with his followers. Let all the Rākşasas slay him with weapons of various shapes. Having said this in wrath, Khara darted towards Rama. And discharging choice shafts, Syenagāmi Prthugrīva, Yajñaśatru, Vihangama, Durjaya, Karaviraksa, Parusa, Kalakarmuka, Hemamali, Mahämāli, Sarpāsya, and Rudhirāśana these twelve generals endued with mighty prowess accompanied with their forces, proceeded vehemently against Räina, discharging excellent shafts. Threat with shafts resembling fire, and decked with diamonds and with gold, (Rāma) possessed of energy destroyed the rest of his (Khara's) forces. And as the thunderbolt slay the mighty, Asuras, those shafts studded with gold, and like to smoking fire, slew those Rākşasas. And in the field Rāma slew an hundred Rāks asa with an hundred Karnis, and a thousand (again) with a thousand. And, their armour and ornaments severed, and their bows broken in shivers, those rangers of the night fell down on the earth, bathed in blood. And as a spacious dais is covered with Kusa, the entire field was scattered with the Rākṣasas fallen in battle with hair dishevelled, and covered with blood. And at that time that fearful forest, with the Rākṣasas slaughtered, and with its clay mired with flesh and blood, resembled hell itself. Fourteen thousand Rākṣasas of dreadful deeds were slain by Rāma single, a human being, fighting, (moreover) on foot. And the remnant of his (Khara's) forces were that mighty car-warrior, Khara himself, and the Raksasa, Trisirā; and (on the other side) was that destroyer of foes-Rāma. The rest of the Rākşasas, gifted with great prowess, terrible, and difficult of being withstood, were all slain in battle by the elder brother of Laksmana. Then seeing that dreadful army destroyed in terrible conflict by the mighty Rāma, Khara ascending a great car, advanced before Rāma, like Indra with the upraised thunderbolt. Then seeing that dreadful army destroyed in terrible conflict by the mighty Rāma, Khara ascending a great car, advanced before Rāma, like Indra with the upraised thunderbolt.