Having thus directed his brother, the highly energetic son of Raghu equipped himself with his gold-hilted scimitar. And girding himself with his bow bent at three places, which served him ornament,—as well as a couple of quivers, that one of fierce energy sallied out. Seeing that foremost of monarchs approach, that best of beasts from fear disappeared; and then again showed himself. as an Thereat girt with the bow and sword, (Rāma) rushed where the deer was; and beheld him illumining all before him with his beauty, and bow in hand (Rāma beheld) him in that vast forest, darting away after gazing at him,-and sometimes seeming to have got beyond arrow range, and at others tempting Rāma (by his vicinity). And sometimes influenced by fear and bewildered, (the deer) seemed to course the welkin; and in the forest now he became visible and now vanished from sight. And like the autumual lunar disc enveloped by indented clouds, he momentarily showed himself, and anon discovered himself at a distance. And Mārica wearing the shape of a deer, showing himself and disappearing from sight, drew Rāghava a long way from the hermitage. Thereat Rāma, eagerly anxious to secure the deer, being foiled by the deer, and in consequence growing enraged, wearied out, rested under a shadow, on a sward. And that ranger of the night, wearing the form of a deer, maddening Rāma, discovered himself (again) at a distance surrounded by (other) deer, And Rama desirous of taking (the beast), seeing him again, set off at speed. At the very moment the deer disappeared from fear, And again showed himself at a distance behind a tree. And seeing him, the exceedingly energetic and strong Rāghava, determined to slay him, growing wroth, taking out a flaming shaft, resembling the rays of the sun, powerfully drew his bow, and firmly setting the shaft, and aiming it at the deer, let go the blazing and burning weapon forged by Brahmā, resembling a flaiming serpent. And that best of arrows, like to a thunderbolt, deeply pierced the breast of Mārīca, wearing the shape of a deer. Thereat bounding up high as a palmyra palm, that one whose saws had almost run out, uttered terrible sounds, lying on the earth. And while on the point of death, Mārīca renounced his counterfeit shape. And remembering the words of Rāvana, the Rākşasa reflected, by what means can Sītā send away Lakşmaņa, and Rāvana carry off Sītā staying in solitude? And pierced to the marrow by that peerless shaft, Marica, renouncing his deer form, resumed his Rākşasa lineaments; and giving up his life attaining a huge person, considering the time had come (for availing himself of the advice tendered by Rāvana), began to cry with the voice of Rāghava, Ah Sita! Ah Laksmana! And seeing that grim-visaged Rākşasa lying low on the ground, with his person bathed in blood, and rolling hither and thither, Rāma proceeded towards the asylum thinking of Sītā and revolving within himself Laksmana's words. While returning he thought Mārīca aside Lakş mana said before that this was Mārica's illusion! His words have been verified now. Truly have I killed Mārīca. Mārīca has given up his ghost exclaiming aloud Ah! Sītā, Ah! Laksmana. I do not know what shall Sītā do hearing the cry? And what shall the mighty-armed Laksmana do? While pondering thus the hairs of the virtuous-souled Rāma stood on their end. Killing that Räkşasa assuming the shape of a deer and hearing his terrible cry Rāma was overwhelmed with fear arising out of sorrow. Thereupon killing a deer and taking its flesh he hastened towards Janasthāna.