Thereupon the high-souled Rāma, along with Sugrīva, proceeded from the mount Rșyamuka to Kiskindha, maintained by Vali's prowess, raising up his gold crested mighty bow and taking his battle arrows like to Aditya. The mighty Sugrīva, bending low, proceeded before the high-souled Rama and Laksmana. They were followed by the heroic Hanumān, the mighty Nala and Neela, and the highly powerful Tārā, the leader of the monkey herd. They beheld as they proceeded, trees, lowered down with the weight of flowers, rivers of clear water flowing to the ocean, mountain hollows, hills, caves, cavities, and principal peaks and charming rills. They. beheld on their way, pools filled with water clear as Baidurya and beautified with lotuses-full blown and buds, and resounded with the cries of Kārandhabas, swans, geese, Banculas, water-fowls, Cakravākas, and various other birds. They surveyed all around in the forest-land, deer ranging fearlessly at large and grazing on tender grass. They beheld frightful wild elephants having white teeth, ranging alone-the destroyers of river banks and enemies of pools. And observing many an infuriated monkey like to elephants, resembling so many moveable mountains riving the mountainous expanses crusted with dust, and many other wild beasts and birds the followers of Sugrīva wended their way. They proceeding quickly, Rama, the descendant of Raghu, beholding the forest filled with trees, spoke to Sugrīva, saying. These trees skirted by plantain groves, dense as a collection of clouds, appear as clouds in the sky. Great is my curiosity, O friend, to learn what are these. 'And I wish to have my curiosity removed by you. Hearing the words of the high-souled Rāghava, Sugrīva began to describe that great forest. In this extensive asylum, O Rāghava, removing the toil (of the travellers) filled with gardens and trees and abounding in delicious fruits, roots and water, dwelt seven Saints, having control over their senses. Those seven Saints, dwelling on the mountain, passed days and nights in water with their heads down and after seven nights used to live upon air. In this wise, passing seven hundred years they repaired bodily to heaven. By virtue of their asceticism, this asylum is walled by trees and incapable of being conquered even by Indra, the celestials and the Asuras. Birds or other wild animals do not enter this asylum; whoever entereth this by mistake never returneth. There is audible, O Rāghava, the sound of the dressing of Apsarās, their sweet-winged accents and that of their music and drums; and herçin pervadeth the celestial fragrance. Here burneth the fire Tretā; and the smoke and cloud sable like to the wings of a pigeon envelope the tops of the trees. And there appear the trees, having their tops saturated with smoke and cloaked with clouds, like to so many Baidurya hills. Do you, O Rāghava, O virtuous-souled one, make obeisance to them along with your brother Lakṣmaṇa, with concentrated heart and folded palms. There resteth no sin in their persons, O Rāma, who bow to those self-controlled Saints. Thereupon Rāma, along with his younger brother Lakşmaņa, made obeisance to those high-souled ones. Having paid homage (to the sacred memory of those great ones) the virtuous-souled Rāma his (younger) brother Laksmana, Sugriva and other monkeys, proceeded with delighted hearts. And wending a distant way from that hermitage of the seven great ones, they beheld Kişkindhä, hard to conquer and occupied by Vali. Thereupon, Rāma, his younger brother and the monkeys taking their weapons, entered, to encompass the destruction of their enemies, the city (of Kişkindhā) reared by the prowess of Indra's son.