After Tārā, having a moon-like countenance, had spoken thus, Vāli, remonstrated with her and said. O you of exquisite loveliness, my brother, and specially my enemy, is roaring lowly and haughtily-and how shall I put up with it? O timid damsel, heroes, who have never been defeated and have never fled away from the battle field, had rather meet with death than put up with this ignominy. I am incapable of bearing this proud uproar of Sugrīva, having a defective neck and desirous of entering into conflict with me. Fearing danger from Rāghava, you needst not entertain any anxiety on my account. Why shall that virtuous-souled and grateful Rāma perpetrate iniquity? Do you therefore return with my other wives. Why do you follow me again? You have already shown your friendship and respect for me. I shall repairing thither, only fight with Sugrīva. I shall crush down his pride and not destroy him. I shall deal with him mercifully in the battle as you does wish and being struck with fists and trees he shall fly away. Forsooth, that vicious-souled one shall not be able to withstand my pride and proficient skill in warfare. O Tārā, you had already displayed your attachment to me by giving me good counsels. By my life, do you go back with the other members of my household, I shall only return after bringing about the discomfiture of my brother in the battle. Thereupon, Tārā, dextrous and of sweet accents, embracing Väli, went round him, with tears trickling from her eyes. Having performed Sastayana or the ceremony of benediction, that one gifted with a knowledge of Mantras, and desirous of Vāli's success, went, overwhelmed with grief, to the inner-apartment in the company of other females. After Tārā had departed to her own quarters with her female companions, he issued out of the city sighing like an enraged serpent. And the quick-paced Vali, exceedingly wroth, sighing, cast his looks around with a view to behold his enemy. And that highly effulgent one espied Sugrīva, having a golden yellow hue, tightly clothed, standing firm on the earth and shining like to burning gold. And beholding Sugrīva stationed thus, the greatly enraged Vāli, of mighty arms, put on his clothes tightly well. Highly powerful and closely habited, he, clinching his fists, proceeded towards Sugriva, and waited for the action. Sugrīva too, clinching his fist and exceedingly wroth, proceeded towards Vāli, wearing a golden garland. And beholding Sugrīva, adept in warfare having his eyes reddened with ire, advance quickly, Vāli spoke. Behold, I have clinched this terrible fist, arranging close my fingers; and one blow from me will take away your life. Being accosted thus by Vāli, Sugrīva, exercised with wrath, spoke to him, saying,—This my fist shall strike you on your head taking away your life. Thereupon being struck by Vāli, waxing worth and approaching him quickly he began to vomit out gore like to a mountain having springs. And Vāli too was struck down by Sugrīva, fearlessly taking up a Sāla tree, like to a mountain clapped by a thunderbolt. Being thus smitten by the tree and overwhelmed with the strike of Sāla he was troubled like to a heavily laden boat in the midst of an ocean. And these (two brothers) gifted with mighty strength and prowess and motion of Suparna, and having huge persons fought with each other like to the Sun and Moon on the sky. They were inimical to each other and intent on finding their mutual dark sides. And Vāli, gifted with strength and prowess, fared better in the conflict, and that highly powerful son of Sun-Sugrīva, was worsted. And having his pride crushed down by Väli and strength greatly reduced, Sugrīva in anger pointed him out to Rāma. Thereupon there took place a mighty conflict between them like to Vitra and Vāsava by means of trees with branches, hills, nails, hard as thunderbolts, fists, knees, legs and arms. And these two monkeys ranging in the forest, fought with each other, having their persons bathed in blood, and roaring like to clouds. Rāghava again and again beheld the weak points of that monkey chief Sugrīva, losing his strength by and by. And beholding that chief of monkeys greatly distressed, the highly powerful and heroic Rāma cast his looks upon his shaft, having the destruction of Väli in view. And fixing on his bow an arrow resembling a serpent, he stretched it like to Death drawing out his cycle of time. Being terrified by the sound of his stringing of the bow the birds and beasts, dismayed as on the eve of dissolution, fied away into different quarters. And a mighty shaft, like to thunderbolt and resembling flaming fire, being hurled by Rāma, alighted on the breast of Väli. Being wounded by that shaft that highly powerful chief of monkeys, gifted with prowess fell down on the earth. Like to ſakra's banner in the full-moon of Asvin, Vali, with his throat choked with vapour, losing all sense and sighing hard, fell dead down to the ground. As the great God Hara emitted forth fire with smoke from his mouth, so that best of men like to Death hurled an excellent, flaming and foedestroying shaft, resembling gold and death itself. Thereupon being bathed in blood that son of Vasava, fell senseless on the ground, in the conflict like to a blossoming Asoka growing on a hill and Sakra's banner struck down on the earth.