Having departed from Rşyamuka, and arrived at the Malaya hill, Hanumān informed the king of monkeys of (the arrival of) the descendants of Raghu. O exceedingly wise one, this one that has come here is Rāma having truth for his prowess. This is Rāma having truth for his prowess, in company with his brother, Lakşmaņa. Rāma the son of Dasaratha, is born in the race of the Ikş wākus. Ever doing the will of his sire, he has been sent hither, in order that his father's verity may stand in tact. Raima, who has come to the forest, is the son of him who has propitiated Fire with Rājasuyas and horse sacrifices,-dispensing Dakshinas and kine by hundreds and thousands-and who has governed the earth by asceticism and truthful speech. His son Rāma has come to the forest through a woman. While that high-souled one having his senses under control was dwelling in the woods, his wife was carried off by Rāvana; and he (Rāma) has (in consequence) sought your protection. Do you, granting an interview to the brothers Rāma and Lakşmaņa-both of them worthy of homage-who pe eager for your friendship, receive them respectfully. Hearing Hanuman's words, Sugrīva-lord of monkeys, becoming visible (at his will), gladly spoke to Rāghava, sir, you are versed in morality, and bear love towards all. The son of the wind-god has faithfully described your virtues to me. That you, O lord, are anxious to contract friendship with me who am a monkey does me honour and is my gain. If you relish friendship with me, do you take this stretched arm and my hand with yours, and bind yourself fast with a vow. Hearing these sweet words of Sugrīva, (Rāma) exceedingly delighted, pressed Sugrīva's hand with his. And contracting friendship with Surgrīva, Rāma experiencing great joy embraced him warmly. Then that subduer of foes, Hanumān, leaving off the guise of a beggar, in his native shape produced a fire with two pieces of wood. Then worshipping that flaming fire with flowers, he, well pleased, carefully placed it between them (Rāma and Sugrīva). Then Sugrīva and Rāghava went round the fire; and (thus) were fastened in friendship. And with delighted hearts, both of them-the monkey and Rāghava began to gaze at each other, yet they did not feel satiated. You are the friend of my heart. Our happiness and misery are common,-Sugriva, rejoicing greatly, said these words to Rāghava. Then spreading a beautifully blossoming spray of Sala, full of foliage, Sugriva made an awning and sat down with Rāghava. Hanumăn, the son of the wind-god with great joy gave to Lakşmaņa a bough of a sandal tree, plentifully blossoming. Next Sugriva, feeling high rapture, with his eyes expanded with joy, answered Rāma blandly in sweet words. Oppressed have I been, O Rama; and here am always afflicted with fear. Deprived of my wife, I have, agitated with apprehension, sought refuge in this dense wilderness. I am afflicted with fright, and worried by fear, with my senses bewildered in this wood. Wronged have I been by Vāli, my brother; and I have incurred his hostility, O Raghava. And, O exalted one, do you dispel the fear of me, who am tormented with fear on account of Vali. And, O Kakutstha, it behoves you so to act that I may not become subject to fear. Thus addressed, the powerful Kākutstha, knowing righteousness, and devoted to virtue, answered Sugriva, smiling, O mighty monkey, that the outcome of amity is good offices I am well aware of. I will slay that captor of your wife Vāli. These infallible sharpened shafts of inine, resembling the sun, feathered with the plumes of the Kanka, like to the thunderbolt of the great Indra, having sharp heads and even knots, like in infuriated serpents,-being let go with vehermence, shall alight upon the impious Vali. Do you today behold Vāli slain with sharpened shafts, resembling snakes,—like to a torn hill lying on the ground. Hearing those words of Răghava fraught with his welfare, Sugrīva supremely rejoiced, said these words, informed with rapture, You hero! You lion among men! by your grace shall I obtain both my beloved and my monarchy. O God among men, do you so deal with that foe, my elder brother, that he may not again wrong venomous me. The left eyes of Sītā, the lord of apes, and night rangers-respectively like the lotus, gold, and flaming fire, throbbed when the friendship between Rāma and Sugrīva was contracted.