Having entered the asylum, Räghava's younger brother, Lakşmana, coming to a disciple of Agastya, spoke to him. There was a king, named Dasaratha. His eldest son, the strong Rāma, has come (to this asylum) along with his wife, Sītā, for seeing the ascetic. Named Lakşmaņa, I am his younger brother, obedient and devoted to him. you may have heard of it. Having entered this horrid forest, in consonance with the mandate of our sire, we desire to see the reverend one. Tell this to him. Hearing Laksmana's words, that ascetic, saying, “So be it," entered the chamber of the sacrificial fire, for the purpose of communicating (the news to Agastya). Entering in, Agastya's beloved disciple, with joined hands communicated to that foremost of ascetics, incapable of being repressed*, exactly what Laksmana had told him, *Some texts:-Effulgent. For seeing the reverend one, and serving him as well, those subduers of their foes, Dasaratha's sons, Rama and Laksmana, accompanied by Sītā, have entered this asylum. It now behoves you to command what is to be done next. Hearing from his disciple that Rāma had come along with Lakşmaņa and the highly virtuous Vaidehi, Agastya said, By luck it is that after a long time, Rāma has come to see me. I had mentally wished for his arrival. Go you; and let Rāma, having been respectfully received, come before me. Why have you not brought himself? Thus addressed by the high-souled and righteous ascetic, the disciple saluting him, with joined hands, said, So be it. Then issuing out, the disciple said to Laks mana, Where is Rama? Let him come and enter in. Threat, going to the asylum in company with the disciple (of Agastya), Laksmana showed to him Kākutstha and the daughter of Janaka, Sītā. Then joyfully communicating to Rāma the words of the reverend one, the disciple (of Agastya) duly took in that one worthy of being honoured. And seeing the asylum teeming with mild deer, Rama entered in with Laksmana and Sita. And there Rāma beheld the place of Brahmä, and that of Agni, That of Vişnu, and that of the great Indra, the place of Vivasvat, and that of Soma, and that of Bhaga, and that of Dhātā and Vidhătā, and that of Vayu, and that of the high-souled Varuna having the noose in his hand, and that of Gāyatri and that of the Vasus, and that of the monarch of the Nāgas, and that of Garuda, and that of Kārtikeya, and that of Dharma. And it came to pass that, surrounded by his disciples, the ascetic came (before Rāma). And Rāma saw that one of flaming energy at the head of the ascetics, and the hero said to Lakşınana, enhancer of auspiciousness. O Laksmana, the revered saint, Agastya, is coming out. I recognize that mass of asceticism by a certain kind of majesty (that characterises him). Having said this touching Agastya of the splendour of the sun, that son of Raghu took hold of his feet. Then, having paid him homage, Rama with joined hands stood there in company with Videha's daughter, Sītā, and Lakşmaņa. Thereat, embracing Rāma and honouring him with water and a seat, and asking him questions anent his welfare, the saint said, Welcome! Offering oblations to the fire, and presenting Arghya to the guests, and paying them homage, that ascetic entertained them with food in accordance with the Vānaprastha mode of life; and then first sitting down, that foremost of ascetics, the pious Agastya, addressed Rāma cognizant of righteousness, staying with joined hands, O Kākutstha, if an ascetic acts otherwise (in respect of a guest), he in the next world feeds on his own flesh, like a false witness. The sovereign of all the worlds, righteous, a mighty car warrior, worthy of being honoured and worshipped, you have become our beloved guest. Having said this, Agastya, according to his desire, worshipping Rāghava with fruits, roots and flowers, said to him, O foremost of men, this mighty, celestial bow belonging to Vişnu, and constructed by Visvakarma, and this best of arrows (named) Brahmadatta, infallible and resembling the sun and this inexhaustible couple of quivers filled with sharpened shafts, like to flaming fire, were granted to me by the mighly Indra. And here is this mighty golden scabbard, and this sword decked in gold. Having, O Rama, slain the mighty Asuras with this bow, Vişņu in days of yorc in battle secured the effulgent Fortune of the celestials. O bestower of honour, do you for securing victory, take this bow, these quivers, this arrow, and this scimitar, like the holder of the thunderbolt, taking the same. Having said this, that highly energetic one, the reverend Agastya, consigning to Rāma all those weapon, again said. SCCTION 13 'O Rāma, I am pleased with you; good betide you! And, O Laksmana, I am gratified by you. You are in trouble in consequence of the great fatigue that you have undergone on the way. And Janaka's daughter, the noble Maithili, is evidently cager (for rest). Of tender years and unkn wn to hardship, she has come to the forest rife with troubles, being urged by the love she bears to her lord. Do you, O Rāma, conduct yourself so, that Sītā may find a pleasant time of it. By fcllowing you to the forest, it is a hard task that she is performing. O son of Raghu, this has been the nature of the fair sex from the commencement of creation, that they gladden him that is well off, and forsake a person in adversity. And women imitate the instability of lightning, the sharpness of weapons, and the celerity of Garuda and the wind. But this wife of yours is absolutely free from all these defects; she is worthy of being extolled and the foremost of those devoted to their lord, like Arundhati among the gods. This region, O Rāma, will be adorned, since, O subduer of enemies, you along with Vaidehī and Sumitra's son, will dwell here. Thus addressed by the ascetic, Rāghava, joining his hands, humbly observed to that saint resembling flaming fire, Blessed and beholden am I, since the foremost of ascetics is gratified with my merits as well as with those of my brother and wife. Do you now direct me to a country well watered, and abounding in woods, where rearing an asylum, 1 may dwell delightfully and pleasantly. Hearing Rāma's words, that best of ascetics, reflecting for a while, spoke these excellent words. Two Yojanas hence, my child, is a region abounding in fruits and roots, containing countless deer, and beautiful-known by the name of Pancavați. Repairing thither, do you, rearing an asylum, pass your time pleasantly in company with Sumitrā's son, duly doing the mandate of your sire. O sinless one, all this news relating to yourself, has from affection been known to me through the potency of my asceticism, as also that relating to Dasaratha. Although you have promised to dwell with me in this ascetic grove, yet by virtue of my asceticism I know the desire that is in your heart. I therefore tell you, repair to Pancavati. That is a charining woodland, and there Mithila's daughter shall dwell with delight. And that tract is worthy of all praise, and, O Rāghava, it is not distant from here. It is in the vicinity of the Godāvarī. Mithilā's daughter shall live there agreeably. And that spot abounds in fruits and roots, is frequented by various fowls, is retired, O mighty-armed one, and is sacred and beautiful. And you of pure ways, and competent to protect the ascetics, shall, O Rāma protect them. O hero, yonder is the mighty wood of Madhūkas. Directing your course to the asylum of Nyagrodha trees, go by the north of this Madhūka wood. Then arriving at a spot hard by a hill, (you will) come upon the celebrated Pañcavați, crowned with blossoming woods. Thus accosted by Agastya, Rāma along with Sumitra's son, honouring the truth-speaking saint, greeted him. Then, having saluted his feet, they, taking the saint's permission, set out along with Sītā for the hermitage of Pañcavați. And, taking their bows and quivers those sons of the king, of undiminished martial virtue, with intent minds bent their course to Pañcavați by the way laid down by the Maharși.