They all, repairing quickly to Kiskindha, Vāli's capital stood waiting in the dense forest, hiding themselves behind the trees. Casting his looks all around in the forest, Sugrīva, having a huge neck and fond of woods, became exceedingly enraged. Setting up a terrible uproar and rending the sky with his cry (Sugrīva) encircled by his kinsmen, invited (Vāli) to battle. Thereupon roaring like to a huge cloud, preceded by a mighty wind, Sugrīva, gifted with leonine motion and resembling the newly risen Sun, finding Rāma expert in business, spoke to him, saying. You have reached Kiskindhā, Vāli's capital, adorned with gold, filled with pennons and instruments and surrounded by monkeys. Do you make good your promise, O hero, you hadst made before to encompass the destruction of Vāli like to the season making the creepers filled with fruits. Being thus accosted by Sugrīva, the virtuoussouled Rāghava, the slayer of foes, addressed him with the following words. Uprooting the Gaja creeper, Laksmana, has placed it around your neck as an emblem (to distinguish you). You does appear beautiful, O hero, with this creeper around your neck like to the sun on the sky engarlanded by the stars. I shall, O monkey, by the discharge of one shaft in the conflict, destroy your fear and enmity proceeding from Vāli. Do you show me, O Sugriva, your enemy, in the guise of a brother. Wounded (by my shaft) Vāli shall roll in the dust in the forest. If regaining his life he comes in your view, do you leave this field, showering abuses upon me. more You didst behold seven Talas riven by a single shaft of mine and do you therefore consider Vāli destroyed to-day by my prowess in the conflict. Though fallen in distress before, I never spoke an untruth, being always guided by an inclination to acquire virtue. Like to the deity of hundred sacrifices causing the rice fields bring forth their fruits by means of profuse showers, I shall fulfil my promise by dint of my prowess. Do you therefore renounce all doubts about it. Do you call, Vāli, wearing a golden garland. Do you make such a sound, O Sugriva, as may bring out that monkey chief (from his city). He has subdued his breath, is proud of victory and fond of warfare; you could not repress him before. Forsooth that Vāli shall come out, leaving the company (of his wives). Hearing the war cry of his enemy, he shall never put up with it, specially, as he boasteth of his prowess before his wives. Hearing Rāma's words. Sugrīva, having a gold-yellow hue, set up a terrible roar, as if riving the sky. Terrified by that sound, the kine, losing their countenance do move hither and thither like to damsels, oppressed on account of their kings' neglecting (to protect them). And the deer fly away like to the horses defeated in a warfare. And the birds fall down on the earth, like to planets, losing their purity. Thereupon confiding in Rāma's words, that son, of Suryya (Sun) having his energy enhanced by means of his prowess resembling the ocean agitated by the wind, began to roar like to cloud.