Killing the Rākṣasa, Mārīca assuming shapes at will and ranging in the shape of a deer, Rāma vended speedily his way. And as he hurried himself, eager to behold Maithilī, jackals began to howl hideously at his back. Hearing their harsh cries, capable of making one's hair stand on end, Rāma struck with fear at the voices of the jackals, became filled with alarm. Ah! I consider this as inauspicious—that these jackals are crying. Escaping being devoured by the Raksasas, may fair fortune befall Vaidehi! If Laksmana should have heard the cries which Mārica, knowing my voice, and fixing on the means of harming me, uttered in the form of a deer, Saumitrī, hearing that voice, leaving Mithila's daughter and commissioned by herself, must have come near me. Surely, the Rākṣasas in a body are desirous of slaying Sitä. Becoming a golden deer, Mārica, having allured me far, transformed himself into a Rākşasa, as soon as he had been struck with my shafts; and exclaimed, 'Ah! Laksmana, slain am I.' It is doubtless, we having left (Sītā, whether all is well with her. I having raised the hostility of the Räksasas for the sake of Janasthāna; And many and dreadful are the omens I see (around me). Thus reflecting as he heard the howlings of the jackals, the self-possessed Rāma with hasty steps returned to the asylum. Rāghava went back to Janasthāna, alarmed in consequence of his having been drawn away by the Raksasa in the form of a dear. And birds and beasts approached that highsouled one distressed and depressed in spirit; and staying on his left set up frightful cries. As he was witnessing the exceedingly dreadful signs, Rāghava saw Lakşmaņa coming with a lacklustre (countenance); and Lakşmaņa came up to Rāma. And depressed in spirit, he was rendered still more sad by that one who, afflicted with depression shared his sorrow. And, seeing that (Laksmana) bad come, leaving Sita in that solitary wood frequented by Rākşasas, his brother fell to reprimanding him. And taking Lakşmaņa's left hand, the son of Raghu in extreme distress sweetly spoke these rough words, Alas! Laksmana, you have committed a censurable.,act; leaving Sita, O mild one, you have come hither. Is it well with her? I make no doubt, O hero, but that Janaka's daughter has either been slain or devoured by Rākṣasas ranging the forest. And, considering the many omens that take place before me, O Laksmana, I do not know whether we shall light upon welfare of Janaka's daughter Sita being alive, O best of men. As these multitudes of beasts and these jackals are crying frightfully in the flaming direction*, I do not know, O you of mighty strength, whether it is well with that daughter of the king. i.e. The quarter presided over by the sun, vic., the East. This Rākşasa, who, wearing the shape of a deer, and, alluring me, had drawn me far, has in some sort been slain by me wiih much ado; and he became a Rāksasa at the time of his death. Yet my mind is poor and cheerless; and my left eye throbs. Doubtless, O Laksmana, Sita is not, she is either carried away, or dead, or is wandering on the way. SECITION 58 Seeing Lakşmana cast down, cheerless, and come without Vaidehī, the righteous son of Dasaratha, asked him. Where, O Laksmana is that Vaidehi, who has followed me to the Dandaka forest, and leaving whom you have come hither? Where is that one of a slender waist, who is the help in trouble of me, deprived of my kingdom, dispirited, and running about the Dandakas? Without whom, O hero, I cannot live for a moment-where is that life's help of me Sītā resembling the daughter of a celestial? O Laksmana, without Janaka's daughter (hued) like burning gold, I covet not the sovereignty of the celestials or the earth. Is Vaidehī, dearer to me than my life still living? Shall this exile of mine be of no avail? O Sumitrā's son, on my dying for Sītā and your returning (to the city). shall Kaikeyi have her desire, and attain felicity; and shall Kausalyā, her son dead, and herself wearing the guise of a female mendicant, humbly wait upon Kaikeyi when she shall have succeeded in obtaining the kingdom for her son? If Vaidehī live, I will then return to the asylum; but O Lakşmaņa, if that one of excellent character should happen to be dead, I will also renounce my life. If, O Laksmana, Vaidehi ever precluding her speech with a smile should not speak to me when I arrive at the asylum, I shall give up my life. tell me, O Laksmana, whether Do you Videha's daughter live or not; or whether, in consequence of your acting heedlessly, that forlorn wench has been devoured by Raksasas. Of a tender frame, and a mere girl, Vaidehi, never having experienced unhappiness being cast down, surely weep for my separation. When that exceedingly wicked Rākşasa cried, Lakşmaņa at the top of his voice, was you also seized with fear? And I apprehend that voice resembling mine was heard by Vaidehī; and, despatched by her from fear, you may have come hither swiftly to see* me. Some texts-to rescue me. You have every way acted unwisely in having left Şītā alone in the wood. By this you have afforded opportunity to the cruel Rākşasas to repair the mischief (I have done them). The Rākşasas subsisting flesh are aggrieved because of Khara having been slain; and now, without doubt, those terrible ones have slain Sita. Alas! absolutely sunk am I in peril, O destroyer of foes. What shall I do now? I fear such an event was appointed for me. Thus thinking of Sītā, paragon among women, Rāghava hastily went to Janasthāna in company with Laksmana. on Taking to task his younger brother of distressed visage, Rāma, afflicted with hunger and thirst, and dejected in spirits, sighing heavily with a countenance turned pale, entered the asylum and found it vacant. And entering his own asylum that hero went to the play-grounds (of Sītā) and remembering the sporting ground (of Sītā) in that abode, he was filled with grief and his down stood on end.