Thereupon, Kākutstha, with Laksmana, equally aggrieved, said, consoling Sugrīva, and Tārā together with Angada. Grief and lamentations do not tend to the welfare of the deceased. It therefore behoveth you to perform the after ceremonies. You have satisfied the worldly practice with a profuse discharge of tears. It is not proper to delay the performance of appointed actions. Time is the prime cause in this world, and the source of the accomplishment of actions. And Time it is that leads men to actions. No one is the lord of another person, and no one leads him to actions. People are subject to their actions of previous existence and Time aids them. Even the Eternal being cannot withstand the ways of Time. He never decayeth-and no one else can withstand the course of Time. It has no friend, no cause and no one can overcome it. It has no kinsman, no relation; even it is not subject to itself. The wise can perceive the work of Time. Piety, wealth and desire are all subject to it. Vāli, the lord of monkeys, has attained to his own true state, reaping the fruits of his actions, acquired by virtue of his royal accomplishments namely forgiveness and charity. The abode of the celestials, which was conquered by this high-souled one by his former piety, has now been occupied by him after resigning his body. This is the best course of Time that has been attained to by the lord of monkey-herds. No more with lamentations therefore; do you perform the actions that are worthy of being performed on this occasion. After Rāma had spoken thus, Laksmana, the slayer of foes, addressed Sugrīva, senseless with grief, with the following sound words. Sugrīva, do you perform the funeral ceremonies of Vali along with Tārā and Angada. Do you collect for cremation many a dry fuel and celestial sandal. Do you console the unfortunate Angada, who is beside himself with grief. Do not conduct yourself like an ignorant person, for this city is now under you. Let Angada bring clothes, garlands, scents, clarified butter, oil and other necessary articles. O Tārā, do you go and bring soon a conveyance; for speediness is a special virtue on an occasion like this. Let the monkeys dress themselves who can convey this hearse. The powerful and the capable only shall carry Vali. Having thus addressed Sugriva, Laksmana, the enhancer of Sumitrā's joy and the destroyer of foes, stood before his elder brother. And hearing the words of Laksmana, the counsellor respectfully entered the cave with a view to bring the conveyance. And taking that conveyance carried by the monkeys and worthy of being carried by the heroes, he issued out again of the cave. It had a celestial throne and was like to a warchariot and had trees and birds painted on it. It was painted on all sides with the figures of foot soldiers, had latticed windows and was like to the car of the Siddhas-spacious and artistically and stoutly built by artizans with beautiful carvings like to a wooden hill. It was ornamented with excellent ornaments and beautiful garlands, sprinkled with red sandal and skirted with strong ribs. It was covered with flowers and lotus garlands, crusted with precious clothes and had the colour of the rising Sun. Beholding such a conveyance, Rāma spoke to Lakşmaņa, saying-Do you soon conduct the funeral service of Vāli, Thereupon Sugrīva, long with Angada, placing Väli on the conveyance, began to bewail. And placing the lifeless body of Vāli on it, he covered it with various ornaments, garlands, and clothes. Thereat Sugrīva, the king of monkeys, ordered for the performance of Vāli's funeral rites. Let the monkeys go before, scattering many a precious jewel and let the conveyance follow them. Let the monkeys perform the obsequies of our master with such grandeur as befits the riches of the kings on this earth, a With view to perform the funeral ceremonies of Vāli, the counsellors and other monkeys, having lost their king and embraced Angada, proceeded weeping. And other subject monkeys followed them. And all other she-monkeys, headed by Tārā, having lost their lord, bewailed, exclaiming again and again-O hero, O hero. And they, thus bewailing piteously, followed their lord. In response to the bewailings of she-monkeys, hills and forests, as if, bewailed on all sides. Monkeys, ranging in the forest, made funeral piles on the banks of the hill-streams and in solitary watery nooks. Thereupon laying down from their shoulders the conveyance, those foremost of monkeys stationed themselves in a corner, being stricken with grief. And Tārā, beholding her husband's body on the conveyance, placed his head on her lap and bewailed, overwhelmed with griet. O lord of monkeys! O my lord! O my dear one! O you used to luxuries! Oyou having long arms! O my darling! behold me. Why did you not behold these monkeys, racked with sorrow? O conferrer of honours, your countenance looks as if beaming with joy; although you are dead, and you appearest as if alive, having the hue of the setting Sun. O monkey, Death himself, under the semblance of Rāma, is attracting you, who with one shaft in the battle, has rendered us all widows. O best of kings, these she-monkeys cannot go by jumping. Did you not perceive that they have travelled so far on foot? Those your wives, having moon-like countenances, have always your welfare in view. Why did you not, O best of monkeys, cast your looks towards them and Sugrīva? O king, these your counsellors, your wives headed by Tårā, and all these citizens are bewailing around you. O slayer of foes, do you despatch your counsellors to the city and we shall all enjoy in this forest, excited with amour. The other she-monkeys, worked with sorrow, raised up Tārā bewailing thus being exercised with grief consequent upon the demise of her husband. Thereupon Angada along with Sugrīva, overwhelmed with grief, weeping, placed his Sire's body on the funeral pile. And putting fire duly, he circumambulated his Sire, bound for a journey for good. Having duly cremated Vāli's body, the foremost of monkeys arrived at a river of auspicious water with a view to perform the watery ceremony. And all these monkeys along with Sugrīva and Tārā, placing Angada before them, sprinkled water. And the highly powerful Käkutstha, equally aggrieved like Sugriva, being as poorly, conducted duly the obsequious ceremonies of Vali. Thereupon cremating Våli, gifted with unequalled prowess, slain with one shaft of the foremost of Ikṣwakus, and like to flaming fire, Sugrīva appeared before Rāma who was in the company of Laksmana.