Seeing Sūrpanakhă again lying on the ground, Khara in anger spoke out to that one, who had come to bring on evil. I had but recently commissioned for your behoof those heroic Rākşasas living on flesh. Why then do you again weep? Bearing regard and attached to me, and ever engaged in my welfare, they, assailed by others, are incapable of being slain; nor do they not obey my orders. What can it be? I would hear of the occasion owing to which again, crying ‘Ah lord,' you roll on the earth like a serpent. Why do you be weep like one forlorn, while I your lord, am living? Arise! Arise! Do not fear, cast off your stupor. Thus addressed, and consoled by Khara, that irrepressible one, wiping her eyes, spoke to Khara. Having had my nose and ears cut off, I had come hither, covered with blood; and you had consoled me. And you also had despatched fourteen heroic Rākṣasas, for my hehoof, for slaying the terrific Rāghava along with Lakşmaņa. But all those, bearing ill will (towards Rāma), bearing darts and pattiśas in their hands, have been slain in conflict by means of weapons penetrating into the vitals. Seeing those possessed of great speed, in a moment laid low on the ground, as well as (witnessing) Rāma's mighty deed, great fear has taken possession of me. O ranger of the night, I am afraid, and agitated, and cast down. I have (at length) found in you a refuge, seeing fear on all sides. Will you not rescue me who am sinking in this ocean of grief, having sorrow for its alligators and affright for billows? And these Rākşasas, living on flesh who had arrived at that place, have been slain by Rāma with sharpened shafts. If you have any kindness for me as well as those sons of Rākşasas* and, O ranger of night, if you have strength and energy to cope with Rāma, do you kill this thorn of the Rákşasas, who has set up his dwelling in the forest of Dandaka. Another reading is that enemy of mine. If you do not to-day slay that destroyer of foes, Rāma, I shall banishing shame, give up my life in your very presence. Meseems, you backed by your forecast are incapable of staying in battle before Rāma in high encounter. Some texts-(Rāma) equipped with the bow. You plume yourself on being a hero; but are really none such. Prowess has been falsely attributed to you. Go off from Janasthāna without delay, along with your friends. O stainer of your line, do you in battle slay those foolhardy ones. But if you fail in slaying those human beings, Rama and Laksmana, then how can you void of strength and of slender prowess, stay here? Overcome by the energy of Rāma, you shall speedily meet with destruction Dasaratha's son, Rāma, you shall speedily meet with destruction. Dasaratha's son, is endued with energy. His brother is possessed of high vigour by whom I have come to be deformed. Having thus bewailed long, that Raksasi, possessed of a spacious abdomen, through sorrow, became bereft of her senses before her brother, and exercised with great grief cried, striking her abdomen with her hands.