As he was proceeding to Pancavati, Raghu's son saw a huge-bodied vulture of terrible prowess. And seeing him in the forest, the exalted Rāma and Lakşmaņa, as they were conversing with each other, knowing the bird to be (in reality) a Raksasa, asked him, saying, Who are you? There-upon, in soft and sweet words, he, pleasing them, said, My child, know me for a friend of your father.' Knowing him to be a friend of his sire, Rāghava paid him homage, and enquired for his name and lineage. Hearing Rama's words, he mentioned his own lineage, and related the origin of all beings. O mighty-armed one, I shall describe (to you) from the very beginning the (history of) those that were Prajāpatis in days of yore. Listen, O Raghava. Of these, the first is Kardama, then Vikrta, and then Sesa, Sansraya, the powerful Bahuputra, Sthanu, Marici, Atri, the mighty Kratu, Pulastya, Aigiri, Praceta, Pulaha, Daksa, Vivasvat, Aristanemi, O Rāghava, and the exceedingly energetic Kasyapa. These had the west. The Prajāpati Dakşa, it has been heard by us, O Rāma, had sixty famous and illustrious daughters. Of these Kaśyapa wed eight, with elegant waists; Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kālikā, Tamră, Krodhavāśa, Manu and Analā. Then, well pleased Kaśyapa again said to those damsels, Do you bring forth sons like to myself, who shall be lords of the three worlds. Thereat, Aditi, O Raina, Diti, Danu, and Kalika*, O mighty-armed one, consented, the rest were of another mind. *Some text:-Kalaka. And of Aditi were born thirty-three deities, O repressor of your foes, viz., the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, and the Asvinas, O subduer of enemies. And, my child, Diti gave birth to those sons, the renowned Daityas. Formerly, this earth girt with seas was in the possession of these. And, O vanquisher of your foes, Danu gave birth to a son, named, Ašvagriva. And Kālikā brought forth Naraka and Kālaka. And Tāmrā gave birth to these five daughters celebrated in the world, Kraunci, Bhāsi, Syeni, Dhrtarastri, and Suki. And Krauncī gave birth to the Ulūkas, and Bhāsī, to Bhāsas, and Śyeni to hawks and vultures possessed of energy; and Dhịtarāştri to swans, all kinds of Kalahansas, and Cakravākas, and that damsel, Suki, to Natā And Vinatā was Natā's daughter. And Krodhavasā, O Rāma, brought forth ten daughters viz., Mrgi, Mrgamanda, Hari, Bhadramadā, Mātangi, Śårdūlī, Śvetā, Surabhi crowned with every (auspicious mark), Surasā and Kadrukā. You foremost of the best of men, Mrgi's sons were all the deer, and those of Mſgamandã were bears, Srmaras and Camaras. And Bhadramadā bore one daughter, Irāvati. And Irāvati's son is the mighty elephant; who is the lord of the worlds. And Hari's sons are lions and the nimble monkeys. And Śārdúlí brought forth as her sons, Golāngūlas, and tigers; and the offspring of Matangi were mad elephants, O best of men. And Śvetā, O Kākutstha, gave birth to the elephants of the cardinal points. O Rāma, then, Surabhi gave birth to two daughters-the famous Rohini, and Gandharvi. Rohini produced kine, and the sons of Gandharvī are horses. And Surasā, O Rāma, gave birth to Nāgas, and Kadru to Pannagas. Kāśyapa's other wife Manu begot mankind-Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras. From the mouth, it is known sprang Brahmanas, from the breast, Ksatriya, from the thighs, Vaisyas, and from the feet, Sudras. And Anală produced all trees bearing sacred fruits. Vinatā (was) Śuki' grand-daughter, and Kadru, Surasā's aunt. And Kadru gave birth to a thousand Nāgas with the holder of the Earth. And Vinatā brought forth two sons-Garuda and Aruna. An from Aruņa sprang myself and my elder brother Sampāti subduer of enemies, know me for Jatayu, the son of Syeni. If you will, I shall become your help during your abode (in the woods). And, O child, I shall protect Sītā when you shall go out along with Laksimana. There Rāghava paying homage to Jațāyu, and embracing him jcyfully, bent low; and that selfpossessed one listened to the story of Jațāyu's friendship with his father, as related by him repeatedly. Then consigning to that bird of exceeding strength, Mithila's daughter, Sita, Rama accompanied by Lakşmana went to Pañcavatī, destroying his foes and protecting the worlds.