And thus Rāma was addressed by Vāli, wounded and senseless, with those modest, pious and auspicious words. And being thus reproached he spoke to that excellent lord of monkeys, gifted with virtue and other accomplishments, resembling the Sun shorn of its lustre, a cloud which has already discharged its waters and fire extinguished. Not cognizant of virtue, knowledge, passion and custom, why did you blame me like a child? Why did you purpose to address me thus out of fickleness, consequent upon your monkeyhood not asking your wise elders recognized by the preceptors? This land, abounding in hills and woods, belongs to the lkşwakus. Along with it was conferred on them the power of administering favour and chastisement to beasts, birds and human beings. The upright, virtuous and truthful king Bharata, cognizant of virtue, knowledge and passion and ever engaged in administering favour and punisl.ment, governs this kingdom. That king is said to be cognizant of time and place; in him dwelleth modesty, truthfulness, prowess and a love for discipline. Ourselves and other kings, being commanded by him to practise piety, have been journeying in this wide world desirous of multiplying virtue. That foremost of monarchs, Bharatalover of virtue, governing this entire earth, who dares perpetrate an iniquity.? Stationed in the excellent virtue of our own and placing Bharata's commandments on our heads, we shall consider how we shall punish them who go astray (from the path of virtue). You have oppressed virtue and perpetrated a gross iniquity. You have placed yourself under the control of your passions and deviated from the track of royal duties. The elder brother, father, and the instructor—these three should always be regarded in the light of a father if they tread the paths of virtue and morality, A younger brother, a son and an accomplished follower should always be regarded as sons. And virtue is always at the bottom of all such considerations. O monkey, the religion of the good is indeed very subtle and can comprehend great things the immortal soul can understand what is good or bad. Fickle as you are, how canst you comprehend what is proper, consulting with your monkey companions who are equally stupid and lighthearted, like to one, born blind, leading with another such? I do fairly speak to you that it is not anger only that has led me to bring about your destruction. Do you consider why I have killed you-you had ravished your brother's wife renouncing that ever-existing virtue. You, the perpetrator of many evil deeds, have got by Rumā, the wife of your brother-the high-souled Sugrīva. O monkey, you had thus violated the path of virtue. And thus I have punished you who have ravished your elder brother's spouse. o you, the leader of monkey-herds-I find no other alternative than to punish him who act against humanity and violates the sacred sanctions of custom. I am a Ksatrya coming of a high pedigree. I cannot put up with your immoral conduct. Šāstras sanction the destruction of one who under the influence of passion ravishes his own daughter, sister and younger brother's wife. This is Bharata's commandment-the lord of earth, and we have been satisfying his orders. You have disregarded virtue. A wise man, living in virtue, cannot let go one who has passed by the sanctions of morality. Bharata has sanctioned the destruction of the amorous; and we, O lord of monkeys, following his orders, thought proper, to encompass the destruction of one like you who has spoliated virtue and morality. Like to Laksmana, I have contracted friendship with Sugrīva. And with a view to regain his wife and kingdom, he resolved to engage in my well-being. I too also promised the same before the monkeys. And how can a man of my position neglect to make good his promise? For these causes of very great moment, favoured by virtue, I have adininistered to you this condign punishment. Do you now approve it. Your discomfiture is quite of a piece with the sanctions of morality-and to assist friends in one of the codes of religion. Hear, Manu has composed a couple of couplets tending to the purification of character and highly prized by the virtuous as well as myself. Those who, perpetrating iniquity, bear with fortitude the punishment, inflicted by their sovereign get at the abode of the celestials being purified like to the pious. People are freed from their sins, when they confessing their crimes, are either punished or forgiven. But the monarch who does not punish the perpetrator of an evil deed, is visited by a mighty sin. Formerly an iniquity, like one perpetrated by you, was committed by a devotee who was punished severely by my forefather Māndhäta. And other lords of earth punish in the same way the authors of misdeeds. What more, the perpetrators of crime, themselves undergo penances and are thus released from their sins. Therefore do not repent any more, O best of monkeys. The punishment, I have inflicted on you, is in consonance with the sanctions of morality. We are not our own masters. Hearken, O best of monkeys, there is another argument (for your destruction); and hearing which, O great hero, it behoveth you to renounce your ire. Many persons living on flesh, either lying in ambush, or openly catch and pierce by means of net, noose and trap, many a deer, terrified and trusted, taking to their heels or quarrelling with their companions, careful or careless. They are not to blame in this and I do not cherish, O best of monkeys, any mortification or ire for this. And even many royal ascetics, versed in religious lore, go a-hunting; and hence you had been killed by me with a shaft, O monkey, in the conflict. And I am justified in killing you, whether you did fight or not since you are a monkey. There is no doubt, O best monkeys, that the monarchs confer life and piety auspicious and hard to attain. It does not therefore behove any one to injure them, to blame them and to use improper words by them-since they are the celestials ranging on this earth under the semblance of man. Not knowing virtue and growing angry why did you blame me who am following the religion of my forefathers? Being thus accosted by Rāma, Vāli, greatly mortified and informed of the principle of religion, observed no delinquency in Rāghava. Thereupon that lord of monkeys spoke to Răma, with folded hands, saying:-There is not the least doubt, О best of men, in all that you had said. An inferior person can by no means address his superior improperly. It does not behove you, O Rāghava, therefore to blame me for those unpleasant words which I used towards you, out of foolishness. You have acquired a practical mastery over the principles of religion and are ever engaged in the welfare of your subjects. Your eternal power of ascertaining the crime and meeting its condign punishment is perfectly clear. Do you know me as the foremost of sinners and one who has deviated from the track of imorality. Do you conduct me, with pious words, to a better land. Vāli, having his throat choked with vapour, addressed again and again, Rāma, with piteous accents, saying. I do not mourn so much for me, Tāră, or other friends as for my son Angada, eldest and wearing a golden Angada* *A bracelet worn on the upper arm. Brought up by me from his very infancy, he shall by my separation, wear away like to a pond having its liquid contents drunk up by an elephant. He is my only son, dear and born of Tārā. A mere child and of unripe understanding as he is, that one of mighty strength should always be protected by you, O Rāma. Do you regard favourable Sugrīva and Angada. You are their protector, and chastiser punishing them for their sins. O king, O lord of men, it behoveth you to regard Sugrīva and Angada in the same light in which you regardest Bharata and Laksmana. It behoveth you to so arrange as Sugrīva may not disregard that chaste Tārā who is blameable for my folly only. He, who is favoured by you, abideth by yourcommandments and acteth after your heart, can acquire kingdom, attain to heaven, and govern the earth. Desiring to have my destruction brought about by you, I entered into conflict with my brother Sugrīva, albeit prevented by Târā. Having addressed Rāma thus the lord of monkeys stopped. Thereupon Rāma consoled Vāli, of clear understanding with the following moral words, acceptable to the Saints. O best of monkeys, do you not consider ourselves as well as yourself blameable. We are more conversant, than you, with the principles of religion. They never lose their virtue being proficient in the mode of ascerting crime and punishing it one administering punishment to the criminal and the criminal receiving it. And therefore receiving punishment (from me) you had been released from your sins and acquired a knowledge of religion. Do you therefore renounce your grief, your illusion and the fear that is lurking in your heart. It is impossible for you, O foremost of monkeys, to withstand the course of dispensation. There is not the least doubt, lord of monkeys, that Angada shall be brought up by me and Sugriva in the same way as he was by you. Hearing these sweet, collected and pious words of the high-souled Rāma,-the repressor of the enemies in a battle,-the monkey again addressed him with the following pregnant words. O lord, O you having Mahendra's prowess, I do propitiate you for my having insulted you with improper words, senseless as I was being wounded by shafts. Do you forgive me, O lord of monkeys.