Thereupon Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, sons of a kingly father, passing along the way, pointed out by Kabandha, leading to the lake Pampā, proceeded towards the West. They wending their way desirous of seeing Sugrīva, there came within the compass of their vision many trees, grown on the summits of the mountains, blossoming with flowers and abounding in fruits tasting sweet like to honey. Passing the night on the summit of a hill those two descendants of Raghu arrived at the western bank of Pampā and espied the pleasant asylum of Savari. Getting at that charming hermitage covered on all sides with trees and casting their looks around they beheld that female mendicant-Savari. No sooner had that one of perfect asceticism beheld those highly intelligent Rāma and Laks maņa than she rose up with folded hands and touching their feet offered them duly water for washing their feet and mouth. Thereupon Rāma spoke to that female ascetic, engaged in religious services. O you of sweet accents, have you got all hindrances to asceticism removed? Is your asceticism growing stronger every day? O you having asceticism for your wealth, have you restricted your anger and fare? Have you observed the commandments and attained to mental felicity? Have your attendance upon your spiritual guide born fruits? Being thus accosted by Rāma that old Savarī, of accomplished asceticism and recognised by the Siddhas, approaching Rāma spoke. Favoured with your presence my asceticism has attained to its consummation. Blessed is my birth, fruitful is my service to my spiritual guides and accomplished is my asceticism. O best of men, you are the foremost of celestials; worshipping you I attain to the abode of deities. O gentle one, O slayer of foes, O you that do confer honours on men, yourself casting your auspicious looks upon me, consecrated I, by your favour, shall attain to the imperishable land of celestials. On your setting foot on the mount Citrakūta, the ascetics whom I served, ascending celestial cars of incomparable lustre, departed to heaven. Those great ascetics, cognizant of virtue, said to me, Rāma shall come to your holy asylum. Do you receive with great reverence that guest together with Laksmana. On beholding him, you shall attain to that best land of the celestials whence none return. O best of men, I was thus told by those great ascetics, and for you I have collected various wild fruits growing on the banks of Pampā. Being thus addressed by Savarī, the virtuoussouled Raghava spoke to her conversant with the knowledge of past and future. I have heard from Danu, in truth, about your divine authority as well as that of your spiritual guides. If you purpose so I wish to witness it with my own eyes. Hearing those accents dropping from Rāma's lips, Sabarī showing to them the vast forest said. Do you behold, O Rāghava, this forest, crowded with deer and birds resembling a dense cloud. This forest is known as Matanga's wood. Here in this forest the pure-souled preceptors sacrificed to fire their persons consecrated by the Mantras as Mantra itself. This is that alter Pratyaksthalī, ascending which my worshipful preceptors used to offer flowers to the deities with hands trembling with toil, Behold, O best of Raghus, this alter of incomparable beauty, by virtue of their asceticism, has been still shedding its lustre on all the sides. Behold, again, the seven seas have appeared here in conjunction, at their very thought, worn out with fast and therefore incapable of moving on. Even those barks, which they used to place on these trees after ablution have not yet been dried up. These flowers, of blue colour which they offered to the deities, being engaged in divine services, have not yet been withered away. You have observed this entire forest and heard every thing worth hearing. I purpose now to renounce my body being commanded by you. I wish to approach those pure-souled ascetics, whom I used to wait upon, and whom these asylums belong to. Hearing with Lakşmaņa the speech of the pious one, Rāma gained an excess of joy and exclaiming, Wonderful it is! Again spoke to Savarī of keen austerities-0 gentle one, I have been worshipped by you. Do you repair at your ease and pleasure. Being thus addressed and ordered by Rāma, Savarī, wearing matted locks, rags and the skin of an antelope, surrendered herself to fire and rose high up in the welkin like to blazing fire. Adorned with celestial ornaments, wreathed with celestial garlands, sprinkled with sandal-paste and wearing celestial cloth she appeared of exquisite grace and lighted up the quarters like to lightning. By virtue of her devout meditation, Savarī repaired to that holy region where dwelt her spiritual preceptors-the pure-hearted ascetics.