When the son of Raghu had set out with Sutiksna's permission, SItā addressed him in affectionate words and convincing speech. Although you are great and follow the narrow way (of righteousness), yet you are on the eve of entering into unrighteousness. But you could by refraining from action, eschew this unrighteousness that springs from an evil begot of desire. This evil begot of desire is threefold. One prominent evil is falsehood, and both the others' are of weightier significance, association with others; wives, and vindictiveness without any (basis of) hostility. Falsehood, O Rāghava, has never been yours nor can it ever be yours (in the future). Nor yet, O foremost of men, can you ever even in fancy be (guilty of) going after others' wives, which destroy all religious merit. These, O Rāma, are by no means in you. O King's son, you ever and a day direct your attentions to own wife. And you are Righteous and truthful and do the will of your şire. In you are established virtue and truth, and every thing; and by help of your conquered senses, you, O mighty armed one, are capable of bearing everything. O you of a gracious presence, yours is control over sense. The third evil that leads men through ignorance to bear hostility towards others without any (cause of) hostility, is now present (to you). You have, O hero, for the protection of the saints dwelling in the forest of Dandaka, Promised the slaughter of Rākṣasas in battle. And it is for this reason that equipped with bows and arrows, you have along with your brother set out for the forest known as Dandaka. Seeing you set out, my mind reflecting on your truthfulness as well as your happiness in this world and welfare in the next, is wrought up with anxiety. O hero, I do not relish this journey to Dandaka. Thereof I will tell you the reason. Do you listen to me as I tell you. Bearing bows and arrows in your hands, you have come to the wood along with your brother; and it may well happen) that seeing grim rangers of the forest, you may discharge your shafts. Even as the vicinity of faggots increases the energy of fire, the proximity of (the bow) enhances the strength and energy of the Ksatriya. Formerly, O long-armed one, in a sacred wood haunted by beasts and birds, there lived a truthful ascetic of a pure person. Intending to disturb his austerities, Saci's lord, Indra, bearing a sword in his hand, came to the asylum in the guise of a warrior. And in that asylum, that excellent scimitar was deposited as a trust with that righteous person practising asceticisin. Receiving that weapon, that ascetic intent upon preserving his trust, range the forest, maintaining his faith. And intent upon preserving his trust, he goes nowhere for procuring fruits and roots without that sword deposited with him as a trust. Constantly carrying the sword, by degrees, the ascetic, foregoing all thoughts about asceticism, had his mind involved in fierce sentiments. Thus in consequence of bearing that weapon, that ascetic taken up with fierce thoughts, losing his sobriety and led astray from righteousness, went to hell. This ancient story anent the carrying of arms, asserts that even as fire works change in a piece of wood, the presence of arms works alteration in the mind of him bearing them. From affection and the high honour in which I hold you, I merely remind you of this matter. I do not teach you. Equipped with bows as you are, you should renounce all thoughts of slaying without hostility the Rākṣasas residing in Dandaka. Without offence none should be slain. It is the duty of Kșatriya heroes by means of their bows to protect persons of subdued souls, come by any calamity. Where are arms? And where is the forest? Where is Kaştriya virtue? And where is asceticism? These are opposed to each other, let us, therefore, honour the morality that pertains to this place. From following arms, one's sense gets befouled and deformed. Again going to Ayodhyā, You will observe the duties of Kastriyas. Then my mother-in-law and father-in-law shall experience enduring delight, if having renounced the kingdom, you lead the life of an ascetic. Interest springs from righteousness; and happiness also results therefrom. One attains everything through righteousness, in this world the only substantial thing. Repressing self by diverse restrictions, intelligent people attain righteousness; but virtue crowned with felicity, is incapable of being attained by following pleasure. O mild one! ever cherishing your heart in purity, do you practise piety in the wood of asceticism Everything the three worlds are truly known to you. I have spoken this through feminine fickleness. Who can speak of righteousness to you? Reflecting on and understanding things, do you along with your younger brother speedily do what you like.