O Mighty armed Rāma of great prowess, formerly my beauty, beyond conception, was known all over the three worlds, like to the beauty of the Sun, the Moon and Indra. I used to frighten everywhere the ascetics living in the forest by turning this my beauty into a terrific form. Once on a time assuming this terrible shape I assailed and enraged the great ascetic Sthulasira collecting diverse wild fruits. Thereupon he imprecated curses upon me. Do you retain this ghastly shape hated of all mankind. Upon my praying to that angry ascetic for my relief from that curse, he said. You shall regain your stalwart and beautiful shape when you shall be burnt by Rāma in a dense forest having got your arms dissevered by him. O Lakşmaņa, know me to be the beautiful son of Danu. Through Indra's curse in the battle field I have been metamorphosed into my present shape. After I had pleased him with hard austerites, the Grand-Father of the celestials conferred on me a long life. And therefore I was inflamed with pride assailed Indra in a conflict, thinking within me, 'I have gained a long life-what can Indra do me?' Thereupon by his thunderbolt, having hundred edges hurled off his hands, my thighs were shattered and my head thrusted into my body. Myself praying for the close of my life, he did not despatch me to the abode of Yama. He only said May the words of the Grand Sire prove true.' Where to I replied 'How shall I live long without any food, being smitten by you having a thunderbolt in your hand, and having my head, thighs and mouth crushed down?' Thereat Indra made my hands extending over a Yojana and placed my mouth, having sharpened teeth, on my belly. Thenceforth, stretching out my long arms I used to devour all lions, tigers, wolves and deer ranging the forest. Indra said to me, 'You shall attain to heaven when Rāma, along with Laksmana, shall cut off your arms in a battle.' Acting under the conviction that Rāma, resolved to destroy my person, shall surely come within the compass of my arms, I do always assail with relish, O worshipful one, O you best of kings, every animal I meet with in this forest. You are that Rāma. My good betide you, O Rāghva. Verily did the great ascetic speak to me that none should be able to assail me but Rāma. Being cremated by you, I shall counsel you best and tell you with whom you should contract friendship. Being thus addressed by Danu, the virtuoussouled Rāghva spoke before listening Lakşmaņa. My renowned spouse Sītā was easily ravished by Rāvaņa after I had gone out of Janasthana along with my brother. I know that Raksasa's name only—but do not know his whereabouts, his figure and his prowess. It behove you to show proper compassion for us, who have been stricken with grief, who are helpless, have been ranging this forest in this way and are, ever engaged in the well-being of others*. This sloka may be rendered in another way:Do you continue benefiting us by showing proper compassion for us, who are stricken with grief helpless and ranging the forest in this way. We have however adopted here the commentator Rāmāņaya's explanation. O, hero, we shall burn you after collecting all the branches that have been broken down by the elephants and dried up in time, and digging a big trench. Do you tell us who has carried away Sītā? And where? If do you know it truly do you perform us this good service. Thereat the Rākşasa, skilled in speech, spoke to Rāghava, addressing him thus. I am not gifted with divine fore-sight and therefore do not know where Maithilī is. I shall let you know of him who shall be able to tell you all about her, after I resume my original shape, being burnt (by you). I shall furthermore tell you, O Rāma, who knows that Räksasa. Without being burnt I am incapable of being cognizant of that highly powerful Rākṣasa who has carried away your Sītā. By the influence of curse, I have lost my foresight and by my own improper actions I have been transformed into this ugly figure. Do you cremate me according to the prescribed rites after throwing me into the ditch before the sun, with his worn out carriers descends into the western horizon. Being burnt by you in the ditch, with due ceremonials, O descendant of Raghu, I shall inention, to you, one who knows that Rāksasa. O Raghava, O fleet-footed hero, do you contract friendship with him gifted with good qualities and he shall assist you. There is nothing unknown to him, O Rāghava is the three worlds. Formerly for some reasons he had travelled all over them.