Sugrīva, rejoiced at the words of Rāma, said to that hero, the elder brother of Laksmana; who was well pleased. I am, without doubt, worthy of being favoured by the gods, since you accomplished and furnished with virtues are my friend. By your help, O Rama, one can, O sinless one, obtain the kingdom of the celestials,-what is to be said of one's kingdom, O lord? I, who have, in the presence of Fire, gained for my friend (you) sprung from the Rāghava race, am, O Rāghava worthy of being honoured by my friends and relations. You also shall by and by learn that I am a fit friend for you; but I can not speak to you of the qualities that abide in me. O free one, the felicity of high-souled and self-governed friends like you abounds and is enduring. Pious friends look upon the silver, and gold, and the elegant ornaments of pious friends as common property. Whether rich or poor, happy or miserable, good or bad, a friend is the greatest refuge (of his friend). Witnessing such affection, people can, O sinless one, forsake wealth, comfort, and even their native land for the sake of their friends. There at the graceful Rāma, in front of the intelligent Lakşmaņa resembling Väsava, said to Sugriva of a pleasing presence,-It is even so. The next day seeing Rāma as well as the mighty Lakşmaņa seated on the ground, Sugrīva briskly cast his eyes about the forest. And hard by that lord of monkeys discovered a Sāla tree, bearing a few beautiful blossoms, with its wealth of foliage, decked by black bees. There at tearing off a beautiful bough full of leaves, Sugrīva spread it (on the earth), and then sat down with Rāghava. Seeing them seated, Hanumān breaking off a branch of śāla, humbly made Lakşmaņa sit down. Seeing Rāma seated at his case in that best of mountains abounding in Sāla flowers, and cheerful like the ocean, Sugrīva from love spoke to Rāma sweet and excellent words, of which the letters vibrated with delight. Wronged by my brother, I deprived of my wife and exceedingly distressed, and exercised with fear, live in this foremost of mountains, Rs yamuka. O Rāghava, my senses wildered, having been oppressed by Vāli, and having incurred his enmity, I am afflicted with fear, and tormented with fright. O you, that remove the fear of all creatures, it behove you who am tormented by fear and am helpless, to extend your favour to me. Thus accosted, that ever energetic one knowing righteousness and devoted to it, Kākutstha, smiling, said to Sugrīva, Benefits make friends, while injuries denote enemies. Even this very day will I slay him that has deprived you of your wife. O exalted one, these feathered shafts of exceeding energy, sprung from the Kārtikeya forest, decked with gold, furnished with the plumes of the Kanka, resembling the thunderbolt of the great Indra, having smooth knots, and sharp heads, are like enraged serpents. You shall behold your brother and enemy, who is named Vāli slain by my shafts, and lying like a dislodged hill. Hearing Rāghava's words, Sugrīva-lord of host-felt excess of joy and exclaimed, Excellent well! Excellent well! O Rāma, overwhelmed am I by grief. You are the succour of those afflicted with sorrow. Having made you my friend, I express to you my grief. I have, in the presence of Fire by giving you my hand, made you my friend. You are dearer to me than life itself. This I swear to you by Truth. Having made you my friend, I inspired with confidence am unbosoming myself to you. The sorrow, that is in my heart, is constantly enfeebling my mind. Having proceeded thus far, he, his eyes filled with tears and his words faltering because of vapour, could not speak aloud. Sugrīva suddenly restrained, before Rāma, the force of tears, like to the tide of a river. Having restrained his tears and wiped his fair eyes, that energetic one, sighing heavily, again went on, Formerly, O Rāma, I was deprived of my kingdom and reproached in harsh language by the strong Vāli. He also took away my wife dearer to me than life; and my friends have been imprisoned and been bound. That wicked wight, O Rāghava, seeks my life. Many monkeys commissioned by him have been slain by me. It was, O Rāghava, in consequence of this fear that when I (first) saw you, I did not come out. This is all the fear that oppresses me. My adherents are only these headed by Hanumān. It is for this that although reduced to the greatest straits I have been able to preserve my life. These affectionate apes protect me on all sides. They go when I go, and stay when I stay. Why should I expatiate? In brief, Vāli my elder brother, famed for his prowess, is my foe. Even by his death my present pain would be removed. Both my life and my happiness are bound up with his death. I have, O Rāma, communicated to you, the way in which my grief might be removed. Whether in joy or in sorrow, a friend is the refuge of his friend. Hearing these words, Rāma said to Sugrīva, What for arose hostility between yourself and Vāli? I wish to hear this (related) faithfully. Having learnt the cause of your hostility, and ascertained your strength and weakness, I will, O monkey, understanding the irritation that has ensued, compass your happiness. Great is my wrath, on hearing you disgraced; and like a down-pour in the rainy season my ire increases, shaking my very heart. Do you cheerfully and confidingly speak while I fix the string to my bow. As soon as my shaft is off, your foe is beaten. Thus addressed by the high-souled Käkutstha, Sugrīva, along with the four (other) monkeys, experienced exceeding delight. Then with a cheerful countenance, Sugrīva began to unfold to Lakşmaņa's elder brother the cause of their hostility. Thus addressed by the high-souled Käkutstha, Sugrīva, along with the four (other) monkeys, experienced exceeding delight. Then with a cheerful countenance, Sugrīva began to unfold to Lakşmaņa's elder brother the cause of their hostility.