After Laksmana had spoken these highly sound and pleasant words, Rāma, ever taking to what is sound, accepted them. Thereupon that one, of mighty arms, slaking his flaming ire and reclining himself upon his beautiful bow, addressed Laksmana. Do you ponder over, O brother, where shall we repair, what shall we do and by what means shall we come by Sītā? Whereto Lakşmaņa replied saying to the highly aggrieved Råma, It is proper for you to search this Janasthāna filled with a multitude of Rākṣasas and covered with diverse trees and creepers. Here are many strongholds in the midst of mountains, clefts of rocks, many caves and numerous cavities filled with various animals. Many are the abodes here belonging to the Kinnaras and Gandharvas. Do you, along with me, search all these places. Great men, of your calibre, do remain unagitated even in the midst of difficulties like to mountains never shaken by the velocity of the wind. Hearing these words, Rāma, enraged, fixing sharp and terrible arrows to his bow, began to range the forest with Lakşmaņa. Thereupon he beheld, fallen on ground, having his person bathed in blood, the king of birds-Jatayu, resembling a mountain peak, and spoke to Lakşmaņa. It is clear and beyond all doubt that Vaidehī has been devoured by this Rākşasa, assuming the shape of a vulture and ranging the forest. This Rākşasa has been reposing at ease after devouring that one of expansive eyes; I shall kill him with terrible straight coursing arrows, having flaming points. Fixing sharpened shafts to his bow, Rāma, enraged, darted towards the vulture, as if moving the sea-girt earth. Vomiting frothy blood Jațāyu, the king of vultures, spoke to Rāma, the son of Dasaratha. O you of long life, that goddess, whom you have been searching in this vast forest like to Os adhi, and my life have been carried away by Rāvana. I saw her, O Rāghava, carried away stealthily by the powerful Rāvaņa, in your absence as well as that of Lakşmaņa. Myself nearing Sītā, for her rescue, O Lord, Rāvaņa was thrown down on earth by me in conflict having his car and umbrella shattered. This is his snapped bow and these are his broken shafts. And this is his war-car, O Rāma shattered in fight. This is his charioteer lying on earth being killed by the velocity of my wings. Having sundered my wings with his dagger, who had been exhausted, Rāvana taking Sītā, rose high up in the welkin. It behove you not to kill me who had been wounded before by the Rākşasa. Hearing from him pleasant words relating to Sītā, Rāma, leaving aside, instantly, his mighty bow, embraced him, and rolling on earth having lost self-control through grief, began to lament with Lakşmaņa. Though highly composed by nature, he was overwhelmed with doubled grief. And beholding Jațāyu, sigh again and again and breathing with difficulty in a helpless plight, Rāma, highly aggrieved, spoke to Lakşmaņa. I have lost my kingdom and have been living in this forest. My Sītā has been carried away and this bird has been killed (on my account). This misfortune of mine can burn even the very fire. If for assuaging my grief I do enter the mighty ocean, verily shall that misfortune dry up even that lord of rivers. There is none so unfortunate as I, throughout this earth, mobile or immobile, and it is for this bad luck that I have confronted this mighty disaster. This mighty king of vultures is our father's friend and he Leith on earth, killed through the evil turn of my fortune. Uttering these and various other words, Rāghava, along with Lakşmaņa touched his body manifesting his paternal affection. Embracing the king of vultures, bathed in blood, having its wings cut off, Rāghava, fell on the ground, exclaiming where has Maithili gone like to my life?