Having bathed, Rāma Sītā and Sumitrā's son went to their own asylum from the banks of the Godāvarī. Arriving at the asylum, Rāghava along with Lakşmana, performing his morning devotions, entered the cottage. And honoured of the Maharsis, Rāma happily dwelt in that cottage; and seated with Sītā that mighty-armed one looked like the moon in conjunction with Citrā. And he carried on various converse with his brother Lakşınana. As Räma was thus seated with his mind engrossed in that talk, a Rākṣasi came to that region at her will. And that one named Surpanakhā, sister to the ten-necked Raksasa, coming upon Răma, saw him like a celestial, having a leonine chest, mighty arms, and expansive eyes resembling lotus leaves, with the powerful gait of the elephant, wearing a head of matted locks, with a resplendent countenance, bearing regal marks. And beholding Rāma dark-blue like the lotus, and becoming like Kandarpa himself, and resembling Indra, the Rākşasi was maddened with desire. Rāma graced with beauteous continence, that Raksasi had a hideous face; Ráma had a slender waist, she had a huge abdomen; he had expansive eyes, she had terrible eyes; he was gifted with an elegant head of hair, she had coppery hair; Rāma was of a dear presence, she was of an unsightly presence; Rāma had a sonorous voice, she had a hideous voice. Rāma was youthful, the Rākşasi was an old hag; Rāma had mellifluous accents, she had was a harsh accents; Rāma was ever abiding by justice, she was unruly; Rāma was handsome, she was ugly. That Rākşasī being wrought up with passion addressed Rāma saying Wearing matted locks, and equipped with bows and arrows, why hast you along with your wife come to this region haunted by Rākșasas? It behove you to say "what the object of your visit is." Thus accosted by the Rākṣasī, Śūrpanakhă, that subduer of his foes from sincerity of disposition began to relate everything; There was a king named Dasaratha endued with the prowess of a celestial. I am his eldest son known among men by the name of Rāma. This is my younger brother (named) Laks inana, (ever)serving me. This is my wife, known by the name of Sītā. Commanded by my father and mother, I in obedience their mandate, desirous of acquiring religious merits, have for the purpose of securing righteousness, come to the forest for dwelling here. I also am anxious to know you. Whose daughter are you? And what is your name, and what your lineage? Possessed of a captivating form, you appear to me as a Rākşasī. Tell me truly why you have come here. to Hearing these words the Rákşasi, afflicted with lust said, Listen, O Rāma. I will relate everything truly. I am a Räkșasī, capable of wearing shapes at will. My name in Śūrpanakhā. Striking terror into the hearts of all, I range this forest alone. My brother is named Ravana* You may have heard of him. My brother Råvana is a valiant son of Viśravā if you have heard of him. And he that is given to long sleep-the mighty Kumbhakarna, the righteous Vibhīşaņa, who never serves the Rākşasas, and the brothers Khara and Düşaņa renowned in conflict (are also my brothers). O Rāma, I have surpassed them all (in prowess). At first sight of you, I approach you, you best of men, as iny husband, with (feelings of) love. I am endued with power, and range about at will by virtue of my strength. Become my husband for ever and a day. What will you do with Sita? Deformed and unsightly, she is not worthy of you. I am fit for you. Do you look upon me as a wife. This unsightly, grim unchaste and human one with me, with a lean abdomen, will I devour up, along with this brother of yours. Then having your wish, in company you will range the Daņdakas, surveying the various mountain summits and forests. Thus addressed, Kākutstha having charming eyes, well skilled in speech, with a smile, began to speak thus. with me, with a lean abdomen, will I devour up, along with this brother of yours. Then having your wish, in company you will range the Daņdakas, surveying the various mountain summits and forests. Thus addressed, Kākutstha having charming eyes, well skilled in speech, with a smile, began to speak thus.