Hearing those words of Sītā the highly powerful Ten necked one striking his hands together, increased his body too high. Thereupon, that one skilled in speech again spake to Maithili, Methinks you have run mad. Have you not heard of my valour and prowess? Stationing myself in the welkin I can with my hands raise up the earth. I can drink up the waters of the ocean. And engaged in conflict I can destroy Death itself With my sharpened shafts I can pierce the Sun and cut asunder the earth. You are mad with your beauty. Do you look upon me, who am capable of illusions. When he had spoken thus, his yellow eyes became blood-red with rage and assumed the, semblance of flaming fire. Thereat Răvana, the younger brother of the Lord of wealth, changing his placid countenance, instantly assumed his own terrible shape resembling that of Yama. Highly exercised with ire, that ranger of the night became of ten countenances and twenty arms; his eyes were bloody and he appeared beautiful like to blue clouds, being dressed in gold-hued apparel. Leaving aside the semblance of a mendicant, that lord of Raksasas, Ravana, increasing in bulk, assumed his own shape. And wearing a blood-red cloth he stood there fixing his look upon that jewel of a damsel–Maithili. Thereupon Rāvaņa spake to Mathili like to the rays of the sun, having a head of black hair and wearing apparel and ornaments, saying, O you fine damsel, if you did wish to have a husband known all over the world, do you surrender yourself to me. I am a worthy husband for you. Do you serve me for ever, your praiseworthy husband. O fine lady, I hall never do what you did not like. Renouncing your attachment for a man, do you place your love in me. O foolish girl, worthy of being adored by the learned, for what quality are you attached to Rāma of a limited life, who has been deprived of his kingdom and has his desire frustrated, and who of an evil intent, has, at the words of his wife, renouncing his kingdom and kinsmen, been living in this forest-the abode of voracious animals. Speaking thus to Maithili, sweet-speeched and worthy of being sweetly addressed, that highly wicked Raksasa, Rāvaņa, being exercised with lust, approached towards Sītā and got hold of her, like to Budha holding Rohinī in the sky. With his left hand he held her, having eyes like to lotus-petals, by the hair, and with his right hand got hold of her thighs. Seeing Rāvaņa of sharpened teeth, and mighty arms, resembling the summit of a mountain and like to death itself, the deities of the forest became highly terrified and fled in different directions. Instantly appeared there the celestial car of Ravana, decked in gold, drawn by asses and making a terrible sound. Thereupon, that one emmiting terrible accents, remonstrated with Vaidehī in harsh words and clasping her ascended the car. The virtuous Sīta, being thus caught by Ravana, began to cry aloud, addressing Rama, who had gone away to a distant forest. Rāvaņa, racked with lust, rose high up with her like to the wife of a Pannaga, though she tried her best (to get rid of him), for she was not in the least attached to him. Being thus carried away by the ethereal track by that Lord of Rākṣasas, Sītā began to cry aloud, like one mad, distressed and of deranged senses. Ah! mighty Laksmana, ever ministering to the satisfaction of your superiors, do you not know that I have been stolen away by a Rākṣasa assuming shapes at will? O Rāghava, for virtue have you renounced your life, happiness and wealth,-do you not see that I have been carried away by one of mighty iniquity? O you the subduer of foes, you did always control the rebellious,-why do you not punish such a vicious Rākşasa? The vicious do not instantaneously meet with the fruits of their actions, as for corn to ripen requires the assistance of time. For this iniquitous deed, which you have perpetrated, availing of the time and losing your sense, you shall meet with a mighty disaster from Rāma, bringing about your end. Ah! being the virtuous wife of the virtuous and far-famed Rāma, I have been stolen away. Now has the desire of Kaikeyi and other relations been fulfilled. I invoke this Janasthāna and these flowery Karnikās to tell Rāma that Rāvana has stolen away Sītā. I invoke you, O Godāvarī, having swans and cranes sporting in your stream, to tell Ráma that Rāvana has stolen away Sītã. I salute and invoke the deities that live in this forest of many trees to tell my husband of my being stolen away (by Ravana). I do seek the refuge of all deer, birds and other animals that live in this forest, and may they all cominunicate to Rāma the news of his dear spouse being carried away, and tell him that Sītā, losing her control, has been stolen away by Rāvana. Even if I am taken away by Yama, and if the mighty-armed Rāma is apprised of it, surely shall he bring me back by the display of his prowess. Racked with sorrow that one of expansive eyes, while thus bewailing in piteous accents, she espied Jațāyu, the king of vultures, seated on a tree. Thereat the daughter of Janaka, brought under the control of Rāvana and terrified, began to cry and utter those piteous words. O worshipful Jațāyu, do you see that this vicious lord of Rākşasas has ruthlessly carried me away like one having no husband. You will not be able to withstand this mighty, wicked and cruel night-ranger wearing emblems of conquest and having a scimitar in his hand! Do you relate to Rāma and to Lakşmaņa everything about my being carried away from the beginning to the end.