Having been thus addressed, Vaidehī unaffected by fear, although exercised with grief, placing a blade of grass between herself and Rāvana, answered him. There was a king named Dasaratha, the bridge of righteousness, like to a mountain, ever bearing regard towards the truth, and renowned among men, whose son is Rāghava. He is named Rāma, and is righteous-souled and celebrated over the three worlds. he is long-armed, of expansive eyes, like to a celestial—he is my husband. Born in the race of the Ikşvākus, the has the shoulders of a lion and is possessed of exceeding effulgence-the same that along with his brother, Laksmana, shall take your life. If you had wronged me forcibly in his presence, you would have slain in battle in Janasthāna even as Khara. All the mighty Rākşasas of grim visages, whom you have extolled (before me), shall be deprived of their venom before Rāma, as serpents are before Suparna, The shafts decorated with gold shot by the bow-string of Rāghava, shall pierce their bodies, as the waves of the Ganga (beat against) her banks. Although, O Rāvana, you may be incapable of being slain either by the gods or the Asuras, yet having roused the high hostility of Rāghava, you will not be able to liberate your life. The strong Rāghava will compass the end of what remains of your life. Like the life of a beast tied to the sacrificial stake, your own is incapable of being reclaimed. Should Rāma look at you with eyes aglow with anger, you, O Raksasa, would be consumed even as Manmatha was by, Rudra. He who is able to bring down the Moon or destroy him, and to drink up the ocean dry, will surely liberate Sītā from here. Your days are numbered, and auspiciousness has bidden you adieu. You are shorn of strength, and your senses have been dulled. And it is owing to you that Larkā shall be subject to widowhood. That you by force have for naught carried me away from the side of my husband-this sinful act can never conduce to your felicity. That exceedingly effulgent lord of mine along with my husband's younger brother, summoning up their energy, is fearlessly dwelling in the vacant Dandaka. By means of an arrowy shower in conflict, he will take your prowess and strength, your hauteur and wickedness out of your person, When urged by the Destroyer, the destruction of creatures is perceptible, then, coming under the sway of the Destroyer, men become careless in their actions. Having outraged me, you, O worst of Rāks asas your time come; for compassing your own destruction as well as that of the Rākşasas and those dwelling in your inner apartment. A Candāla cannot tread the dais reared the midst of a sacrifice beauteous with ladies, and vessels, and sanctified by the twice-born ones. So I, the religiously wedded wife of that one, ever intent on virtue, and (always) firm in my vows, is incapable, you vilest of Raksasas, of being touched by you, a sinner. How can the female that has always ‘sported with her mate amidst lotuses, cast her eyes on a shag staying among rushes. Do you either bind or destroy this body deprived of sensation. This body will I not protect, nor yet this life, O Rāvana; And I shall not be able to bring blame on myself in this world. having said these harsh words in wrath, Videha's daughter, Janaki, did not there again say anything to Rāvaņa. Hearing Sita's words, harsh and calculated to make one's down stand on end, Rāvana answered her in words tending to excite one's apprehension, Hear, O Maithili, my words. O damsel if, O you of sweet smiles, within this time you do not turn yourself to me, the cooks shall cut you off in pieces to serve my morning mcal. Having herself spoken thus, Ravana-challenger of foes-growing exceedingly wroth, addressed the Rākşasis in these words, You frightful Rākşasīs terrible to behold, subsisting on flesh and gore, do you at once crush her pride. As soon as he had said this, those frightful and terrible Rākṣasīs with joined hands encircled Maithili. Then the grim-visaged king Ravana, as if riving the earth by his tread, proceeding a pace or two, said, Do you take Maithilī to the wood of Asokas. There surrounding her, do you secretly guard her; and there (sometimes) by storming, and (at other) by means of soft speech, do you all strive to bring Mithila's daughter, like a wild female elephant, under your sway. Thus commanded by Rāvana, those Rākşasis taking Maithili along with them, went to the Asoka wood, abounding with trees granting every desire, and filled with various kinds of fruits and flowers, and frequented by fowls fraught with juices at all seasons. And as a doe comes under the subjection of tigresses, Janaka's daughter, Maithili, her frame worked up with grief, came under the sway of the Raksasis. And like a female deer fast bound by a trap, Janaka's timid daughter Maithilī, agitated by the mighty grief, did not attain respite. And greatly up-braided by the fierce eyes (of the Raksasis), Maithili did not know repose; and, afflicted with grief and fear, she, remembering her beloved lord along with Lakşmaņa swooned away. Having been thus addressed, Vaidehi unaffected by fear, although exercised with grief, placing a blade of grass between herself and Ravana, answered him. On Sītā having entered Lankā, the great father addressed the gratified Devendra of an hundred sacrifices, For bringing about the weal of the three worlds, and the woe of the Rākşasas, Sītā has been taken into Lankā by the wickedminded, Rāvaņa. Devoted to her husband, the exalted lady always brought up in happiness, not seeing her husband, and seeing (on the other hand) environed by numbers of Räkşasīs,-is hungering after the sight of her lord. The city of Lankā is situated on the shores of the lord of rivers and streams. How can Rāma get a knowledge of that blameless one, staying there? Brooding over the various ills she has undergone, that exceedingly rare damsel is passing her days. Surely she will resign her existence. Great is the doubt that has arisen as to Sītā putting a period to her existence. Having yourself from here, do you see the fair-faced Sītā. having entered the city of Lankā, Offer excellent clarified butter. Thus addressed by the reverend chastiser of Pāka, Devendra in company with sleep, approached the city ruled by Rāvana. He then addressed sleep, saying. Go you; and stupefy the Räksasas. Thus accosted by Maghavat, that goddess, exceedingly delighted, for securing success to the work of the celestials, covered the Rākşasas with stupor. In the meanwhile, that god, the thousand-eyed lord of Śacī went to (Sītā) staying in the woods, and spoke to her these words, I am the sovereign of the celestials. Good betide you! I am here, O you of luminous smiles! For securing success to the work of the magnanimous Rāghava, I will lend my aid to you. Do not, Odaughter of Janaka, grieve. Through my grace, he shall along with his forces cross over the ocean. And, O excellent wench, I have by my supernal power, stupified the Raksasis. And, O Sita, for this reason, I along with sleep, taking these rice, rice boiled in clarified butter, have, O Vaidehi, corne to you. If you partake of these from my hand, you shall never O beauteous one, be afflicted either with hunger or thirst, O you of thighs resembling rambhā (trunks), for years. Thus addressed, Sītā, alarmed, said, How can I know you for Devendra, Saci's husband, staying here? By the side of Rāma and Lakşmaņa, I had beheld the signs of the celestials. If, O Devendra, you are yourself the sovereign of the celestials, show those to me. Hearing Sītā's words, the lord of Saçī did accordingly. he did not touch the earth with his feet, and his eyes remained winkless. he bloomed in youth, and the blossoms did not fade on his attire. Thereupon knowing him for Vāsava, Sītā was overjoyed. And weeping, she spoke regarding Rāghava, By luck it is that I had heard of that mightyarmed one along with his brother. As is my father-in-law, the king, as is the master of Mithilā, so are you (to me), you whom I behold to-day; my husband has now found a protector. And by your command, O Devendra, will I partake of this pāyasa cooked with milk, which has been offered to me, and which shall enhance (the prosperity) of our race. Thereupon taking the pāyasa from Indra's hands, that Maithilī of luminous smiles (mentally) offered it to her husband as well as Laksmana. If my mighty lord live along with his brother, let this through my reverence for them, be theirs. She then partook of the pāyasa herself. Having thus eaten it, that one of excellent countenance, had her hunger and rising sorrow removed; and attaining a mental tendency from Indra, Janaki grew glad with reference to the Kakutsthas. And Sakra also for bringing about the success of Rāghava's work, with a pleased mind, went to the abode of celestials. And greeting Sītā again and again, that high-souled celestial, in company with sleep went back to his own abode.