Having been addressed with those harsh words the younger brother of Rāghava, enraged, proceeded at once, being anxious to see Rāma. Thereupon the ten-necked one, availing of this opportunity came before Vaidehī assuming the semblance of a mendicant. Wearing a soft silken cloth, with a lock of hair on his head with an umbrella and shoes and having on his left shoulder a rod and kamandalu the highly powerful one assuming the appearance of a wandering devotee carrying three long bamboo staves appeared before Vaidehi in the forest when there was none of the brothers by her. He saw there the young and pious daughter of the king like to an evening void of both sun and moon and as the highly terrible Rahu eyes Rohini forsaken by Moon. Seeing that terrible one the doer of evil deeds, the trees of Janasthāna did not move nor the wind did blow. Seeing him eye Sītā with his blood-red eyes, the fast streaming river Godāverī even slackened its course out of fear. In the mean time the Ten-necked Rävana, enquiring about Rāma's weak points appeared before Vaidehī in the guise of a mendicant. Like to Sani approaching citră, that impious one, assuming the appearance of a pious man like a well covered with grass, approached Vaidehī who was bewailing her husband. And seeing that pious spouse of Rāma-Vaidehi, Ravana stood before her. Her lips and teeth were extremely fine, her face resembled the full moon and her eyes were like lotus-petals. She had a yellow siiken cloth on and sat in the thatched cottage, overwhelmed with grief and bathed in tears. And that ranger of the night with a pleased heart approached Vaidehī. Seeing her that lord of Rākṣasas was pierced with the shafts of passion. And speaking highly of her, surpassing in beauty the three worlds and resembling by the excellence of her own person the very goddess of wealth herself Rāvana uttering the name of God spake to her, O you having the colour of gold and silver, O you wearing silken cloth, O you appearing like a lotus wearing a garland of lotus-petals, O you of beautiful countenance! Are you Bashfulness, Beauty, Fame, Wealth, Apsarā, Dignity or Rati herself who is ranging at will in this forest? All your teeth are equal having their tops like to the buds of Kunda flower, beautiful and yellow. Your eyes are expansive, clear, of bloody hue, and having black pupils. Your hip is fleshy and spacious. Your thighs are like those of elephants, round, fleshy and perfectly strong. Your nipples are bulky, pointed, highly captivating like cold palm fruits, beautiful and ornamented with diverse jewels. O you of beautiful smile! O you of beautiful teeth! O you of beautiful eyes! O fine damsel, you did carry away my heart like to a river carrying away its banks by its stream. The lock of your hair is exquisitely fine, your breast very close and your waist is so thin that they may be got round even by fingers. There is none so beautiful like you-a Goddess, a Gandharvi, a Yaksi or a Kinnari. I had never seen before on this earth a damsel so beautiful as you. This your beauty the best on earth, your youth, your grace and your abode in the forest do agitate my mind. So it is well for you to come (with me); it does not behove you to remain here. This is the abode of terrible Rākşasas wearing shapes at will. Picturesque palaces, prosperous cities and sweet-smelling gardens are worthy of your abode. O you of dark-blue eyes, fine is your garland, fine is the sinell of your person and fine is your apparel-me-thinks fine is your husband too. O you of pure smile! whom do you belong to?-Rudras, Marutas, or Vasus-Meseems, O fine damsel you are a very gooddes. No one comes here—the Gandharvas, the celestials or Kinnaras; this is an abode of the Rākşasa how do you come here. Are you not afraid of these monkeys, lions, tigers, wolves bears, herons and hyenas? Alone in this forest, are you not afraid of these terrible elephants of fierce motion and maddened with the exuding of their temporal juice? Who are you? Whose wife? What for do you range alone in this forest of Dandaka frequented by terrible Rākşasas? Thus addressed was Vaidehĩ by the vicious souled Rāvana. Seeing him come under the guise of a twice-born one, Maithelee worshipped him with diverse articles necessary for serving a guest. Offering him a seat first and afterwards inviting him to wash his feet she said to that one of placid look cooked rice is ready. Seeing Rāvaņa approach with Kamandalu and wearing a red cloth under the guise of a Brāhmana, Maithelee could not pass by him any way, and considering him a twice-born one by various signs invited him as if a Brāhmana , O Brāhmana, do you sit on this seat facing the right; do you take this water to wash your feet); do you enjoy these well-cooked eatables growing in the forest and intended for you. Jānakí the wife of Lord of men inviting him thus, Ravana, casting a look upon her, addressed himself for his own destruction, to carry her away. She was anxiously expecting the return of Rāma who had gone a-hunting with Lakşmaņa; she looked around and beheld but on all sides the spacious yellow forest-land-~-there was neither Rāma nor Lakşmaņa.