Seeing his sister deformed, and covered with blood, fallen on the ground, the Raksasa, Khara, fired with wrath asked her. Arise! Leave off fear and amazement. Tell me plainly by whom you have been thus deformed. Who is it that with his finger-end has by way of sport hart a black venomous snake that was innocent? He that coming in contact with you has to-day drunk virulent poison, winding a fatal noose round about his neck, know it not through ignorance. Endowed with strength and prowess, ranging about at will, wearing shapes at pleasure, and resembling the destroyer himself, going to whom hast you come by this condition? Who among the gods, Gandharvas or creatures or the light souled saints is of such mighty energy as to have deformed you? In this world I do not see him that would do me : wrong, not even the mighty Indra, the thousand eyed tamer of the demon Pāka. a crane Even as afflicted with thirst appropriate milk mixed in water (leaving the latter out), so by means of fleet an lifedestroying shafts I will among the immortals take the life of that chastiser. The frothy blood of whom, having his marrow pierced (by me) and slain by me in battle, dose the Earth wish to drink? Tearing off flesh from the corpse of whom slain by me in conflict, shall the birds so joyfully feed on it? Him, whom I shall wrong mightily, neither the gods, nor the Gandharvas, nor the Piśācas, nor the Rākşasas, will be able to rescue in fierce encounter. Recovering by degrees your sense, it behoves you to tell me what individual it was of execrable character, who by his prowess, half humbled you in the forest. Hearing these words of his brother, who was under the influence of extreme rage, Sūrpanakhā with tears in her eyes, said. Tender, and endowed with beauty, possessed of youth and gifted with great strength, with expansive eyes resembling white lotuses; clad in bark and dark dear-skins subsisting on fruits and roots, having their senses under control; leading an ascetic life and a Brahmacarya mode of existence; there are two sons of Dasaratha the brothers Räma and Lakşmaņa resembling the Sovereign of the Gandharvas, and marked with signs betokening royalty. I cannot ascertain whether they be celestial, or human beings. And between them I saw there a youthful female furnished with grace, and having a dainty waist; adorned with every kind of ornament. And it is on account of this feinale that I have like one unchaste and uncared for, have come by this condition at their hands. Nor I wish in the midst of encounter to drink the frothy blood of that crooked one as well as those two slain (in battle). Let this my prime wish be crowned there with fruition. her and their blood will I drink in dreadful conflict. As she said this, Khara wrought up with boundless passion, said, Two human beings accoutred in arins, and wearing bark and dark deer-skins have in company with a female entered this deep Dandaka forest. Do you returni, after slaying them, as well as that wicked one. And this sister of mine will drink their blood. You Rākşasas, even this is my sister's dear desire. Repairing thither, specdily accomplish this, bearing them down by your native might. Seeing those two brothers slain by you this one exceedingly rejoiced, will drink their blood in the field. Thus commissioned, those fourteen Räksasas set out there like clouds driven by the winds, accompanied by Śürpanakhā.