And Rāma accompanied by his brother as well as Sītā went to the asylum of Sutīksna in company with the twice-born ones. And having proceeded far, and crossed many a stream of copious waters, Rāma saw a holy peak towering high like the mighty Meru. Then those worthy scions of the Ikşvāku race-descendants of Raghu—with Sītā entered the forest ever furnished with various kinds of trees. And having entered the dense forest abounding in blossoms and fruits and trees, Rāma saw in a recess an asylum glittering with bark and garlands. There Rāma duly addressed an ascetic seated in the lotus-attitude* for warding off evil, even Sutīksna, *The yoya system has many positions for concentrating thought. O you conversant with righteousness, speak to me, O Maharsi, You that have truth for your prowess. Thereupon eyeing Rāma keenly, that calm (ascetic)-the foremost of those practising righteousness, embracing him with his arms, said, Welcome, you foremost of the Raghus, O Rāma, you the best of those practising righteousness. This asylum now has been furnished with its master in consequence of your visit. O illustrious one, O hero, expecting you, I have not yet ascended heaven, renouncing on earth this body of mine. I had already) heard that, coming to Citrakūta, (you had been staying there), having been deprived of the kingdom. Here came, O Kākutstha, the Sovereign of the celestials of an hundred sacrifices. Coming to me, that mighty deity, the Sovereign of the celestials, said that I had acquired all the worlds by my pious acts. Do you, by my grace, in company with your wife and Lakşmaņa, dwell delightfully in those regions won by my asceticism, containing Devarsis. Thereupon the self-possessed Rāma answered that blazing and truth-telling Brāhmana of fiery austerities, like Vasava answering Brahma. O mighty ascetic, I myself will win those regions. I wish to be directed to a dwelling in this forest. You are possessed of ability in respect of everything, and are (at the same time) engaged in the welfare of all beings, this has been told to me by the high-soulcd Sarabhanga of the Gautama race. Thus addressed by Rāma, that Maharşi known over all the worlds, Spoke sweet words in great joy, O meritorious Rāma, even this is the asylum (for you). Do you live here pleasantly. It is inhabited by numbers of saints and is always provided with fruits and roots. This forest is haunted by herds of deer that range here without doing harm to any one, although they possess great energy; and go away, having bewitched people (by their beauty). Save what comes, from these deer, there is no other evil to be encountered here. Hearing those words of the Maharși, the placid elder brother of Lakşınaņa, taking up his bow with the arrow set, said O exalted one, if by means of sharpened shafts blazing like lightning, I slay those herds of deer when they come, it shall impart pain to you, and what can be more unfortunate than this? Therefore I shall not be able to dwell long in this asylum. Having said this, Rāma ceased and became engaged in his evening adorations, and, having finished them, along with Sīta and Lakşmaņa fixed his quarters in the asylum of Sutiksna. Then, when the evening had passed away and night fell, Sutiksna, having done homage to those chiefs of men, offered them excellent fare, suitable to ascetics.