After Savarī had repaired to heaven by virtue of her divine prowess, Rāma with his brother Lakşmaņa began to ponder over the pious influence of those great ascetics. Thinking within himself about the divine authority of those great ones, the virtuous-souled Rāma spoke to Lakşmaņa, devoted and ever engaged in his well-being. Beheld have I, O gentle one, the wondrous asylum of the pure-souled ascetics filled with diverse birds and tigers rambling friendly with antelopes. O Laksmana, we have performed ablutions in the sacred waters of these seven seas and offered oblations to our manes. Our misfortunes have ended and prosperity has appeared and my mind is now filled with ecstasy of delight. Me-thinks, O best of men, auspiciousness shall soon appear to us; do you come, therefore, we shall proceed towards the picturesque lake Pampā. You appear in view, at no distance, the mount Rşyamūka. Here dwells with four monkeys, the virtuous-souled Sugrīva. Surya's son, in constant fear of Vāli. I am in a hurry to behold Sugrīva the best of monkeys, for my business—Sītā's quest-is entirely at his hands. Unto the heroic Rāma, speaking thus Saumitrī said. Let us depart soon, I am in haste too. Issuing out of Matanga's asylum, the mighty Rāma, lord of men, repaired with Lakşmaņa to the lake Pampā. Exercised with grief, he arrived at the bank of that best lakes, beholding (as he passed along), various trees and pools, the mighty forest covered on all sides with huge trees and flowers and resounding with the noise of lapwings, peacocks, woodpeckers and various other birds and rattling of the bamboo's. Beholding, from distance, Pampā of sweet, cool and pure water, Rāma performed ablution at the Matanga Sara (a portion of Pampā) and paced slowly towards the lake. Thereupon Daśaratha's son, stricken with grief, bathed in Pampă covered with lotuses. It was adorned on all sides with Tilakas, Aśokas, Punnāgas, Uddālas and Bakulas. It was lake girt on all sides with picturesque gardens, having its waters undulating beautifully and transparent like to crystal, and covered all around with soft sands. It was filled with fish and tortoise, adorned with trees on its banks, encircled with creepers embracing her like companions and frequented by Gandharvas, Kinnaras, serpents, Yaksas and Raksasas. It was covered with trees and creepers of various kind, of cool water, and enveloped with beauty. It was, somewhere, of red hue, in contact with water lilies, somewhere white with Kumudas, somewhere blue with blue lotuses like to a blanket of diverse hues. It was filled with white and red lotuses and encircled with blossoming mangoes groves and resounding with the music of the peacocks. Beholding Pampā, ornamented like a damsel with Tilakas, Bijapuras, (a) figtrees, Sukladrumas, (b) flowery Karavis, blossoming Punnāgas, groves of Mālati (c) and Kunda, (d) Bhandhiras (e) Nichulas, (1) Asokas, Saptaparņas, (g) Ketakas, (h) Atimuktas, (i) and various others trees, Rāma the mighty son of Dasaratha began to lament with Lakşmaņa. [a] Common citron-Lat. (Citrus-medica). [b] Lat. (Symplocos racemosa). (c) Great-flowered Jasmine-Lat. (Jasminum Grandiflorum). [d] A kind of Jasmine-Lat. (F. Multiflorum). [e] Lat. (Memisa Sirisa). [f] Lat. (Barringtonia Acutangula). [g] Lat. (Alstonia-Scholaris). [h] (Pandanus Odoratissiumus). [I] Lat. (Gaeritnera Racemosa). There stands on its bank the mount R$ yamūka, abounding in various metals and covered with trees of variegated flowers as mentioned before (by Kabandha). There dwell the famous lord of monkeys, Sugrīva, the heroic son of the great Rkşarajā. O best of men, do you approach the chief of monkeys. Rāma, having truth for his prowess, again spoke to Laksmana, saying, O Laksmana, how shall I live without Sitā, who have been deprived of my kingdom, who am poorly and have Sītā for my life? Having said this to Lakşmaņa, who had nothing else in view, that best of Raghus, racked with sorrow and grief and oppressed by Cupid, entered the lake Pampā graced with lotuses. Proceeding slowly, observing the forest, Rāma beheld and entered with Lakşmaņa Pampā, girt on all sides with beautiful woods and filled with a multitude of diverse birds.