Seeing fourteen thousands of Rākşasas of dreadful deeds, together with Duşaņa, and Khara, and Trisirā, slain in battle by Rāma single-handed, that one resembling clouds, Śūrpanakhā, again fell to send up mighty sounds. And witnessing Rāma's deeds, incapable of being performed by others, she, extremely agitated, went to Lankā, ruled by Rāvana. And she saw the effulgent Rāvaņa in front of his palace, surrounded by his counsellors, like Vāsava surrounded by the Maruts; scated on a supreme golden seat resembling the sun, and like to a flaming fire on a golden dais kept alive by sacrificial offerings. Unconquerable by high-souled saints, celestials, Gandharvas and all creatures; terrible like the Destroyer with his mouth wide open; his persons containing scars* of wounds inflicted by the thunder bolt and the lightings, in the war between the gods and Asuras; his breast bearing marks of attacks made by Airāvata with the ends of his tusks. *This reminds one of Milton: of Belzebub, he says, His person Deep scars of thunder had intrenched-Par, Lost-Book I. Having twenty hands, and ten heads, wearing elegant attire; broad breasted; heroic; marked with royal signs; (in hue) resembling cool lapises; embellished. in ornaments of burnished gold; having goodly hands, white teeth, and a huge face resembling a hill. Even him who in the war of the gods had been assailed an hundred ways with the descent of Viş ņu's discus; whose body had been cut with all the weapons of the celestials; (him). who furiously disturbs the deep incapable of being disturbed; uproots mountain summits, and tramples over gods, the destroyer of righteousness, and the violator of other's wives. The employer of all celestial arms, and the disturber of sacrifics-who going to the city of Bhogavatī, and vanquishing Vāsuki, had carried off Taksa's beloved wife. Who, going to Kailasa, and defeating him having for his vehicle a human being, had carried of the car Puspaka coursing at every where at will; Who endued with prowess had devastated the divine Caitraratha grove, the tank (situated there) and the Nandana wood, as well as the gardens of the gods; And, who, himself resembling a mountain summit, had by means of his upraised arms, obstructed the rising of these repressor of foes the exalted Sun and Moon; Who, possessed of calmness, having formerly for ten thousand years carried on asceticism in the mighty forest, offered his own heads to the self create one; Who in conflict fears, not death from either gods or Dānavas or Gandharvas, or Piśācas or birds or serpents, from none save human beings; Who, possessed of prodigious strength, forcibly takes away the clarified butter sanctified with mantras from the sacrificial ground; The destroyer of sacrifices about to be completed; of villainous nature; the slaughterer of Brahmanas; of cruel deeds; harsh and kindles, and ever bent on doing evil to all creatures; And railing furiously at all creatures; the inspirer of fear in all beings. And the Räkşasas beheld her exceedingly powerful and cruel brother, wearing gorgeous apparel and ornaments, and decked in a glorious garland, seated, like the Destroyer at the time (of dissolution) ready (to destroy); the exalted chief of Rākşasas; the delight of the race of Paulastya. Stupefied with fear, the Rākşasī, approaching that destroyer of foes, Rāvana, surrounded by his counsellors, said these words. And transported with fear and desire, Śūrpanakhā, given to fearlessly ranging every where, who had been deformed by that highsouled one, showing (her mutilation), addressed these harsh words to Rāvana of flaming and expansive eyes.