Beholding Jațāyu fallen on the ground by the terrible Raksasa, Rāma spoke to Laksmana, having compassion for all, saying Verily for my service this bird has breathed its last, being killed by the Raksasa.O Laksmana, its voice has been enfeebled, its vision weakened and its life, greatly exhausted, Leith in a  very little proportion in its body. May good betide you, O Jatayu; if you are capable of speaking again, do you relate how Sītā has been carried away and you have been killed. Why has Rāvaņa taken away by stealth the worshipful Jānki? What offence did I commit by him that he has carried away my dear one? O you best of birds, how looked the moonlike, pleasant countenance of Sītā at the time of her being carried away? What did she speak then? What is the prowess, appearance and action of that Raksasa? Where dose he live, O reverend Sir? Pray tell me, I do ask you. Beholding Rāma, lament like one helpless, the virtuous-souled Jațăyu spoke in faltering accents. Sītā has been carried away by Rāvana, the lord of Rākşasas, creating a mighty illusion producing wind and showers. O darling, myself being worn out that nightranger, having sundered my wings, fled away with Sītā to the southerly direction. O Rāghava, my life is about to expire, my eye-sight has grown of mistaken perception, I see trees before me made of gold having hair resembling Usira. Rāvana has taken away Sītā at a moment when a person regains soon his lost property. O Kākutstha, this moment is called Vindya, which Rāvana has not been able to perceive. (At this moment) the person who takes away (a thing) is soon destroyed like to a fish devouring a hook. This refers to Jatāyu's astrological knowledge. Vindya is derived from the root Vid-to gain. Thus this moment is favourable to the laser and unfavourable to the taker. Hence Rāvana carrying away Sītā at this moment shall meet with destruction. Do not therefore entertain the least doubt about your coming by Janakī. Destroying him at the head of the battle you shall soon sport with Vaidehi. Thereupon flesh and gore began to come out of the mouth of Jatayu, the king of vultures, not loosing his sense even while treading the verge of death. Thereupon the king of birds gave up his dear life uttering only-Rāvana is the son of Visravā and brother to Vaisravana (the lord of wealth). Rāma again and again addressed him with joined palms saying, Do you speak! Do you speak. And instantly Jatayu's vital spark rose up in the sky, leaving his bodily frame. Thereupon the king of vultures fell down on the earth by stretching forth his legs, body and head on the ground. Beholding the vulture dead, of huge proportions, resembling a hill and having red eyes, Rama, aggrieved, spoke piteously to Saumitri. Living happily, for years, in this forest of Dandaka inhabited by the Rākşasas, Jațāyu has, at last, given up his life. He lived for a long time, of an uplifted person, and has now laid low on the earth. None can withstand the course of destiny. Observe, O Laksmana, this vulture for my benefaction, has been killed by the powerful Rāvaņa in his attempt to rescue Sītā. For me, has this Lord of birds, breathed his last, renouncing his large ancestral kingdom. In every status of animal creation, the heroic, the righteous and the honest, affording refuge to all, are to be found, even among the birds. I do not feel so much affliction, O hero, for Sītā's ravishment as I do for this vulture, who has been killed for me. Like to the highly famous, effulgent king Dasaratha, this King of birds is worthy of being adored and worshipped by me. O Saumitri, do you bring fuels; I shall produce fire there-with and burn the dead body of this king of birds who has been killed on my account. Placing on a funeral pile, I shall cremate, O Saumitrī, the dead body of this king of birds who has been destroyed by the grim-visaged Raksasas. Being consecrated and commanded by me, do you, O highly powerful king of birds, attain to that excellent state of existence, which is reached by persons ever performing pious observance, by Āhilāgnis by heroes who are not afraid of entering a battle-field and by persons who confer grants of land. Saying this the virtuous-souled Rāma, afflicted with sorrow, burned the body of the king of birds, placing it on the funeral pile, like to his own kinsman. Entering the forest with Saumitrī, Rāma gifted with prowess, killed plump high deer and stretched forth grass and twigs for offering oblation to that bird. Taking off the flesh of those high deer and clustering it, Rāma, of great renown, offered it to the vultures in that pleasant forest-land, abounding in green grass. Thereupon for his speedy arrival at the abode of celestials, Rāma recited those Mantras which are being uttered by the twice-born ones. Afterwards repairing to the river Godāverī the two princes offered water to that kingly vulture. And offering yater to him according to the prescribed rites of the Śástras, those two descendants of Raghu, after bathing, perforined the Udaka ceremony for that king of vultures. Presentation of water specially to the manes as a religious or obsequal rite. Having been killed in battle for an arduous but glorious work, that king of vultures, consecrated by the ascetic-like Rāma, attained to an excellent state. Having performed the Udaka ceremony for that best of birds and considering him in the light of a father they went away and entered the forest in quest of Sītā like to the two best of celestials-Visnu and Vasava. glorious work, that king of vultures, consecrated by the ascetic-like Rāma, attained to an excellent state.