As those terrible and inauspicious forces were marching on, a mighty sable cloud with dreadful sounds began to shower down blood. The steeds yoked to his (Khara's) car, gifted with great celerity, dropped down all of a sudden on the level high ways strewn with blossoms. A dark circle bordered with red, resembling that of charcoal, appeared in the vicinity of the sun. And a frightful vulture, having a huge body, approaching the banner, sat upon the upraised golden flag-staff. And beasts and birds having shrill voices, living on flesh, remaining near Janasthāna, emitted various dissonant notes. And in the quarter lighted up by the sun, fierce jackals having mighty voices, in dreadful cries presaged evil to the Rākşasas. And terrific clouds surcharged with water and blood, and resembling elephants with rent temples, enveloped the sky. And a dense darkness appeared, capable of making one's hair stand on end, and no quarter was distinctly visible. And out of season, there appeared evening hued like a cloth soaked in blood. And facing Khara, terrible beasts and birds set up cries. Kankas, Gomayas and vultures, portending fear, began to cry. Ever inauspicious in war, jackals presaging evil, with their mouths belching forth flame, howled in the face of the forces. And comets, resembling parighas appeared beside the sun. That mighty planet Svarbhānu seized the sun when there was no parva. And the winds blew violently; and the sun was without lustre. And when there was no night, stars wearing the sheen of fireflies, began to fall. And in the tanks fishes and fowls were inert, and the lotuses were withered. And at that hour the trees were shorn of fruits and flowers; and without wind there arose dust dusky like clouds. And the parrots uttered wild notes-cīcīkūci. And meteors of terrific aspects fell with loud noises. And the earth with her mountains, woods, and forests, shook. And as the intelligent Khara was roaring from his car, his left arm shook, and his voice fell, and as he surveyed around, his eyes moistened, and his head ached; yet through ignorance, he did not desist. Witnessing these mighty portents capable of making one's hair stand on end, Khara with a laugh, addressed the whole body of Rākşasas. Even as a strong person from prowess counts not a weak one, I do not dwell upon all these mighty portents, dreadful to behold, that have appeared. Even the stars will I bring down from heaven with my sharp shafts; and even Death will I engaged, bring to mortality. Without slaying Rāghava puffed up with pride as well as Laksmana, by means of sharp weapons, I return not (from the conflict). Let that sister of mine, for whom Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa have had sense perverted, attain her desire, by drinking their blood.. I had never before met with defeat in conflict. You have witnessed it. I do not speak a falsehood. Wrought up with rage, I shall slay in fight the sovereign of the celestials himself, going on his mad Airāvata, with the thunderbolt in his hand, what shall I say of those two, who are human beings? Entangled in the noose of death, that mighty army of the Rākşasas hearing his challenge, experienced boundless enthusiasm. And anxious to see the encounter, there came high-souled saints, and celestials, and Gandharvas, and Siddhas, with the Cāranas. And these pious ones assembled, spoke to one another. Welfare to those cows, and Brāhmanas, and those that are prized by the worlds! As the discus-handed Vişņu vanquished the foremost Asuras, may Rāghava rout in battle those rangers of the night, the progeny of Pulastya! And saying this as well as various other things, the supreme saints and the celestials stationed in the sky conceiving curiosity (as to the issue of the conflict), beheld the host of those Rākşasas, whose days had been numbered. Then impetuously Khara issued in his car from the van of the army*. And these twelve endowed with exceeding prowess, viz., Syenagāmí, Prthusyama, Yajñaśatru, Vihangama, Durjaya, Karavirāksa, Parusa, Kālakärmuka, Hemamāli, Mahāmāli, Sarpāsya, and Rudhirāśana posted themselves around Khara. The N.W.P. text has a different stoka. And seeing him come out on the ground, they themselves came out. And Mahākapāla, Sthūlākṣa, Pramātha and Trisirā—These four going before the forces, went at the back of Dūşaņa. Then as the planets dart towards the sun and moon, that heroic and dreadful army of Rākşasas, eager for victory suddenly rushed towards the princes with great vehemence.