Hearing Vaidehi's words spoken through high regard (for her husband), Rāma with his energy enhanced, answered Janaka's daughter. O noble lady, you have spoken wild words fraught with worth and profit; and, O Janaka's daughter versed in virtue, you have expounded the duties of Kșatriyas. What, O exalted one, shall I say? You have yourself by your words (furnished an answer to what you had said). Kşatriyas wear bows in order that the word 'distressed' may not exist (on earth). O Sītā, those ascetics of severe vows that are beset with perils in Dandaka, having personally come to me, who am their refuge, have sought protection at my hands. Always dwelling in the forest, subsisting on fruits and roots, they on account of Rākṣasas of cruel deeds do not, O timid attain ease. These ascetics are devoured by terrible Rākṣasas living on human flesh. Being eaten up (by the Rākşasas), the anchorites living in the forest of Dandaka, those best of the twice-born ones, said to us-Be you gracious to us.' Hearing those words of theirs which fell from their lips, I, resolving to act in accordance with their request, said. 'Be you propitious.' This is surpassing shame to me that such Vipras who themselves are worthy of being sought, seek me. What shall I do? I said this in the presence of those twiceborn ones. Thereat all those that had come, said, We have been, O Rāma, immensely harassed in the forest of Dandaka by Räkşasas wearing shapes at will. Do you deliver us. O sinless one! These irrepressible Rākṣasas living on human flesh vanquish us at the time of Homa, and on the occasions of Parvas. Of the saints and ascetics afflicted by the Rākşasas, who are on the search for their refuge, you are our best refuge. sore We can by virtue of the energy of our asceticism easily destroy the rangers of the night; but we are loath to lose our asceticism earned in a long time. O Rāghava our austerities are constantly disturbed, and we can hardly perform thein. Therefore, although afflicted and devoured by the Rākşasas dwelling in the forest of Dandaka, we do not cast our curse on them. You along with your brother are our protector: you are our master in this forest. Having heard these words, I promised my perfect protection to the saints in the forest of Dandaka, O daughter of Janaka. Having promised, I living cannot violate my vow concerning the ascetics; verily truth is ever dear to me. I had rather renounce my life, or you, O Sītā, along with Lakşmaņa-but by no means my promise made, especially to Brahmanas. O Videha's daughter, the protection of the saints is incumbent on me even without any representation, and what (shall I say) when I have promised the same? You have spoken this to me through affection and friendship. I have been well pleased with you, O Sītā. One did not instruct another that one did not bear affection to. O beauteous damsel, (wat you have said) is worthy of both your love and your race. You are dearer to me even than life, being a companion in my religious acts. Having said these words to Mithila's princess, the, beloved Sītā, the high-souled Răma, equipped with bows, along with Laksmana, directed his steps towards the inviting woods of asceticism.