Hearing the words of that sovereign of the Rākşasas, the highly energetic Mārica, skilled in speech, answered the Raksasa chief. O king, the speaker of soft words is common, but the speaker and the listener of unwelcome though beneficial words are rarities. Volatile, and employing no spies, you surely do not understand the exceedingly powerful Rāma towering high in virtues, and resembling the illustrious Indra or Varuņa himself. I shall be well, me child, if Rāma fired with rage, do not render all the world bereft of Rākşasas; If Janaka's daughter has not sprung to compass your destruction, if a dreadful disaster do not befall you because of Sītā, And if having obtained for her lord you that are wilful and wicked, the city of Lankā with you and the Rākṣasas do not meet with utter extermination. The sovereign who is wicked, whimsical and of evil intent like you, bring about his own destruction as well as that of his kingdom and relatives. Rāma, the enhancer of Kausalyā's delight had not been abandoned by his father, nor is he devoid of propriety of conduct; he is not avaricious, wicked nor the destroyer of Kaşatriya race. He does not lack religious merits or accomplishments, nor is he of a harsh temperament and intent on causing misery to creatures. Finding his truthful sire imposed on by Kaikeyi he has sojourned to woods. For compassing the welfare of his father Dasaratha and Kaikeyi he has entered the forest of Dandaka. Rāma, O my child is not harsh or foolish; nor has he not control over his senses. Far from speaking untruth he does not know false stories even. It did not behove you therefore to use such improper language towards him. he is an incarnation of virtue, pious and truthful, and lord of all men as Vāsava of all celestials. How does you then wish to carry away by force his Vaidehī, protected by virtue of her own chastity, like to the rays of Sun? It did not behove you to enter that fire of Rāma who has arrows for rays and bow and scimitar for fuel. It did not behove you, O Rāvana, to approach Räma renouncing your kingdom, happiness and love of life, who is like to death itself and has bow for his widened and flaming mouth, and arrows for his rays and who is irrepressible, of mighty prowess, holding bows and arrows and repulsing the forces of the enemy. Incomparable is his power; daughter of Janaka is his wife and lives in the forest confiding in the mighty strength of his bow; you shall not be able to carry her away. She is the beloved wife of that best of men having a leonine chest—and he holds his wife dearer than his life and is ever attached to her. And young Sītā beloved of the mighty Rāma, and like to the rays of flaming fire is ever incapable of being carried away by you. Of what avail is this vain attempt O Rākşasa chief? No sooner Rāma shall see you in the battle you shall meet with your end. Hard it is to attain life, happiness and kingdom, so it behoved you to act properly, after consulting with your ministers headed by Vibhīşaņa, judging Rāma's merits and demerits and ascertaining his and your own strength and as well as your welfare. Methinks your approaching conflict with the son of the Kosala chief forebodes no good to you; hear again therefore O prince of the night rangers, words sensible and lending to your welfare.