I Was however somehow saved by Rāma in that conflict. Listen what happened afterwards. I was not humbled even by the danger of my life. Once again I entered the forest of Dandaka accompanied by two Rākşasas assuming the shape of deer. I had a flaming tongue, huge teeth, sharpened horns and lived on the flesh of ascetics. Assuming such a terrible appearance I began to traverse with great vehemence the Tīrtha, Agnihotri and the place of worship; eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the ascetics after killing them I began to hinder all religious services. I had a most ugly figure and was maddened with drinking blood, and all the animals of the forest were exceedingly frightened at me. While I was thus traversing the forest of Dandaka throwing obstacles in the way of religious services I saw the pious ascetic Răma living on a restricted fare, the honoured Sītā and the mighty Lakşmaņa, taking recourse to asceticism, moderate in eating and ever engaged in the welfare of created beings. Remembering his former enmity and aggrandisement, I, being extremely wrathful, in my deer shape and with my sharpened horns, darted towards him with a view to kill him, considering through my ignorance the effulgent Rāma as none other but an ascetic living in the forest. Then stringing his huge bow he darted three sharpened arrows at me. Those three terrible arrows with bent knots resembling thunderbolts, killing enemies and drinking blood and having the motion of Garuda and air, coalescing with each other came before us. Wicked as I am, I was fully aware of his prowess having been frightened by him on a former occasion, and so I saved myself by escaping, but those two Raksasas were killed. O Rāvana, any how saved from the arrows of Rāma and having got my life back I have resorted to the life of an ascetic and have been carrying on asceticism here being absorbed in Yoga. From that very day I see Rāma wearing bark and deerskin even in the very trees before me like to Death with the noose in his hands. Terrified as I am I always see thousands of Rāma around me. Me seems the entire forest is inhabited by Rāma only. O king of Räksasas, I see Rāma even in the quarter where there is no Rāma. Seeing him in my dreams even I look around like one awaken. O Rāvana what more shall I speak to you, I am so much afraid of Rāma that such words as Ratna (jewel), Ratha (chariot) which begin with the letter Ra administer consternation to me. I am fully apprised of the prowess of that descendant of Raghu; it dose not behove you to enter into conflict with him; he can destroy Vāli and Namuci. O Rāvana, whether do you fight with Rāma or not, do not mention him to me if do you wish to see me. Many persons pious and devoted to asceticism on this earth have met with destruction for another's misdeeds. And I shall meet with a similar fate for your sins. O you the ranger of night do whatever you like, I shall not follow you. Truely is that highly intelligent and effulgent Rāma of mighty prowess, like death itself to the rangers of night. Though the wicked Khara of Janasthāna has been slain by him on Sūrpanakhā's account, yet how is he to blame for it do you truly speak. You are my friend; it is for this and for your welfare that I speak this truth to you. If do you not follow my words, yourself with all your kinsmen, shall be slain in battle by Rāma.