Thereupon beholding Tārā fallen (on the ground) like to a star dropt down from the sky, Hanumān, the lord of monkey-herds, consoled her again and again. Animals unagitated, attain to happiness or misery, as an outcome of their actions performed (in their previous existence) by merits or demerits. Why did you mourn for others, yourself being an object of mourning? Why did you feel commiseration for the poor, yourself being poorly? In this body like to a bubble who is there who mourneth for another? It behoveth you now, O you having your son alive, to look after prince Angada and think of those duties which remain to be executed by you (after the demise of Vāli). Do you know that life and death of the animals is very unsettled. It is therefore proper to perform what tends to the welfare of after-life. It does not behove you, O learned damsel, to mourn like others. He even, who (while living) was surrounded by thousands of monkeys cherishing hopes, has met his destined end. This hero discharged his royal duties in consonance with the sanctions of morality and was gifted with various kingly accomplishments such as conciliation, clarity and forgiveness. He has attained to the land of kings and it becomes you not to mourn for him. O blameless damsel, all these foremost of monkeys, this your son Angada, this kingdom of the monkey chief, do belong to you. Do you soon despatch, O passionate lady, these two (Angada and Sugrīva) exercised with grief as they are (for the performance of Vali's funeral rites). And abiding by your commandments let Angada govern the earth. Let Angada perform all those ceremonies, which should be gone through by sons according to the Šāstras and which are for the well-being of the king; this is the time for the performance of those funeral rites. Performing the funeral ceremonies of the lord of monkeys do you install Angada. And beholding your son thus established on the throne you shall be able to pacify your grief? Hearing those words of Hanumān, Tārā, racked with grief consequent upon the loss of her lord, bespake him who was standing there: I would rather die with this hero who has been slain than have hundred sons like Angada. I cannot myself govern this kingdom nor can I confer it upon Angada. Such duty-devolves upon his (Angada's) uncle Sugrīva now. O Hanumān, do you not consider that I shall confer this kingdom upon Angada-0 best of monkeys, father is son's friend (in this respect) not mother. There is no other resource for me tending to my welfare both in this world and the next than taking refuge to this lord of monkeys. It is becoming for me to serve this bed which has been resorted to by the hero, slain (and lying before me.) monkeys, father is son's friend (in this respect) not mother. There is no other resource for me tending to my welfare both in this world and the next than taking refuge to this lord of monkeys. It is becoming for me to serve this bed which has been resorted to by the hero, slain (and lying before me.)