As Khara was advancing before Rāma, that leader of the army named Triſirā, approaching him, said. Do you employ me, who am possessed of prowess, and yourself desist from this rashness. Behold the mighty-armed Rāma brought down in battle. I swear (to you) truly; I touch this weapon, (to say) that I will stay Rāma, who deserves to be slain by all the Rākşasas. Either I shall prove his death in battle, or he shall prove mine. Restraining your martial ardour, do you for a while become a witness. Either, joyed in consequence of Rāma being slain, you shall repair to Janasthāna; or I being slain you shall enter the field (against him). Thus satisfied by Trisirā, from his desire to meet with death, the latter, on being permitted with Go, proceeded towards Rāma. And like a hill with three sumınits, Trisirā rushed towards Rāma on an effulgent car yoked with steeds. And as a mighty cloud pours down shower, (Trisirā) discharging vollies of shafts, uttered a roar resembling the sound of a wet kettledrum. And seeing that the Rākşasa Trisirã was advancing, Raghava resisted (his attack) by discharging sharpened shafts. And that encounter of those exceedingly powerful ones, Rāma and Triſiră was fierce, like to that between a lion and an elephant. Then struck on the forehead by a brace of shafts shot by Trisirā, the wrathful Rāma enraged, and inflamed with anger, said. Ah! such is the strength of the heroic Rākşasas! I have been wounded in the forehead with shafts resembling flowers. Do you also take the arrows shot from my bow. Saying this, (Rāma) enraged, and influenced by wrath, wounded Trisiră in the breast with fourteen arrows. And that energetic one by means of four shafts having their joints bent, brought down his four steeds. And by means of eight arrows (Rāma) laid low the charioteer from the front of the car. And Rāma with a shaft severed his upraised standard. Then as that ranger of the night was descending from his broken car, Rāma pierced his breast with arrows, and thereat he was stupified. Thereupon, that one of immeasurable prowess, out of anger by means of three shafts possessed of celerity, brought down Trisira's three heads. And that ranger of the night present in the field, afflicted by the shafts of Rāma, after his heads had fallen first, fell, vomiting smoking gore. And the Räksasas remaining after the rest had been slain, belonging to Khara's original forces losing heart, began to flee like deer terrified at a hunter. And seeing them fly, Khara waxing wroth, swiftly making them desist, darted towards Ráma, like Rāhu darting towards the Moon.