Having in the forest slain the Rākṣasa Virādha possessed of tremendous strength, Rāma endued with prowess, embracing and cheering Sītā, spoke to his brother Lakşınaņa of flaming energy, saying, This dense forest is hard to live in; nor are reacquainted with the was of the wood. Therefore will we speedily repair to the ascetic Sarabhanga. Thereupon Rāghava set out for the hermitage of Sarabhanga. And Rāma beheld a mighty wonder near that one of celestial virtue, who had purified his soul through asceticism. He saw the lord of the celestials, possessed of a resplendent person, resembling in effulgence the sun or Vaisvanara-mounted on a superb car (saw) him that is followed by all the celestials, stationed in the sky, not touching the earth, adorned in luminous ornaments-the god dressed in a clean appear! Worshipped by many a high-should personage dressed in the same way. And from a distance, (Rāma) saw the car stationed in the sky yoked with green steeds-resembling the infant sun; And he saw the spotless umbrella possessing the beauty of a mass of white clouds, resembling the lunar disc, and graced with variegated wreaths. And his (Indira's) head was being fanned by two chowris, costly and furnished with golden handles, held by two magnificent damsels; and innumerable Gandharvas and Siddhas and prime sages were hymning the celestial stationed in the welkin. And seeing Sarabhanga engaged in converse with Satakratu, Rāma said to Laksmana (the following words). And pointing out the car, Rāma showed the wonder to his brother. Behold, O Laksmana, yonder car stationed in the sky, splendid, furnished with exceeding grace, wonderful, and seeming as if the sun had fallen from the heavens. The steeds standing in the sky are for certain those of which we had formerly heard as beionging to Sakra of many sacrifices. And, you foremost of men, these youths envisioning (the celestial) by hundreds, wearing earrings, and bearing swords in their hands, are broad of chest, have arms resembling bludgeons in size, and are clad in crimson vesture, like to tigers incapable of being approached. Over the breasts of all appear chains of blazing sheen; and, O son of Sumitrā, their beauty appears that of five and twenty. And even this is the ever-enduring age of the celestials, as these foremost of men of sweet looks appear. O Laksmana, stay here awhile with Vaidehi, so long as I do not gather who it is that is in the effulgent car. Saying to Sumitrās son, Stay here, Kākutstha bent his steps towards Sarabhaiga's asylum. And seeing Rāma approach, Saci's lord, taking Sarabhanga's permission, addressed the celestials. Rāma is coming hither. Do you set out for another place, ere he yet addresses me. He is not fit to behold me (now.) When he shall have vanquished (his foe in fight) and won success, shall I readily show myself to him. He shall have to achieve an act incapable of being achieved by others. Then rendering homage to that anchorite and conversing with him, the wielder of the thunderbolt-subduer of enemies-repaired to heaven in a car yoked with steeds. When the thousand-eyed one had gone away, Rāghava accompanied by his companions appeared before Sarabhanga in the (Agni-hotra) chamber. Taking his feet, Rāma, Sītā and Lakşmaņa sat down with the permission of the ascetic, who received them and set apart quarters for them. Then Rāghava questioned (the sage) concerning the visit of Sakra; and Sarabhanga related everything to Rāghava. O Rāma, this bestower of boons wishes to take me to the regions of Brahmā. I have conquered them, incapable of being attained by persons that have not schooled themselves, by virtue of fierce austerities. O chief of men, knowing that you were near, I became anxious to go to the minor celestial regions and the supreme heaven (of Brahmā), after I had seen you, righteous and high-souled, who are my dear guest now. O foremost of men, having had a meeting with you, a high-souled prince of righteous nature, I have for aye attained the excellent regions of Brahmã and Nākaprştha. Do you receive them as pertaining to me. Thus addressed by the sage, Sarabhanga, that best of men, Rāghava, versed in every branch of learning, said. O mighty anchorite, I shall acquire all those regions myself. I now wish that you may direct me as to my abode in this forest. Thus accosted by Rāghava resembling Sakra in strength, the eminently wise Sarabhanga again said, O Rāma, here in this forest lives a pious and self-restrained ascetic of mighty energy, named Sutiksna. He will bring about your good. O Rāma, follow this Mandākini flowing among flowers, which (here runs in an opposite direction to her usual course; and then will you reach there. This is your course, you best of men. Do you now, my child, for a space look at me; while I leave of my limbs, even as a serpent renounces its slough. Then preparing a .fire and with Mantras a offering obiations into it, the exceedingly energetic Sarabhanga entered into the fire. The fire consumed the down, hair, old skin, bones, flesh and blood of that high-souled one. (Anon) Śarabharga became youth resembling fire; and rising from the flame, he appeared splendid. And proceeding past the regions of highsouled sages sacrificing with fire, as well as of the celestials, he ascended those of Brahmā. That one of pious acts done on earth-that best of the twice-born the grandfather, in company with his followers. And the grand-father also, beholding that Brahmana, rejoiced greatly, and said-Hail! race-saw