Then repairing to Pañcavațī filled with various animals and beasts of prey, Rāma remarked to his brother Laksmana of flaming energy, (Now) we have come to the place to which we had been directed by the ascetic This, O amiable one, is Pañcavați furnished with blossoming woods. Do you cast your eyes around this forest, and (ascertain) what spot shall suit our asylum. Do you find out such a place in the vicinity of a tank where yourself Sītā and I may dwell happily, which is graced with the garniture of woods and delightful with liquid lapses, and whose neighbourhood yields fuel, flowers, Kuća and water. Thus addressed by Rāma. Lakşmaņa with joined hands, said to Kākutstha in the presence of Sītā, O Kákutstha, even if I were to stay with you for an hundred years, I shall remain your servant. Thyself selecting some beauteous spot do you tell me-'Construct (an asylum)'. Well pleased with the words of Lakşınana, that highly effulgent one, after dure reflection, selected a site having every recommendation. Going to that romantic spot for rearing an asylum, Rama, taking the hand of Sumitra's son in his, said to him. This place is level, graceful and surrounded with blossoming trees. Do you duly construct an asylum at this spot. Hard by is seen a beautiful pool, embellished with lotuses, resembling the sun, and breathing balmy perfume. And, as told by that pure-hearted ascetic, Agastya, this is the graceful Godåvarī, bordered by flowering trees; swarming with swans and Kārandavas, delighted with Cakravākas, thronged with herds of deer,* not far, yet not so very near. And resounding with the cries of peacocks; charming; elevated; containing full many a cave; do you, O amiable one, behold these hills, covered with trees in full flower; and they are shining like elephants painted with diverse colours by persons with the utmost care; adorned with Salas, palmyras, Tamālas, dates, Panasas, Nīvāras, Tinišas, and Punnāgas. And covered with mangoes, Asokas, Tilakas, Ketakas, and Campakas, and trees entwined by flowers, herbs and plants; and containing Syandanas, sandals, Nīpas, Paņāsas, Lakucas, Dhavas, Ašvakarņas, Khadiras, Samls, Kinsukas and Patalas. This spot is sacred-this spot is charmingthis spot abounds in beasts and birds. Here will I dwell, O Sumitra's son, in company with this birds. Thus addressed by Rāma, the exceedingly powerful Lakşmaņa, slayer of hostile heroes, in a short time raised as asylum for his brother. And the exceedingly stout Lakşmaņa created there for Rāghava a spacious hut thatched with leaves made of clay, furnished with pillars, constructed with long bomboos, graceful-spread with Samī boughs; tightly fastened with strong cords; covered with Kusa reeds, and leaves; with its floor well levelled; and charming; beautiful to look at, and exceedingly excellent. And then going to the river Godāvarī, the lovely Lakşmana, performing his bath, and securing lotuses and fruits, came back (to the asylum). Then offering flowers, and duly performing rites for the peace (of the habitation), Lakşmaņa showed the asylum which he had made to Rāma. Seeing the beautiful asylum along with Sitā, Rāghava experienced high raptures. And joyfully embracing Lakṣmaṇa with his arms, Rāma said these exceedingly calm and solemn words. Pleased am I with you. You have done a great deed, my brother; for which I have granted you my embrace by way of reward. While you, his son skilled in reading thought, grateful, and cognizant of righteousness are alive, O Laksmana, my father is not dead. Having said this to Lakşmana, Rāghava— the enhancer of auspiciousness experiencing felicity, began to dwell happily in that region filled with fruits. And ministered to by Sītā and Lakşmaņa that righteous one lived there, like the immortals in heaven.