Rāma bewailing thus like one helpless being stricken with grief, overwhelmed with sorrow and losing control over himself, Lakşmaņa touched his feet and consoling him instantly began. By constant asceticism and manifold pious observances king Dasaratha obtained you like to the celestials obtaining ambrosia. As I have heard from Bharata, king Dasaratha died for your separation, attached as he was to you for your accomplishments. O Kākutstha, if do you not bear patiently this impending peril what little-minded person else shall bear it? Compose yourself, O you best of men. Peril overtake everybody like to fire but vanish in no time. This is the nature of men. Yayati, the son of king Nahusa, though attained to the state of celestials, was however thrown down for an iniquitous deed. The hundred sons, that had been born to our ancestral priest Vasiştha, were all killed in one day. O lord of Kosala, even Vasumati, the mother of the world, adored of all beings, meet with misery consequent upon earth-quake. Even the mighty Sun and Moon witness eclipse who are the eyes of the world and the very images of virtue and in whom the whole world is stationed. O you best of men, what of insignificant beings cased in this frail body, even the mighty creatures and celestials are subject to the influence of destiny. I have heard, O best of men, even the celestials headed by Indra are subject to happiness or misery. So it dose not behove you to bewail thus. O descendant of Raghu, it become you not to lament like an ordinary person even if Janakí is dead or has been carried away. O Rāma, persons, highly experienced and ascertaining right or wrong without being moved, do not lament even in the face of mighty perils. O you best of men, do you, after due consideration, ascertain what is proper or improper; persons of your vast wisdom are cognizant of the right or wrong by dint of their understanding. Without proper exercise, actions, of unknown merit and uncertain issue do not bear fruits. O hero, many a time and oft ere this, you had given me the self-same counsel. Who is capable of counselling you who are the very preceptor of the gods? O you of great intellect, even the celestials cannot measure your mental acumen. Greatly benumbed is your wisdom with the slumber of grief, and I am to rouse it. O you the best of lkşvākus, do you engage in the destruction of your foes considering well your celestial and human prowess. O you best of men, what necessity have you to destroy the whole world? Do you rescue Sītā after finding out your vicious enemy.