Thus addressed by the aggrieved Rāma, the monkey, Sugriva, his accents obstructed by vapour and his eyes filled with tears, said with joined hands, I do not know the hidden abode of that exceedingly wicked Raksasa,-nor do l know his heroism and prowess, or the lineage of that one sprung from a vicious race. O vanquisher of foes, leave off sorrowing. I promise to you truly, I will exert so that you mayst obtain Maithilī. Slaying Rāvaņa with his hosts, and putting forth my manliness capable of pleasing others, I will speedily act so that you mayst be pleased. Do not be overwhelmed with grief: summon the fortitude that is in you. Such lightness of sense does not become persons like you. I also have experienced mighty disaster arising out of separation from my wife; but I do not weep in this wise,-nor do I forsake my fortitude. A despicable monkey as I am, I do not grieve for her,-and what again shall I say of one that is magnanimous, endued with meekness and firmness, and great? It behoveth you to restrain your falling tears by patience. It behoveth you not to resign that patience which is the dignity of persons possessed of the quality of goodness. Persons endued with firmness of understanding by help of their intellect, do not in calamity consequent on separation from dear ones, or on the occasion of loss of wealth, or of fear arising from thieves, wild beasts, etc., or of loss of life itself, lose their self-possession. He that is senseless as well as he that suffers himself to be overwhelmed with grief, losing all control over self, drown themselves in sorrow like a boat bearing a heavy load in water. I soothe you from the love I bear towards you. Do you have recourse to manliness. It does not behove you to let grief overcome you. Those that indulge in sorrow, know no happiness; and their virtue* goeth out of them. Therefore it behoveth you not to grieve. In the sense of energy. The life even of him that is mastered by sorrow is in jeopardy. Therefore, you foremost of monarchs, leave off that grief. Do you entirely have recourse to fortitude. In the spirit of a friend I tell what is for your good: I do not instruct you. Honour the amity I bear towards you. It behoveth you not to weep. Thus sweetly consoled by Sugrīva, Rāghava with the end of his cloth wiped his face tarnished with tears. And after that lord, Kakutstha, had recovered his natural state through the words of Sugrīva he embraced Sugrīva and addressed him, saying, O Sugriva, that which, pleasing and profitable, proper and fit, ought to be done by a friend, has been done by you. Solicited by you, I have, O friend, regained my natural tone of mind. Such a friend is rare, specially at such a time. But you should strive to trace Maithili as well as bring about the destruction of that fierce Räks asa, the impious Rāvana. Do you also without reserve say what I shall have to do for you. Like corn sown in a fertile field in the rainy season, every concern of thine shall attain success. O best of monkeys, do you verily consider as true the words that I have uttered through affection. Falsehoods have I never spoken before, nor will I ever say one (in future). This I promise to you. I swear by truth itself. Hearing Rāghava's words, and in special his promise, Sugrīva felt exceedingly delighted along with this monkey ministers. Thus fast bound in friendship, the man and the monkey conversed with each other about (topics) which each thought fit, connected with their joys and griefs. Hearing the words of that illustrious monarch of kings, that hero-greatest of monkeys-considered and felt in his heart as if his work had already been accomplished.