Beholding both the brothers, Rāma and Laks maņa, clasping each other with their arms, the headless demon spoke: O two best of Ksatryas, are you waiting here beholding me hungry? O you having lost your sense, you have been chosen by Destiny as my food. Hearing those words Laksmana, sore, distressed and determined to display his valour, addressed Rāma with words worthy of being said on that occasion. This vile Rākṣasa shall seize both of us; let us sunder soon its two huge arms with our daggers. This grim-visaged Raksasas, of huge proportions, gifted only with the strength of arms, defeating all other persons, has addressed itself at last to destroy us. It is odious for the Kșatriyas to make away with those who cannot defend themselves like to animals brought for sacrifice.* The purport is : Lakṣmaṇa wanted to chop off the arms of Kabandha and not to put an end to its life as it was not capable of fighting, being a headless demon. And it is not proper for the Ks atryas to destroy those who cannot fight. Hearing their conversation, the Raksasa, inflamed with rage, widening its terrible mouth, prepared to devour them up. This has a special significance here-meaning to get hold of them by stretching forth its arms. Thereat Rāma and Lakşmana, cognizant of time and place, pleased+, sundered its arms off its shoulders with their daggers. They were pleased because they cut off its arms with ease like to the trunks of a plantain tree. Rāma, stationed on the right side cut off in no time its right arm with his dagger and the heroic Laksmana, the left one. It may mean also expert. Having got its arms dissevered, the terriblevoiced, Kabandha, of huge arms, roaring like to the muttering of clouds and resounding the heaven, earth and all the quarters, fell flat on the ground. Beholding both its arms cut off, the demon, with its person bathed in blood, asked them poorly Who are you? Being thus accosted by Kabandha, the mighty Lakşmana, gifted with auspicious marks, spoke to it, about Kākutstha. He is a descendant of the Ikşvākus known on earth by the name of Rāma, and know me as his younger brother, by name-Laksmana. Being thwarted by mother (Kaikeyi) in his accession of kingdom, he, renouncing all, has fled as an exile to woods, and has, along with me and his spouse, been ranging this forest. While living in the dense forest the wife of Răma, effulgent like to the celestials has been ravished by a Raksasa. Searching her, have we come here. Who are you? And what for are you ranging this forest like to a headless demon, having your thighs broken and your flaming face placed on your breast? Being thus addressed by Lakṣmaṇa with these goodly words, Kabandha, pleased, recollecting the words of Indra, bespoke him, O two best of men, you are welcome! By my good luck it is that I do behold you. By my good fortune you have dissevered my shoulders today. Do you hear; I shall relate truly to you how have I, by my haughtiness, come by this unsightly shape.