Having commissioned those eight terrible and mighty Rākşasas, Rāvana, in consequence of perversion of sense, considered himself as crowned with success. And brooding over Vaidehi, he, sore pierced by the shafts of Kāma, hastily entered his charming mansion, with the intention of secing Sitā. And entering that apartment, Rāvana-lord of Rākşasas-saw the distressed Sītā in the midst of the Raksasas, with a tearful countenance, oppressed with a load of grief, like to a bark sinking in the ocean through the violence of the winds; like to a doe separated from the herd of deer, and surrounded by dogs. Coming to Sītā disconsolate in consequence of stress of sorrow, remaining with her head bent down, that ranger of the night, the lord of the Rākşasas, forcibly showed to her that mansion resembling the mansion of the celestials, thick with palaces and lordly piles, inhabited by thousands of females; containing birds of various kinds; furnished with various gems; with beautiful pillars of ivory gold and crystal and silver, studded with diamonds and lapises. Rāvana in company with Şītā ascended the beautiful golden stairs, resounding with the sounds of kettle-drums and embellished with ornaments of burnished gold. And those loftily edifices had excellent windows made of vory and silver, and covered with golden nets. The ground all over was decorated with ambrosia and gems. The Ten-headed one in his own mansion showed to Maithilī large tanks and pools covered with various kinds of flowers. (All this) Rāvaņa showed to Sítā overmastered by sorrow. And after having showed to Vaidehi the whole of that good lie of mansions, that wicked one, with the intention of tempting Sītā, spoke to her. O Sītā, leaving out old men and boys, I am the lord of thirty two crore of night-rangers of terrible deeds. And a thousand come forward whenever required for any service. If such is my sovereignty, all this is established in you, O large-eyed lady, as well as my life. You are dearer to me than life. O Sītā, be you the mistress of those numerous excellent women who are my wives. Dear, be you my wife. This is for your good. Why should you act otherwise? Do you relish my speech. Do you bend your mind towards me. It behoves you to favour me, who am burning in the heat of desire). This Larkă measuring an hundred Yojanas girt round by the ocean, is incapable of being harassed by the celestials themselves headed by Indra. Neither among the celestials nor Yakşãs nor Gandharvas nor Serpents, find I any one that can match me in prowess. What will you do with Rāma a human being of short life, poor, of small prowess, practising mendicancy? O Sītā, bend your mind to me. I am a fit husband for you. O timed one, youth is uncertain. Sport with me here. And, O you of a handsome countenance, do not wish for the sight of Rāghava. O Sītā, what power has he to come hither even in thought? None can fetter the exceedingly fleet wind in the sky, or hold the bright flame of a burning fire. O beauteous one, in these three worlds I find no one that can by his might carry you away, who are protected by my arms. Do you govern at Lankā this extensive kingdom. The like of me and celestials and all that are mobile and immobile shall be your servants. Laving your limbs with water, do you gratify me. The evil that you had done, has been expiated by your life in the forest: now do you reap the fruit of your good deeds. Here are garlands furnished with divine fragrance, and, O Maithili, superb ornaments. Enjoy you all those along with me. O you of shapely hips, the car called Pușpaka, resembling the sun, which (formerly) belonged to my brother Vaiśravaņa, was through my prowess won by me in fight. And vast and beautiful is that car furnished with the speed of the mind. Do you, O Sītā, at your pleasure sport on it along with me. Your face stainless and lovely to look at, resembling the lotus, dose not, O you of a comely countenance, O magnificent damsel, appear beautiful in consequence of your being exercised with grief. When Rāvana had spoken thus, that best of females Sītā muffling up her moon-like countenance with the ends of her cloth, began to shed gentle tears. Thereat the heroic ranger of the night, Ravana, said to Sita, distressed, sunk in thought, and deprived of her splendour through anxiety, O Vaidehi, banish bashfulness, which stands in the way of one's duty. The yearning I feel after you is in consonance with what the sages prescribe. These tender feet of yours I press upon my heads. Do you speedily show your favour to me. I am your slave (ever) obedient to you. Let not these words of mine spoken by me under the withering influence of love prove fruitless. Rāvana has never bowed his head to any female. Having said this, the Ten-headed one, come under the subjection of the Destroyer, looked upon Maithili, Janaka's daughter (as his own) saying, She is mine.