While residing in the female apartment, Vāli heard the uproar of that high-souled Sugriva-his wrathful brother. And hearing that mighty roar, shaking the whole world of creation, his pride was in no time, crushed and he attained to an excess of ire. Thereupon, Vāli, having a golden hue, greatly exercised with wrath, instantly lost the effulgence of his person like to the sun possessed by Rāhu. And looking terrible by his teeth and having eyes resembling burning fire in consequence of ire he appeared like to a pond, having the lotuses thereof uprooted with their stalks and fibres. And hearing that unbearable sound, the 'monkey, issued out speedily, as if riving the earth with his foot marks. Embracing him warmly and showing her affection, Tara, afraid and mortified, addressed him with the following words, presaging his future welfare. Do you renounce, O hero, this your ire, coming like the course of a river, like to one, leaving aside the garland, which he used in the night, after rising from bed. O monkey chief, do you engage with him in conflict, tomorrow. O hero, your enemy is very insignificant and hence there will be no deterioration on your part. Your hastily issuing out does not please me; do you hear, why I do prevent you. Formerly this Sugrīva invited you angrily to battle and being defeated and wounded by you fled away. That one, who had been defeated and harassed by you formerly, is now calling you. Indeed it has excited my fear. His pride, his energy, and his terrible uproar do indicate that there is nothing insignificant (at the bottom). I do not think Sugrīva has come here without any to assist him. Forsooth he has taken shelter of some body, and securing which he has been setting up such a terrible uproar. That monkey is clever by nature and gifted with intellect. And Sugrīva shall not desire friendship with any one without having a test of his prowess. Hearken, O hero, I shall relate to you today, the auspicious words, I heard ere this, from the prince Angada. He has related to me all about Sugrīva, what he heard from his emmissaries while journeying in the forest. The two heroic sons of the king of Ayodhyá— Rāma and Lakşmaņa, incapable of being defeated in a battle and born in the race of Iksawkus, have repaired to woods. To accomplish Sugrīva's welfare, those two heroes, hard to repress, have come here. He is the main stay of your brother in the battle. Rāma has sprung up like to the fire of dissolution and is the repressor of enemy's prowess. He is the refuge of the saints and the prime shelter of the afflicted. He is the protector of those grinded by their enemies and is the only possessor of fame. He is gifted with knowledge and intellect and ever abideth by his sire's commandments, Like to Himālaya, the king of mountains, containing diverse metals, he is the mine of various accomplishments. It does not behove you therefore to enter into conflict with that high-souled Răma, incomparable in prowess and hard to conquer in battle. Hearken, O hero, I desire to speak something more-I do not wish to excite your wrath. Do you instantly confer upon Sugrīva, the dignity of heir apparent (to your throne). O hero, O king, do not quarrel with your younger brother. I do consider it your welfare to contract friendship with Rāma and regain Sugrīva's affections, renouncing all your inimical feelings. This your younger brother, even when remaining at a distance, should always be maintained by you. Whether by you, or at a distance, he is always your best friend—I do not find his equal on earth. By conferring on him gifts and honours do you receive him back. And do you renounce your enmity and let him sit by you. Methinks, that large-necked Sugrīva is your best friend-there is no other resource for you than to secure your brother's friendship. If you does wish to go by my desire, if you does regard me as your well-wisher, do you perform what I do request you for your welfare. Be pleased and hear my beneficial words. It does not behove you to yield to the influence of ire your conflict with that son of the king of Kosala, gifted with the prowess of Sakra, will not conduce to your welfare. Thereupon Tārā spoke to Väli these suitable and well-meaning words—but they did not satisfy him, possessed by Kāla, as he was, on the eve of his destruction.