Once on a time I was engaged in travelling all over the earth. I had in my body, resembling a huge mountain, the strength of a thousand Nagas. I had parigha in my hands, crown on my head and golden ear-rings on my ears and my body was of a dark blue colour like that of a cloud. Causing fright to the people I used to wander through the forest of Dandaka and live upon the flesh of the Rsis. The pious ascetic Viśvāmitra being afraid of me went in person to the king Dasaratha and said, When I shall remain absorbed in meditation on the occasion of Parva, let Rāma protect me O king, Truly am I afraid of this Mārīca. Being thus addressed by the ascetic the virtuous-souled king Dasaratha replied. Rāghava is still under twelve years of age and had not been well disciplined in military arts. But I have soldiers enough, and if permitted by you, O you best of ascetics, I shall with my fourfold forces kill your enemies, the rangers of the night. Being thus addressed that ascetic spoke to the .monarch, saying. True it is that you were the protector of the celestials in the War and your exploits are well known to the world, but no one shall be able to withstand the Rākṣasas but Rāma. The highly energetic Rāma, though a boy is sufficiently qualified to defeat the enemies; therefore, O Destroyer of foes, let your soldiery remain here and let me proceed along with Rāma. May God bless you. Saying this the ascetic Viśvāmitra being pleased went to his asylum along with Rāma. After-words having been initiated for the sacrifice in the forest of Dandaka Rāma having unstrung his mighty bow came to the ascetic to protect the sacrifice. He had a gold chain round his neck, a crest on his head and a bow in his hands; he had a pair of beautiful eyes, and only one piece of cloth; his countenance was of green hue and exquisite beauty and even then moustaches or other signs of manhood did not appear on his face. Beautifying the entire forest of Dandaka with his own splendour Rāma appeared like the newly risen moon. Thereupon I resembling a cloud and having golden ear locks entered the asylum being proud of my power on account of the boons offered to me by Brahma. Seeing me enter he took up his dart and attached string to his bow with proper care. Being under the influence of sheer foolishness I passed by him as a child and darted towards the sacrificial alter of Viśvāmitra. Thereupon he wounded me with a sharpened sword capable of doing away with the enemies and threw me away into the ocean situated at a distance of hundred Yojanas. He had no mind of killing me then and for this he saved my life. I was thrown however into the deep ocean being hindered by the velocity of his arrows and having lost my consciousness. Regaining my sense after a long while I returned to the city of Lankā. Myself saved thus, my followers however all killed by Rāma of unwearied activity though a mere child and a novice in the are of warfare. It is for this that I do prevent you; you shall be overwhelmed with calamities and meet with destruction if do you engage yourself in battle with him. In vain shall you bring about the affliction of the mirthful and sportive Rākşasas ever witnessing social festivities. And in vain shall you for Sītā compass the destruction of the city of Lankā, adorned with diverse jewels and filled with golden edifices. Pious men living with a vicious man, 'meet with destruction for his sins, though they themselves do not commit any misdeed, like to fish (devoured by Garuda) living in a lake where snakes dwell. Thus shall you witness that for your own folly the rangers of the night, adorned with celestial ornaments and having their body pasted with sandal, have been killed and brought down to the earth. And they deprived of shelter have fled away to different directions, some with their wives and some alone, having their wives carried away (by the enemies). You shall further observe that all edifices of Lankā being enveloped with arrows and flaming fire have been burnt down to ashes. There is no greater sin on earth than carrying away another's wife. There are thousand ladies in your seraglio O king. Being attached to your wives do you preserve the race of the Rākşasas, your own line, your wished for life, kingdom, wealth and dignity. Do not bring about Rāma's mischief if do you wish to live happily with your wives and friends. I am your friend and do ask you again and again to desist (from your evil intention); if do you encroach upon Sītā surely shall you along with your kinsmen go to the abode of Yama being enfeebled by the arrows of Rāma. I am your friend and do ask you again and again to desist (from your evil intention); if do you encroach upon Sītā surely shall you along with your kinsmen go to the abode of Yama being enfeebled by the arrows of Rāma.