Beholding that deer with its sides painted with gold and silver, while collecting flowers, Sītā, having blameless limbs and beautiful hips and having the colour of her body like that of pure gold became immensely pleased and called aloud her husband and Lakşmaņa with scimitars in their hands. Do you come soon, do you come soon, O son of the worshipful Sire, along with your younger brother Having called (her husband) again and again in this strain she continued beholding that deer. Being thus called by the daughter of the king of Videha those two best of men Rāma and Laks maņa, casting their looks around beheld that deer. Seeing him Lakşmana, struck with fear, said Me-thinks, this deer is the Raksasa Marica. This vicious Mārīca, O Rāma, assuming the shape of a deer oftentimes kills at pleasure the kings who come here a-hunting. He is cognizant of illusions, by virtue of which he has assumed this shape, O best of men; its countenance is perfectly fine like the abode of Gandharvas and resplendent like the Sun; there is no such jewelled deer on earth. O Rāghava, O Lord of earth, there is no doubt that this is nothing but illusion. When Lakşınaņa spoke thus Sītā with a pure smile being under the influence of enchantment contradicted him, and being pleased said O son of the worshipful Sire, this deer has attracted my mind, get it for me, pray, O you of mighty arms: it shall be an object of sport for us. Many a beautiful deer range at large in the vicinity of our hermitage such as Camaras, Srmaras, Rksas, Prsatas, Vanaras and Kinnaras. They are all very beautiful and of mighty strength; but O Prince, I have never seen before the like of this deer. In energy, strength and beauty it stands above all deer. Its cntire body is diversified with various colours, nay, it is a jewel itself. It moves before me beautifying the forest with its resplendence, like to Moon himself. Ah! what beauty, what beautiful a lustre, how musical a voice, this wonderful deer of variegated countenance, has indeed captivated my heart! If can you get by this deer alive, O what wonder, what surprise! When shall we regain our kingdom after the expire of the term of our banishment, this deer shall beautify the interior of our palace. O Lord, truly shall this celestial deer create surprise in Bharata, yourself, me and my mothers-in-law. O best of men, if can you not get hold of it alive its skin shall also look very beautiful (to us). Spreading on Kuća the skin of this golden deer when killed do I wish to invoke the Almighty. It looks (no doubt) unseemly and terrible and smacks of wilfulness, on the part of a wife to command her husband in this way, but I am sunk in surprise seeing the countenance of the deer. Rāma's heart was struck with surprise beholding that wonderful deer having its down resembling gold, horns resembling exquisitely finc diamonds, colour like that of the newly risen Sun, and resplendence like that of the orbit of the planets. Being enchanted by its beauty and spurred on by Sītā's words, Raghava pleased, spoke to his younger brother. Behold, O Laksmana, it has immensely excited Vaidehi's desire. On account of its exquisite beauty it shall loose its life to-day. It has its equal no where on the earth-neither in the celestial garden nor in the Caitraratha forest. The hairs of its body being arranged in regular and contrary courses and being painted with golden drops do indeed look very beautiful. Do you see, while expanding its inouth, its tongue comes out resembling flaming fire like to a thunder-bolt reaving the mass of clouds. Its face is like a glass made of a best blue sapphire, its belly resembling a conch and pearl, and it is very difficult to ascertain its shapes. Beholding it who is there (on earth) whose heart is not enamoured? Its beauty resembles the rays of gold and is variegated with diverse hues of jewels. Whose heart is not enveloped with surprise beholding such a celestial beauty, O Laksmana? Princes, with bows in their hands, while-a hunting in a deep forest destroy deer either for flesh or for sport. Moreover while engaged in sporting they collect many a jewel and various metals as gold and silver, in the woods. There is not the least doubt that these wild riches filling up their coffers are comparatively far better (than the wealth acquired by other sources) like to the objects of enjoyment, enjoyed at their fancy by the people inhabiting the celestial region. The object which persons desirous of acquiring wealth follow without any discretion in their actions, is the true definition of wealth given by the political economists. Vaidehi of slender waist desire to sit with me on the exquisitely fine golden skin of this gem of a deer, me-seems no deer skin is so comfortable to touch as this neither the skin of Kādali, Priyaki, Praveni nor of Caviki. Truly handsome in this deer and the one that range in the welkin, indeed these two deer only are celestial—the one that range in the sky* (Mrgasirā) and this that range on earth. This refers to Mrgaşiră, the fifth lunar constellation which resembles a deer. And if it be a Raksasa's illusion as you say, O Laksmana, then it must be killed by me. This cruel vicious-souled Mārica made away with many eminent ascetics, while travelling in the forest; and this Räkşasa assuming the shape of an illusive deer destroyed many kings-mighty archers while a-hunting in this forest; it is for this that this deer must be killed. Formerly this Vātăpi entering into the womb of twice-born ones used to come out reaving them like to the embryo of a mule. The name of an Asur devoured by Agastya. Once on a time this Vātāpi approached the eminent saint Agastya and was devoured by him. After the Šrāddha ceremony had been over, finding that Bātāpi desirous of assuming the shape of a Rākṣasa the great saint Agastya said smiling. Being blinded with your prowess O Vātāpi, you have destroyed many eminent twice-born ones on this earth and for this that I do digest you. Truly that Raksasa, O, Laksmana who wish to surpass one like me who has controlled his senses and is ever engaged in pious offices shall meet with his end like to this Vātāpi. Therefore this Mārīca approaching me shall be killed by me like to Vātāpi being devoured by Agastya. Do you therefore vigilantly protect Vaidehi with mail and armours on. It is our prime duty, O descendant of Raghu, to protect Jānaki. I shall either kill this deer or shall get hold of it. Look, O Laksmana, Vaidehi is extremely anxious to get the skin of this deer I shall therefore proceed at once, O son of Sumitrā, to catch this deer. The skin of this deer is the best of its kind; for certain shall it loose its life today. As long as I do not kill this deer, O Lakşmaņa, do you with Sītā remain with vigilance in this asylum. I shall in no time come back with its skin after killing in with one arrow. Do you stay here, O Lakşmaņa, with Jānakī in constant fear and vigilance, along with the mighty Jațāyu, intelligent and ever engaged in pious offices.