Carried away (by Ravana), Vaidehi, not finding any defender, five principal monkeys stationed on the top of a hill. Thereat, that lady of expansive eyes and surpassing charms, in the hope that they might convey the intelligence to Rāma, flung off in their midst her gold-gleaming silken sheet, and elegant ornaments. But the Ten headed one owing to hurry did not observe the throwing of the cloth along with the ornaments. Those foremost of monkeys having tawny eyes observes with winkless eyes the large-eyed Sītā as she was giving way to grief. The lord of Rākşasas, passing beyond Pampā, directed his course towards the city of Lankā, taking Mithilā's daughter along with him, indulging lamentations. Experiencing the height of delight, Rāvana ravished her, taking her on his lap like a sharp-toothed serpent of virulent poison. And speedily, like an arrow shot from a bow, he, coursing the welkin, left behind woods and streams and mountains and pieces of water. Coming to the abode of Varuņa, that refuge of rivers, the exhaustless ocean—the home of whales and alligators, he crossed over it. In consequence of the carrying away of Vaidehi, Varuna's abode, from grief, had all its waves stilled and its fishes and mighty snakes inert. And the Cāranas uttered in the heavens these words, O Ten-headed one, this is your end. Thus did the Siddhas then say. And taking Sītā on his lap, representing his own Death, who endeavoured (to liberate herself). Rāvana entered the city of Lankā. And entering the city of Lankā, vast, with all its highways well-arranged, and with people thronging its gates, he entered his own inner apartment. Then Rāvana set Sītā there, having eyes with dark outer corners, exercised with grief and dole; as if Máyā had set his own Asura Illusion (in his own palace). Then the Ten-headed one spoke to some female friends of terrible visages, Let no man or woman behold Sītā without my permission. And I command that, should she ask for pearls, or rubies, or gold, or apparel, or ornaments, the same should be rendered to her. She that, whether knowingly or unknowingly should say anything unpleasant to Vaidehī, would hold her life cheap. Heaving said this to the Rākşasis, the puissant lord of the Rākṣasas, went out of the inner apartment, and thought within himself as to what was to be done (next). And he saw eight flesheating Rākşasas of wondrous prowess. And seeing them, the exceedingly powerful. (Ravana), blinded by the bestowal of the boon, after extolling their strength and heroism, addressed them. Equipped with various weapons, do you speedily take yourself to Janasthāna-that field of carnage-which ere this contained the abode of Khara; and casting off fear at a distance, do you sojourn in vacant Janasthāna with all its Raksasas slain (by Rama). A great many troops endued with exceeding prowess, who had been posted in Janasthāna, have, along with Düşana and Khara, been slain by the shafts of Rāma. Hence unprecedented is my wrath, towering above my patience; and great and fierce also is the hostility I have conceived against Rāma. I wish to avenge myself on my mighty enemy. Sleep find I none without slaying my foe in fight. Slaying that slayer of Khara and Dūşaņa, Rāma, I shall attain delight like to that attained by a pauper on gaining riches. Staying in Janasthāna, you shall gather true information touching Rāma as to what he is about. Repair all you rangers of the night carefully, and strive yourselves always for slaying Rāma. I have been well acquainted with your strength in many a field, and it is for this that I set you in Janasthāna. Hearing these agreeable and weighty words of Ravana, those Raksasas, bowing down to Rāvana, left Lankā, and in a body invisible proceeded in the direction of Janasthāna. Having obtained Mithilā's daughter, Rāvaņa experienced great joy in establishing her (in his own house); and having created high hostility with Rāma, Rāvana through blindness rejoiced greatly.