Repairing with Lakşmaņa to the lake Pampā filled with red and while lotuses and fish Rāma having his senses agitated began to lament. And beholding there that lake, his senses were stirred with delight. Troubled with passion he spoke to Saumitri saying, Behold, O Saumitri, how beautifully appear Pampā of transparent water like to Vaidurya, graced with full-blown red and white lotuses and various trees. Observe again, O son of Sumitra, the picturesque wood-land around the lake, where trees, crowned with large branches resembling the summits of a mountain, appear like so many hills. Mental agony arising from Sītā's ravishment and Bharata's grief, have been grinding me who am already stricken with sorrow. Verily conduce to my felicity the pleasant lake Pampã of cool water, scattered with various flowers, covered with lotuses, highly graceful, girt with variegated' woods abounding in voracious animals and frequented by deer and birds. This green common, chequered with yellow and blue, appeared of enhanced beauty by the various flowers of the trees as if covered with a blanket of diverse hues. The tops of the trees rich with flowery bunches are gnarled with creepers of blossoming tips. Now has appeared, O Saumitri, the fragrant spring of pleasant breezes, when greatly prevail the influence of Cupid and the trees are graced with fruits and flowers. Behold, O Saumitri, the beauty of the flowery woods, showering flowers like to clouds pouring forth rain. Various trees growing on rock surfaces, moved by the wind have been scattering flowers on the earth. Behold, O Saumitri, the wind is sporting at all sides as it were with flowers drops, dropping and hanging on the trees. The black bees, driven off and singing, pursue the wind, moving the many kinds of flowery branches of the trees. While issuing out of the mountainous hollows the wind is singing as it were and making the trees dance with the musical notes of the delighted cuckoos. The wind, which was violently shaking them, making the tops of the trees collide with each other, appear as it were stringing them together. The sandal-cool wind, of pleasant touch, ever removing the exhaustion of toil, is blowing every where carrying with it pure fragrance. Violently shaken by wind the trees in this nectar-smelling forest are sounding as it were with the hum of bees. Hillocks over-topped with picturesque and flowery trees stand beautifully on this mountainous expanse. Trees with flowery tops, tossed by the airy currents and crested with the bees, are as if dancing in accompaniment with melodious strains. Behold, the Karņikāras covered with flowers appear on all sides like to human beings decorated with golden ornaments and wearing yellow cloths. This spring, O Saumitri, sounded by the musical notes of the birds of different spacies has been kindling my grief who am without Sītā. Cupid has been smiting me the more who am stricken with grief, and the cuckoos have been defying me, displaying their mirth, O Laksmana. At the pleasant fountains the delighted Dátyūahas with their warblings have been afflicting me who am possessed by Cupid. Formerly my dear one, while in the asylum, delighted with the music of these birds, used to attain to a greater joy addressing me to hear them. Behold, birds of variegated hues, emitting forth diverse notes have been alighting upon the trees, groves and creepers from various quarters. O Saumitri, birds and bees of melodious notes accompanied by their co-mates and delighted with their mutual companionship are on the banks of this lake. There live happily flocks of delighted vultures. The trees sounded by the lascivious murmurs of Dätyűhas and Purnskokilas have been kindling my amour. The fire of spring having clusters of Asokas as its embers, the hum of bees as its sound, the rendness of the twigs as its flame, has been burning i.e. O Saumitri, of what avail is this life to me, lot beholding Sītā of sweet accents, having eyes with their eye-lashes, and a head of curly hair. O blameless one, this season, when the groves become charming and the border-lands resound with melodious strains of the cuckoos, is the most beloved of my dear one. Methinks, this fire of distress, originating from amorous trouble and enhanced by the influence of spring, shall soon burn me down. My amorous feelings shall attain to an intense height, as I do not behold Sītā before, whereas see the beautiful trees around. Sītä, away from my vision and the spring, drying up perspiration, have been both inciting my amour. That one having the eyes of a fawn and ruthless vernal breeze, O Saumitri, have been oppressing me who am overpowered with anxiety and grief. These peacocks and pea-hens unfurling then wings like to crystal lattices, have been dancing hither and thither. These maddened peacocks encircled by the pea-hens, have been aggravating my amorous desire who am already possessed by the Cupid. Observe, O Laksmana, there dance with her dancing mate on the mountainous expanse, the pea-hen, troubled with amorous sentiments. The peacock unfolding his charming wings is moving after his dear mate mocking me as if were with his cry. Surely the Rākşasa has not brought my dear one in this forest of peacocks and therefore they dance with their mates in this picturesque forest land. It is unbearable for me to live without Sītā in this season of flowers. Behold, O Laksmana, this attachment is to be seen even among the brutes. The pea-hen being influenced by passion is approaching her mate. Sītā of expansive eyes would have thus neared me being influenced by amour had she not been carried away. Behold, O Laksmana, In this season of spring flowers of this forest rich in their load of flowers are of no avail to me. These pleasant flowers of the trees have been uselessly falling on the earth along with the swarms of black bees. The birds exciting my desire have been delightedly warbling in flocks as if welcoming each other. Surely Sītā, under the influence of another person, is lamenting in the same strain, as I do, if spring has appeared there. Even if spring has not appeared there how can Sītā having eyes resembling full-blown lotuses live in my separation? If spring is there, what can it do her having a beautiful hip and loins, who has already been overpowered by a mighty enemy? Surely shall my dear wife of a slender make, having eyes like lotus-petals and of sweet accents renounce her life at the appearance of this spring? Methinks, for certain, the chaste Sītā shall not be able to maintain her being at my separation. Vaidehi's attachment is entirely centred in me and my affection also riveted entirely in Sītā. This cool breeze of a pleasant touch, carrying the fragrance of flowers appears like a fire-brand to me who am thinking of my spouse. That breeze appears painful to me in Sītā's absence which ere this, had been regarded by me as a source of pleasure in her company. This bird set up a cry in the sky at that time* and now in the absence of Sītā, that crow, sitting on the tree is crying delightedly. This refers to the time when Rāma was united with Sītā i.e. at the time of his wedding, At that time the bird, flying up in the sky set up an inauspicious cry indicating that in no distant time he should be separated form her; and now his sitting on the tree and cawing delightedly indicated that he should soon be re-united with her. This bird flying up in the sky brought about Sītā's ravishment and this bird shall take me to her having expansive eyes. Hear, O Laksmana, the maddening notes of those birds sitting on the tops of the flowery trees and setting up their melody. The Bhramaras (black-bees) are approaching the flower-stalk of Tilaka trees tossed by the wind like to intoxicated damsels. This Asoka, enhancing the desires of the amorous, stands here, as if remonstrating with me by its clusters shaken by the wind. There appear, O Laksmana, those blossoming mango trees like to persons, exercised with passion and smeared with unguents of sandal. Behold, O Saumitri, O foremost of men, the Kinnaras are ranging at large in this variegated forest land on the banks of Pampā. Behold, O Lakşmaņa, here the fragrant red lotuses are shedding forth their splendour like to the newly risen sun. Here appear beautifully the lake Pampā of transparent water, filled with blue and fragrant lotuses, swans and Kõrandavas and abounding in red lotuses like to the virgin rays of the sun and having their filaments crushed by the bees. And the beautiful woods around the lake have been manifesting their beauty, filled with Cakravākas and the herds of elephants and deer desirous of drinking water. Behold, O Laksmana, the picturesque view of the lotuses oscillated by the ripples driven to and fro by the wind. I do not delight in my life, not beholding Sītā, having expansive eyes like to lotus-petals and ever fond of lotuses. O how wily is the course of Kāma who has been presenting to my mind that auspicious one, hard to attain and of sweet-accents! Had I not been overpowered by this season of spring with blossoming trees, I would have been able to put up with the presentamorous infliction. The objects which appeared beautiful to me while in the company of Sītā, now seem shorn of all grace in her separation. My eyes pant for beholding those lotus-petals, O Lakṣmaṇa, because of their resemblance with Sītā's eyes. Issuing out of the trees and touching the filaments, the pleasant wind is blowing like to Sita's breath. Behold O Lakşmaņa, the flowery branches of the Karņikāras on the summits of the mountain situated on the southern bank of Pampā. This prince of mountains, beautified with various metals, has been throwing up dusts of diverse colours driven by the wind. O Saumitri, these mountainous expanses are burning in beauty with blossoming and beautiful Kinsukas void of leaves. These fragrant Mālatis, Mallikäs, Karavīras and lotuses, growing on the banks of Pampā, and fostered by Pampā's water, and Ketakis, Sinduvāras, Basantis in full blossom, the climber Madhavi full of fragrance, and Jasmin shrubs groves on every side. Ciribilvas, Madhukas, Vañjulas, Bakulas, Campakas, Tilakas, Nāgas, Padmakas, blue Asokas, and yellow Lodhras on the hills like to manes of a lion, are in flowers. There appear beautifully on the hills, Ankolas, Kurantas, Curnakas, Paribhadrakas, blossoming mango, Patali, Kovidāras, Mucukundas, Arjunas, Ketakas, Uddalakas, Sirisas, Sinsapās, Dhavas, Salmalis, Kinsukas, Raktas Kurabakas, Tinisas, Naktamalas, sandal trees, Syandanas, Hintālas, Tilakas and Nagas. Behold, O Saumitri, many a beautiful and blossoming tree growing on the banks of Pampā and gnarled by creepers having flowery tips. Like into inebriate damsels, these creepers are embracing the trees, hard by, having their branches tossed by the wind. The breeze, delighted with various tastes is passing from tree to tree, mountain to mountains and forest to forest. Some fragrant trees, covered with flowers and some with buds, appear beautifully green. Saying, 'this is sweet', 'this is pleasant' and 'this is full-blown', the attached bees are falling to the trees. And rising again they are approaching the other trees growing on the banks of Pampā. This forest-land, strewn with flowers dropping spontaneously from the trees like to a bed sheet, has become pleasant. O Saumitri, the mountainous levels variegated with flowers of different species, are appearing like to beds. Behold O Saumitri, the origination of flowers in the trees at the expiry of the winter. The trees as if viewing with each other, have blossomed in this season of flowers. The trees, O Lakşmaņa, with bees humming around and with flowery branches are as if welcoming each other. This swan, has been sporting with its mate in the lucid water of Pampă exciting my amour. Truly does this lake like to Mandākini itself, deserve the accomplishments that are known all over the world. O best of Raghus, I do not desire Ayodhyā or the dignity of Indra if that chaste Sītā be found here and if I can live with her. I shall renounce all desires and thoughts if I can sport with her in this picturesque and green forest-land. These trees, clothed in diverse flower attires, have been exciting my thought in this forest, who have been deprived of my dear one. O Saumitri, behold this Pampā of cool water, enveloped on all sides with lotuses, and frequented by Cakravākas, Karandavas, Krauñcas, Plavas and high deer. The beauty of Pampā has been further enhanced by the birds carolling. Diverse delighted birds have been exciting my passion, reminding me of my dear spouse, of blameless countenance, having a moon like face and eyes resembling lotus-petals. Behold on the yonder mountainous expanse of various colours, stags sporting with hinds and myself on the other hand forsaken by Vaidehi having eyes resembling those of an antelope. These deer ranging hither and thither have been distressing my soul. It is then only that I shall attain to mental quietude if I can behold Sītā on this charming mountainous expanse filled with birds and deer. It is then that I shall draw my vital breath, O Saumitri, if Vaidehi, of slender waist, with me, enjoy the fine breeze of Pampā dispersing the fragrance of lotuses and Saugandhikas and ever assuaging grief. Blessed are they, O Laksmana who enjoy this wild breeze of Pampā. How has that exquisitely fine daughter of Janaka, my beloved spouse, having eyes resembling lotus-petals, brought under the control of another person, been living forsaken by me? What shall I speak to that virtuous, truthful king Janaka when he shall interrogate me about Sītā's welfare in an assembly? Where is that Sītā now who followed me in the track of virtue, who am unfortunate and have been exiled to woods by my Sire? How shall I keep up (my being) being poorly, O Lakşmaņa, being forsaken by that Sītā who followed me, deprived of kingdom and sense? My heart is sinking not beholding her fine spotless countenance, having eyes resembling lotuses and smelling sweet. When shall I hear again O Lakṣmaṇa, the sweet incomparable and auspicious accents of Vaidehī, intervened by smiles and couched in an elegant and easy style? Thai chaste and exquisitely fine damsel even when afflicted in the woods used to welcome me under the influence of Cupid as if she were delighted and had her sorrows removed. O son of a king, what shall I speak to Kausalya in Ayodhyā when she will ask me of her high-souled daughter-in-law's welfare and whereabouts? Do you proceed, O Lakşmaņa, and join Bharata gifted with fraternal affection. I am incapable of living any more without that daughter of Janaka. Thereupon Lakşmaņa addressed to the high-souled Rāma who was thus bewailing like one helpless with the following pregnant and immutable words. Forsake your grief, O Rāma. May good betide you. Do not grieve O best of men. Even the sinless persons lose their sense when they are afflicted with grief. Remembering the grief consequent on separation do you forsake your attachment to your dear one. Out of an excess of oil even the wick burn itself. O worshipful one, even if he hide himself in the region under the earth or in a darker quarter, Rāvana shall not be able to draw his breath. Do you procure information about the vicioussouled Rākṣasa; either he shall give up Sītā or meet with destruction. Unless he gives back Sītā, forsooth I shall kill him even if he enters with her into Diti's womb. Do you, console yourself and renounce your poorliness of mind, O worshipful one. Without sufficient endeavours even men of energy do not regain their lost ends. O worshipful one mighty is the course of energy. And than this there is no greater powerful on earth. And there is nothing unattainable in this world to one gifted with energy. Persons endowed with zeal do never wear away in their actions. And resorting to this energy only that we shall regain Jānaki. Do you not perceive that you are high-souled and highly educated? And leaving behind grief do you forsake your amorous madness. Being thus accosted by Lakşmaņa, Rāma having his mind stricken with sorrow, attained to mental quietude renouncing grief and dolour. Thereupon Răma, of unimaginable prowess, passed slowly by the pleasant and charming Pampā with banks girt with trees shaken by the wind. Thereupon the high-souled Rāma, stricken with grief passed along beholding the forestland, fountains, caves and revolving aside (the 'pregnant words of Laksmana). And the high-souled Lakşmaņa, of unagitated mind, intent upon Rāma's welfare and wending like to an infuriated elephant, cheered him up by means of moral and heroic counsels. Beholding their countenances passing strange, that mighty chief, of monkeys, while ranging near the mount Rșyamuka, became highly terrified and motionless. Observing them range there, that high-souled monkey, wending slowly like to an elephant and stricken with fear and grief, became exceedingly sorry. Espying the highly powerful Rāma and Lakş mana there, monkeys, terrified, entered into that holy and pleasant asylum, a worthy refuge and having its inside always frequented by them.