Coming to the asylum, Khara in company with those that went before him, saw that slayer of foes, the enraged Rāma, holding his bow. And seeing him, Khara possessing a shrill voice, raising his bow, commanded to the charioteer to drive towards Rāma, Drive on! At Khara's command, the charioteer drove the steeds to where the mighty—arined Rāma stood alone, holding his bow. And seeing him (Khara) entered the field, all those rangers of the night-the counsellers-uttering mighty shouts, cnvironed him round. Khara stationed on his car in the midst of Rākşasas appeared like red bodied one risen in the midst of the stars. Then in battle Khara, afflicting Rāma of incomparable energy with a thousand shafts, uttered a tremendous roar. Then all the rangers of the night, waxing exceeding wroth, showered various weapons on that terrible bowman, the invincible Rāma. And wrought up with rage, the Rākṣasas in battle assailed him with iron clubs, and darts, and prāsas, and swords, and axes. And resembling clouds (in hue), the exceedingly strong Rākṣasas, having huge bodies, darted towards Kākutstha by means of steeds and cars. And mounted on elephants resembling mountain-peaks, numbers of Rākṣasas, intent upon staying Rāma in battle, showered arrows on him, as mighty clouds pour down showers on the monarch of mountains. Rāma was hemmed in by all those fiercelooking Raksasas, even as in the evening Mahādeva is surrounded by his courtiers. And as the ocean resisted the tide of a river, Rāghava by means of arrow resist the weapons discharged by the Yātudhānas. As a mighty mountain, assailed by the thunderbolt, dose not feel pain, Rāma, having his person pierced by terrible flaming weapons, did not feel pain. And pierced, and with his person covered with blood, Rāma, the descendant of Raghu, resembled the sun enveloped in evening clouds. And seeing him single, surrounded by many thousand, the Gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas, and supreme saints became sorrowful. Then Rama getting enraged, bringing his bow to a circle, discharged sharpened shafts by hundreds and by thousands. And as if in sport, Rāma in the conflict shot irresistible (shafts) furnished with Kanka feathers, and decked with gold, irresistible, capable of inflicting extreme pain, and resembling the noose of Death. And sportively discharged by Rāma, those arrows deprived the Rākṣasas of their lives, like the noose forged by death. And piercing the persons of the Rākşasas, those arrows, soaked in blood, going up to the sky, appeared with the splendour of flaming fire. And innumerable shafts, exceedingly fierce, capable of depriving the Rāksasas of their lives, were let go from the circle of his bow. And with those Rāma severed bows, in baitle by hundreds and by thousands and flag ends, and shields, and mail, and many arms with embellished hands, resembling the trunks of elephants. And the arrows of Rāma discharged from the string pierced and cut off steeds mailed in gold, yoked to cars, together with the charioteer; and elephants with their riders; and horsemen with horses. And slaying foot-soldiers, he despatched them to the abode of Yama. And cut off with nālīkas (steel-pointed arrows) and, nārācas (arrows wholly made of steel), and sharp-pointed vikarnas (barbed arrows), the rangers of the night uttered dreadful howls of distress. And like a withered wood afflicted by fire, that host harassed by the various marrowpiercing* shafts shot by Rāma, did not attain ease. Another reading is, sharpened. And some heroic rangers of the night possessed of great strength, waxing furious, threw at Rāma rrāsas, and darts and axes. Another reading: remaining before Rāma, threw powerful weapons. Thereupon resisting by means of shafts those weapons of theirs, the mighty-armed Rāma endued with prowess, took their lives in the conflict, and cut off the heads (of warriors). And having their heads, and shields and bowstrings, severed, they fell as fall on the earth trees thrown down by blasts froin the wings of Suparņa*. Those rangers of the night that remained there, wounded by arrows, and losing heart, fled with speed to Khara, to seek his protection. *Lit.-Of fair feather. A name of Garuda. Thereat, encouraging them, Dāsana, taking his bow, ran furiously in high rage against Răma, like the enraged Destroyer himself, And rallied again (by Dāsana) and, their fear dispelled through their having founded refuge with him, they armed with sālas, tālas, and crags, darted against Rāma. And bearing in their hands darts, and clubs, and nooses, those exceedingly strong ones showered in battle shafts and weapons. And the Räkşasas discharged vollies of trees and crags. And capable of making one's hair stand on end, that battle was dreadful and furious and now on the side of Rāma and now again on : that of the Raksasas. And waxing exceedingly wroth, they bore on him hard from all sides. Then finding all directions entirely covered with Rākṣasas, and showers of shafts, that one gifted with mighty strength, sending up a terrific shout, fixed (on the bow-string) the exceedingly effulgent Gandharva weapon (for discharging it) among the Raksasas. Then thousands of shafts went forth from the circle of his bow; and all directions were covered with thronging arrows. And those Rākṣasas, afflicted with arrows could not see Rāma how he took out his dread shafts, nor how he discharged those excellent shafts; they only saw him drawing his bow. And the darkness spread by the arrows envelope the sky with the sun. And Rāma stationed there continued pouring in shafts. And the earth was covered with shafts shot, and alighting, and alighted simultaneously. And at places were seen Rākṣasas by thousands slain, falling, enfeebled, torn and riven. And cut off by Rāma with arrows, darts and Pattiśas in that battle the fearful field was scattered, heads with turbans, arms with fingerfences; torn thighs and arms, and various ornaments, horses, excellent elephants and cars, shattered in numbers, chouris, fans, and umbrellas, and pennons of various descriptions. Beholding all those stain, the (remaining) Raksasas, sore distressed, could not (again) advance before that captor of hostile capitals Rāma.