Entering the extensive forest of Dandaka, the irrepressible and self-composed Rāma saw the collection of asylums belonging to the ascetics, strewn with Kusa and bark, and environed by spiritual energy; incapable of being beheld; like the solar disc in the heavens, the refuge of all creatures with their ornamented yards; filled with a great many deer, and abounding in multitudes of birds; in which Apsaras always danced and which they held in respect; (asylums) beauteous with spacious rooms for fire sacrifice, with sacrificial necessaries, deer-skins, Kusa, faggots, water-pitchers, fruits and roots; surrounded by mighty and sacred fcrest-trees; crowned with lucious fruits; honoured with Bali and homa*; holy; resounding with the sounds of Vedic recitations; scattered with divers blossoms; and containing tanks filled with lotuses; with ancient ascetics living on fruits and roots, having their senses under control, wearing bark and black deer-skins, and possessing the splendour of the sun or fire; and adorued by great and holy sages living upon regulated fare. Beholding that collection of asylums belonging to the ascetics, resembling the regions of Brahmă, resonant with the voices of Vedic recitations; and grateful; with highly pious Brāhmaṇas versed in the Vedas, the exceedingly energetic and graceful Rāghava entered the same, having first unstrung his mighty bow. Thereupon, seeing the righteous Rāma resembling the moon risen, as well as Lakşmaņa and the illustrious Vaidehī, those . Maharsis endued with spiritual intuition, came forward (to meet the incomers); and, having uttered benedictions, those persons of rigid VOWS, received them. And those dwellers of the wood, struck with wonder, beheld Rāma's tender grace and loveliness and elegance of dress. And struck with astonishment, those inhabitants of the woods of pre-eminent piety saw Vaidehī, Lakşmaņa and Rāma, with winkless eyes. And those persons of exalted virtue, engaged in the welfare of all creatures, made Rāghava, their guest, sit down in their thatched cottage. Then, having received Rāma respectfully according to scriptural prescription, those virtuous ones of eminent piety, resembling fire, procured water (for Rāma). And, experiencing great delight, those highsouled ones, uttering benedictions, procured wild fruits, flowers and roots; and, having assigned an asylum (to Rāma), those persons cognizani of righteousness, said with joined hands, “Possessed of high fame, you, the protector of righteousness, are the refuge of these people. you should be honoured and worshipped, being their king, holding the rod, and their superior. O Rāghava, it is because he that governs his subjects, is a fourth part of Indra himself, that the king, being bowed down to by all, enjoys the choices things. And we, being in your dominions, ought to be protected by you. Whether living in the city or in the woods, you, lord of men, are our sovereign. We have renounced chastising others; and, O monarch, we have conquered our anger, and subdued our passions. Therefore, even as a child in its mother's womb (should be protected by her), should we be protected by you." Having said this, they entertained Rāghava, along with Laksmana, with fruits and roots and flowers and diverse other edibles procurable in the woods. In the same way, other ascetics of accomplished purposes, living lives of integrity, duly pleased that lord, Rāma, resembling Vaisvānara.