As Rāma went on, his feet failed him, his left eye to beat, and a trembling came over his frame. Seeing again and again all these signs, he continually kept on asking (Lakşmaņa), Is it well with Sita? Eager to behold Sītā, he proceeded fast; but finding the abode empty, he was filled with anxiety. And proceeding with swiftness, throwing about his limbs, Raghu's son began to survey all around the hut. He then found it empty of Sītā, like to a tank in evil plight and bereft of lotuses-during the winter. And seeing the cottage empty, with its trees as if sorrowing, and its flowers faded, and its beasts and birds sunk in gloom, shorn of grace, worn out, forsaken by the sylvan deities, strewn with deer-skins and Kusa, and twists of Kasa, he wept again and again. Has the timid one been carried off, or is she dead, or has any one eaten her up, or has she vanished (from the earth), or has she gone to the wood, or has she gone to cull flowers and fruits, or has she gone to the pool for procuring water, or has she repaired to the river? Although he searched his beloved one carefully, yet he failed to find her out in the wood-land. And that graceful one with his eyes reddened with grief, seemed like a maniac He rushed from tree to tree, and bewailing being sunk in an ocean of grief traversed all the rivers and mountains. O Kadamba, have you seen where is that one fond of Kadamba groves? If know you this do you tell me of Sītā having an auspicious countenance. O Bilva, tell me pray, if you have seen her, wearing silken cloth, resembling cool leaves and having breast like to Bilva fruits. Or, O Aryunā, she was very fond of you, tell me if live that daughter of Janaka of slender frame. This Kakubha know for certain about Maithilī having thighs like to Kakubha. You stands beautifully that Vanaspati being enveloped with creepers flowers and leaves and filled with the hum of Bhramaras. Surely dose this Tilaka know about her who was fond of her. O Asoka, who dose remove sorrows, do you make good your name by making me, who am exercised with grief, see instantly my beloved (spouse). O Tāla, if you have any pity on me do you tell me whether you have beheld that fair damsel having breast resembling ripe Tāla fruits. Do you tell me without fear, O Jāmbu, if you have seen my dear one resembling in hue the river Jāmbu. O Karnikar, you appear very beautiful with this blossoming flowers, tell me if you have seen my dear devoted wife who was fond of you. Thus the highly famous Rāma asking about Sītā, nearing the various trees such as mangoes, Nipa, Mahaśālā, Panasa, Kurava, Pomegranate, Bakula, Punnaga, Sandal and Ketak began to traverse the forest like a maniac. Again addressed he the diverse animals-O dear, know you for certain about Janakī having the eyes of a doe; is she engaged in play with the does? O elephant, methinks you do know about the daughter of Janaka having thighs resembling your trunk; pray tell me if you have beheld her. O tiger, fearlessly do you relate to me if you have seen my beloved Maithilī, having a countenance resembling Moon. O dear! O you having eyes like to lotuses! why do you fly away? Surely have I seen you. Why do you not address me hiding yourself behind the tree? Wait, wait, O you fair damsel, you have no compassion for me! Never had you mock me before in this way! Why do you neglect me now? O exquisitely fair damsel, truly have I found you out from this your yellow silken cloth. I have seen you flying away. Stand if you have any love for me. Or, O you having a sweet smile, you are not she; truly you have been killed or else you would not have neglected me at this time of dire affliction. True it is that she has been devoured in my absence by the Rākşasas living on flesh having torn into pieces her limbs. Truly has her face, resembling the full-moon, having beautiful teeth a fine nose and white Kundalas, become of pale countenance being brought under the possession of the Rākșasas. Her neck had the hue of sandal and was adorned with necklace—that beautiful tender neck was eaten up by the Rākşasas, my beloved wife wailing. Her arms were tender like leaves and adorned with various ornaments; truly have the Rākşasas eaten them up, shaken as they were, by throwing them here and there. Alas! did I leave her alone only to be devoured by the Rākşasas? And she has been eaten up like one weak and helpless albeit she has many friends. O Lakşmaņa, O you of mighty-arms, have you seen where my dear wife is? O dear! O Sītā! where have you gone? bewailing again and again in this strain Rāma began to range the forest. Sometimes leaping, sometimes walking in an uncertain direction, again and again he looked like one void of sense. And again intent on searching Sītā he furiously engaged in traversing the rivers, mountains, fountains and the woods. he could not wait patiently anywhere. Entering a vast forest he searched every nook and corner for Maithilī; his desire was not satisfied and he again engaged with great labour in the finding out of his dear spouse.