Hearing these words Jațāyu, who lay buried in a deep slumber, awoke and beheld both Rāvana and Janaki. There-at the lord of birds resting on the tree, having a big sharp beak like to the summit of a hill, addressed these soft words to Rāvana, O brother Ten-necked one, I am conversant with Purāņas, of truthful vows and abide by religion. It does not behove you to perpetrate such an iniquitous deed before me. I am Jātayu, the mighty lord of vultures. Daśaratha's son Rāma is the lord of all men like to Mahendra and Varuņa. He is ever engaged in the welfare of all men. This exquisitely beautiful and far-famed Sītā whom you are about to steal away, is the married wife of that lord of men. How do you yourself being a monarch and engaged in the royal office of maintaining subjects, carry away by stealth another's wife? O you of mighty prowess, you should specially protect the wives of kings. Do you therefore control your base inclination of oppressing another's wife. A hero does never perform what bring calumny upon himself. It becometh every individual to save another's wife from the touch of a second man like to his own wife. O son of Paulastya, at the instance of the king mild subjects perform many an action conducing to virtue, wealth and desire, though not mentioned in the Šāstras. The king is the virtue, the king is the desire and the king is the prime jewel of all subjects. Virtue, desire or sin-every thing ariseth from the king. O you the best of Rākṣasas, you are vicious and unsteady; how have you come by riches like to a sinner attaining to the abode of celestials? A vicious person can never relinquish his sinful habits—virtue does never reside in the abodes of impious persons. The mighty and the virtuous-souled Rāma has committed nothing wrong in your city or your dominions. Why do you then commit wrong by him? Khara of Janasthāna is highly wicked and if Rāma of blameless actions has killed him on Surpanakha's account how is he to blame? Why do you then carry away the wife of that lord of men? Do you soon leave off Vaidehī. Like to Indra burning down Vịtrāsura, Rāma, looking with his terrible eyes like flaming fire, shall reduce you to ashes. Do you not understand that you have tied with cloth a virulent serpent? Do you not see that you have placed around your neck the noose of death? It is always proper to carry such a weight as does not exhaust (him who carries); it is always proper to take such a food as does not cause illness. Who engageth himself in such an action as does not confer virtue, fame or glory, but bring about physical affliction only? O Rāvana, I am sixty thousand years old and have been administering regularly my ancestral kingdom. Old though I am, you shall not be able to carry away with safety Jānakī in my presence, young, accoutred in mails as you are with bow and arrows in your hands and ascending a car. As it is not easy to destroy, by the reasonings of Logic, Vedas and Śrutis containing eternal and immutable truths, so you shall not be able to carry away Vaidehi by force before me. If you are a hero do you fight. Or do you wait for a moment, O Rāvana, you shall also embrace the earth like to Khara. Soon shall Rāma clad in bark destroy you in the battle field, who had many a time and oft destroyed in conflict the celestials and Dānavas. These two princes Rāma and Lakşmaņa are at a distance, what shall I do now? O vile being, undoubtedly shall you, terrified, be destroyed by thein. Myself drawing my breath you shall not be able to carry away this beloved queen of Rāma, the pure-natured Sitä having eyes resembling lotuses. It is my duty to do good to the high-souled Rāma and Dasaratha even at the sacrifice of my life. Do you stand, O ten-necked one. Behold for a moment. O Ravana, I shall throw you headlong from this car, like to a fruit from its stalk. O ranger of the night, even to my utmost might I will render you hospitality in encounter.