Thereupon Vāli, adept in warfare, wounded by Rāma's shaft, fell down to the ground like to a felled tree. Ornamented with burning gold, he stretched the whole length of his person on the ground like to the banner of the Lord of celestials, loosened and thrown (off the chariot). That lord of monkeys being levelled to the ground, his kingdom appeared like to the sky, shorn of the Moon. Though struck down to the earth, neither vitality, effulgence nor prowess did renounce the body of that high-souled one. That excellent gold and jewel-crested garland conferred on him by Sakra maintained the vitality, effulgence and prowess of that lord of monkeys. Being adorned with that golden garland, that heroic lord, of monkey-herds, appeared like to an evening cloud. Though felled to the ground, his beauty appeared as if divided into three, namely, his garland, his body and the shaft piercing his heart. The arrow thrown off Răma's bow pointing out to him the way to the celestial region, became an excellent means to that hero. Beholding the broad-chested and mightyarmed Vali, Mahendra's son, wearing a golden garland and having a flaming countenance and yellow eyes, thus struck down to the earth, resembling a flameless fire in the field of battle, like to Yayāti, slipped from the abode of the celestials on the wane of his piety, like to a tree falling down to the earth at the time of Dissolution, hard to repress as Mahendra himself, incapable to withstand like Upendra, Rāma, followed by Lakşmaņa, approached and beheld him. And paying respects to that hero falling on the earth like to a flameless fire and eyeing him again and again those two highly powerful brothers, Rāma and Laksmana neared him. And beholding that highly powerful Rāghava and Laksmana, Vāli addressed them with the following bold and pious words. And thereupon Vāli, of mitigated prowess, waning vitality, motionless and stretched on the ground, spoke to Rāma, proud of warfare, saying these pregnant words. What merit have you reaped by destroying me, who was not engaged in fight with you? I was exercised with ire, being engaged in conflict (with another person) and for you I have met with destruction. People speak highly of you, O Rāma, on this earth, describing you as coming of a high family, gifted with manliness and prowess, ever engaged in the welfare of your subjects, compassionate, energetic, of firm resolution and knowing time. Punishment, control of passions, forgiveness, piety, firmness, truth, prowess and suppression of the wicked-these all are the royal virtues. And knowing your high pedigree, and all these your accomplishments I approached Sugrīva with a hostile intention, albeit prevented by Tārā. Before I saw you I had thought within myself:-'Forsooth Rāma shall not destroy me, engaged as I am with another person and hence not prepared to fight with him.' I do now know you as one who has spoliated his soul through impious actions, feigning religion while in truth an irreligious person, resorting to all vicious deeds, like to a well crusted with grass, unrighteous while passing under the clock of honesty and religion like to a hidden fire. I have not done you any wrong either in your kingdom or in your city. Nor have I passed by you. Why have you then destroyed me, who am a monkey ranging always in the woods, living on fruits and roots and who have come here to fight with another person? It appears that you are of a kingly father and of a graceful countenance. And, O king, there are marks of piety on your person. Who, born in the race of Kșatriyas, versed in religious lore, having his doubts removed and marks of piety on his person, perpetrates such an iniquitous deed? You are born in the family of Raghus and known all over the world as being pious. Being clothed in righteousness why did you commit such an unrighteous act? Chastisement, charity, forgiveness, piety, truthfulness firmness, prowess and the punishment of the iniquitous are the virtues of a king, O prince. We are, O Rama, wild beasts ranging in the forest and living on roots and fruits-our nature is such—but you are a man, O king. Land, gold and silver are the causes of dissension. But who is there who is avaricious enough to get by our forest habitations and fruits? The royal virtue consists in humbly and freely administering discipline, favour and punishment. Kings by no means, should follow their whims. But you are angry and unsteady by nature, capricious, perfectly narrow-minded in the discharge of your royal duties and did use your bow and shaft: (any where and every time). You have no attachment for virtue, no comprehension of right things and are always guided by your passions albeit you are a lord of men. O Kākutstha, destroying me sinless, with your shaft and perpetrating such a disgraceful act, how shall you relate it to the pious. Those, who commit treason, destroy Brahmins and kine, who are thieves and always engaged in the destruction of animals, and who are atheists and marry before their elder brothers are married, do all go to hell. The villainous, the avaricious, those who kill their friends and elope with their preceptor's wives, do always visit the land of the vicious. And there is not the least doubt about it. My skin is not worthy of your touch and my bones and hairs should always be avoided by the virtuous. And my flesh is not worthy of being eaten by persons of your piety. A hedge-hog a porcupine, an iguana, a hare and a tortoise these five animals only, having five toes, are worthy of being eaten by the Ks atryas and Brahmins, O Rāghava. The wise, O Rāma, do not touch my skin and bones and my flesh is not worthy of being taken-I am that (monkey) having five toes who have been killed by you. Alas! disregarding the well meaning and truthful words of Tārā, I have placed myself under the control of Kāla (Death). O Kākutstha, the Earth has got you as her husband like to a good natured damsel being wedded to a husband who has forsaken his own religion. How are you, who are wicked, narrowminded, a liar and ever intent upon bringing about others' misfortune, born of the loins of the high-souled Dasaratha? I have been killed by an elephant-Rāma, disregarding the virtue of the pious, breaking the chord of character, and neglecting the goad of religion. Perpetrating this inauspicious, and improper act, blamed of the worthy what shall you speak to the pious when you shall return in their company? The prowess, you had displayed towards me, careless, O Rāma you did never employ for the suppression of the iniquitous. O son of a king, hadst you fought with me openly you wouldst have, forsooth, seen the abode of Death being killed by me. O Rāma, like to a serpent destroying persons asleep, you, that are under the control of vice, have killed me, who am hard to repress, keeping yourself out of my sight in the battle. I have been killed by you, desirous of encompassing Sugrīva's well being. Hadst you apprized me of your object before, I would have got you your Maithili in the course of a day, and brought, by the neck, that vicious-souled Raks asa-Rāvaņa, the ravisher of your spouse with out putting an end to his life in the battle. Whether in the deep ocean or in the region under the earth, I shall bring your Maithili like to an Asyatar* Here is an allusion. A prince of Daityas, named Hayagriva, stole the Vedas at the end of Kalpa; in the recovery of them he was slain by Vişnu after his descent as Matshya. It is perfectly proper that Sugrīva shall inherit my kingdom on my ascension to heaven. And it is equally improper that I have been viciously killed by you in the battle. Every one in time meets with death and hence there is nothing to be sorry for me. But do you think of a proper reply you shall give to the people (when asked about the cause of my destruction). Having said this, that high-souled Son of monkey-chief, greatly distressed being wounded by (Rāma's) shaft and having his countenance dried up, became silent, fixing his look upon Rāma, resembling the sun.