Understanding the words of the high-souled Sugrīva, Hanumān, proceeded, springing, from the mount Rsyamūka, towards the descendants of Raghu. Thereupon renouncing his monkey shape the son of Māruta, not confiding in them, assumed the semblance of a mendicant. Approaching them humbly, Hanumān paid obeisance to them. And he eulogized them truly in words, sweet and pleasant. Greeting duly those two heroes, having truth for their prowess, that best of monkeys addressed them in sweet accents in consonance with Sugriva's instructions. You are ascetics of celebrated austerities, resembling the Rājarșis and celestials and best of Brahmacaris, why have you come here causing fear to these deer and other wild animals of the forest? Surveying around the trees grown on the banks of Pampā, you have enhanced the beauty of this lake of auspicious water. Who are you two youthful figures of mighty arms, wearing bark, patient, sighing and troubling these wild animals? Heroic, of leonine looks, gifted with mighty strength and prowess, slayers of foes, and holding a bow like to that of Sakra; graceful, of a pleasant countenance, of prowess like to a mighty bull, having hands resembling the trunks of elephants, effulgent, great among men, youthful, beautifying this chief of mountains with the effulgence of your persons, worthy of having kingdoms, and like to celestials, why have you come here? Having eyes resembling lotus-petals, heroic, wearing matted locks, resembling each other, have you come here from the celestial region? Of a spacious breast, heroic, you two men possess the exterior of gods. It appears as the Sun and the Moon have come down to the earth of their own accord. Having leonine shoulders, gifted with high energy, stout like to plump bulls and human albeit looking like celestials, why are not your long, round arms, resembling Parighas and deserving all ornaments adorned? Methinks you two are perfectly able to protect this entire earth, filled with forests and oceans, and intersected by the mountains Vindhya and Meru. These your painted and smooth bows appear like to the thunder-bolts of Indra adorned with gold. And these beautiful quivers are filled to the brim with sharpened and deadly shafts like to flaming fire and serpents. And these two daggers, of mighty proportions, furnished with burning gold, appear like to serpents, let loose. Why do you not answer me accosting you thus? A certain heroic and virtuous monkeychief, by name Sugrīva, has been journeying on this carth, distressed at heart, being driven away by his brother. I have come here being despatched by that high-souled Sugriva-my name is Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys. That virtuous souled Sugrīva desires to make friends with you. And know me to be his counsellor-a monkey, the son of Pavana, ranging every where at my will, coming here, under the guise of a mendicant, from the mount Rsymuka, for the welfare of Sugriva. Having addressed thus those two heroes-Rama and Laksmana, Hanuman, conversant with words and skilled in speech, did not speak again. Hearing those words, the effulgent Rāma, with a delighted countenance, spoke to his younger brother, Laksmana-~-sitting by him. He is the counsellor of the high-souled Sugriva, the lord of monkeys and has approached me, soliciting my friendship in his (Sugriva's) favour. Do you welcome, with pleasant words, O Saumitri, this monkey-Sugrīva's minister, the subduer of foes, affectionate and skilled in speech. None can speak thus who has not mastered the Rgveda, borne well the Yajurveda and acquainted himself thoroughly with the ſāyamveda. Forsooth he has studied well all the Grammars, for he has not used a single in elegant word though he has addressed me with a number of them. And no defect was perceived on his countenance, eyes, forehead, eyebrows or on any of his limbs. His words,-few, beyond all suspicion, pleasant, and uttered in a mild tone, came out readily of his throat and breast. He has uttered accents, which was wonderful, ready, accomplished, auspicious and captivating. Whose heart is not moved by these wonderful words, proceeding (from heart, throat and brain)? Even an enemy, who has his sword uplifted, (is moved). O sinless one, how does that monarch accomplish his objects who has not got such a messenger? Indeed whose emissaries are so accomplished, all his missions are fulfilled only by virtue of their words. Thus addressed, Saumitri, skilled in speech, welcomed that monkey-Sugrīva's counsellor and son of Pavana. O learned one! We knew well the accomplishments of the high-souled Sugrīva. We shall find out that king of monkey herds. O Hanumān, O best of monkeys, we shall go by whatever you shall say, under the instructions of Sugriva. Hearing these skilful words, that son of Pavana, delighted, revolving within him the means for Sugrīva's conquest, purposed to bring about a friendly union between them.