Being thus addressed by Rāvaņa under the guise of a mendicant, desirous of carrying her away Vaidehī thought within herself. This person is my guest and a Brahmin; he may curse me if I do not speak to him. Thinking this for a moment Sītā said. May good betide you! I am the daughter of the high-souled Janaka, the king of Mithilā, the beloved Queen of Rāma and my name is Sītā. Dwelling in the palace of Ikşäkus for twelve years, I enjoyed many things passing human and had all my desires satisfied. On the thirteenth year king (Dasaratha) counselled with his ministers about the installation of Rāma. Accordingly everything necessary for the installation being made ready, KaikeyI, one of my mothers-in-law, begged of her husband a boon. Bringing my father-in-law under control by means of her virtuous deeds, Kaikeyi begged, of that truthful, best of monarchs, two boons namely the exile of my husband into woods and the installation of Bharata, And said-I shall never eat, drink or sleep and (if Rāma be installed) I shall end my life. Kaikeyī speaking thus, that lord of earth, my father-in-law begged her to accept diverse riches; but Kaikeyi did not agree. Then the highly effulgent Răma, my husband was twenty-five years old, and myself was eighteen years old counting from my birth. My husband is known all over the world under the name of Rāma he is truthful, goodnatured, of pure character, ever engaged in the welfare of all created beings, of mighty-arms and expansive eyes. Our father the king Daśaratha was entirely under the control of passions, and hence for the satisfaction of Kaikeyi did not install Rāma.- When Rāma came to his father for being installed Kaikeyi spoke to my husband the following cruel words. Do you hear, O Rāghava, how I have been ordered by your Sire. This kingdom, rid of thorns is to be conferred of Bharata, and you shall have to sojourn into woods for years nine and five. Do you therefore repair to forest, O Kākutstha and save your Sire from untruth. Whereto Rāma fearlessly replied 'So be it!' Hearing her words my husband of firm vows acted accordingly. He always maketh gifts and taketh none. He always speaketh truth and never telleth an untruth. This is his best observance O Brāhmana. His half-brother named Lakşmaņa is of mighty prowess. That best of men is Rāma's help and the destroyer of foes in battle. That brother of his named Lakşmaņa is of firm resolution and given to asceticism. With a bow in hand he has followed (Rama) flying as an exile to woods along with me. Thus that one (Rāma) of firm resolution and ever engaged in pious offices wearing matted hair and assuming the semblance of an ascetic has entered this forest of Dandaka along with myself and his younger brother, O you the best of twice-born ones, we three being deprived of our kingdom by Kaikeyi have been living in this dense forest by virtue of our ! effulgence. Do you take heart for a moment and live here. Instantly shall my husband return with good many wild fruits and roots and with sufficient meat after killing many a deer, hog and Gosamp. Truly do you relate to me your name, Gotra and leneage. O you twice-born one, why do you range alone in this forest of Dandaka? Sītā the wife of Rāma speaking thus, the mighty Lord of Rākşasas-Rävana replied with these harsh words, O Sītā I am that Rāvaņa, the lord of Rākşasas, whoin fear the celestials, Asuras and human beings. O you of blameless beauty, seeing you of golden hue and wearing silk cloth I do not relish my own wives. I have brought many a beautiful damsel from various quarters, do you become my foremost Queen among them. That great city in the midst of the ocean, Larkā, encircled on all sides by the sea and situated on the summit of a hill, is my capital. There shall you with me, O Sītā, walk in gardens, and thus you shall no more long for living in the forest. If you did become my wife, O Sītā, five thousand maid-servants decorated with divers ornaments shall serve you. That blameless daughter of Janaka, being thus addressed by Ravana, was highly enraged, and, passing by him, replied. I am a dependant of Rāma, who is incapable of being, shaken, like to a mighty mountain, incapable of being agitated, like to a vast ocean, and resembling Mahendra in effulgence. I am a dependant of that great and truthful Rāma who is gifted with auspicious marks and like to a fig tree. I am a dependant of that lion among men, Rāma, of mighty arms, of a spacious breast an treading like a lion. I am a dependant of that son of a king, Rāma, of mighty arms, having control over his passions, whose face resembles the full moon and whose fame has spread far and wide over the earth.36 Why do you being a tiger wish for a she-lion? You shall not be able to touch me like to the rays of the sun. O you wretched Rākşasa, when you have desired to steal away Raghhava's beloved spouse, surely do you see these trees (before you) as made of gold. Do you wish to uproot the teeth from the mouth of a lion, that enemy of deer, or from that of a serpent? Do you wish to clasp with your hands the Mandara hill, or do you wish to walk in peace after drinking poison? Do you wish to rub your eyes with pins and lick a razor with your tongue? You did wish to swim across an ocean, having a rock tied to your neck. You did wish to get at the Sun and Moon, to bind a flaming fire with a piece of cloth and walk through iron-spikes, as you have wished to come by the worthy spouse of Rama. Mighty is the difference between Rāma and you, like to that between a lion and a jackal, a sea and a rivulet, nectar and gruel, gold and iron, sandal and mud, an elephant and a cat, a crow and Garuda, a peacock and a madgie (an acquatic bird), or a duck and a vulture. Even If you did steal me, that mighty archer Rāma, gifted with the prowess of the lord celestials, living, surely shall I die, like to a gnat sucking clarified butter. Addressing those words to that wicked ranger of the night, that innocent ($ītā) shook like a plantain tree shaken by the wind. There upon Rāvaņa, like to Death in prowess, trembling, began to relate to her with a view to frighten (her) his race, power, name and actions.