When Khara of fierce prowess had come to the asylum Rāma in company with his brother saw all those evil prognostics. And beholding those dreadful portents, Rāma exceedingly distressed, apprehending some calamity to the Rākşasas, observed to Lakşmaņa. O mighty armed one, behold these great presages that have taken place, capable of annihilating all beings, and which have taken place, capable of annihilating all beings, and which have for their object the utter extermination of the Raksasas! Yonder threatening clouds of asinine sable, showering down blood and uttering loud sounds are ranging the welkin. And, O discerning one, rejoicing at the prospect of my fight, all these arrows emit smoke, and my bows plaited on the back with gold, are restless. Meseems from the noise of the wild birds that impending on us is danger and uncertainty to life. Without doubt, there shall take place a mighty conflict. At this critical time, my arin shaking momentarily, betokens, O hero, victory to us, and defeat to the enemy. And your face appear pleasant with a delightful lustre. O Lakşmaņa, the pallid face of those that prepare for conflict, auger shortening of life. We can hear the shouts of the Rākşasas as they roar, as also the blasts of the trumpets of those doomed to be wounded blown by Rākṣasas of remorseless deeds. A considerate person that wishes for his welfare, apprehending peril, should prevent disaster ere it arrives. Therefore bearing arrows in your hand, and equipped with your bow, do you, taking Videha's daughter, take refuge in the mountain cavern, covered with trees and difficult of access. That you should act contrary to my words, is what I do not wish. Swearing by my feet, go you without delay, my brother. You are both strong and a hero: You can, without doubt, slay these Rākşasas. But I wish to slay all these rangers of the night myself. Thus accosted by Rama, Laksmana, taking arrows and a bow, took refuge in an inaccessible cave along with Sītā. Thereupon, saying, Ah! we have spoken it sharp, Rāma put on his mail. And adorned with that mail resembling fire Rāma appeared in the dark like a mighty flame streaming up. And uplifting his bow, and taking his arrows, that powerful one stood there, feeling all directions with the twangs of his bow-string. Then the high-souled gods and Gandharvas, Siddhas and Cāranas came there, with the intention of witnessing the fight. And high-souled saints of the world, and the foremost Brahmarșis of pious acts, coming together, spoke to one another, saying, Hail to cows and Brāhmaṇas, and all those in whom are established the worlds! may Rāghava vanquish in fight those rangers of the night, the progeny of Pulastya, even as the discus-handed Vişņu routed in battle the foremost Asuras! Having said this, they again spoke, eyeing one another, There are fourteen thousand of the Rākşasas of dreadful deed while the righteous Rāma is single. How can fight take place (between two such parties)? Having said this, the Rājarșis, Siddhas, multitudes of the best of the twice-born ones, and celestial stationed in the sky were moved with curiosity (as to the issue of the conflict). Then seeing Rāma filled with energy, remaining in the field, all beings from fear experienced great pain. And the peerless grace of Rāma of energetic deeds became like to that of the high souled infuriated Rudra.* There is a variation in reading here; the sense, however, is the same. While the gods, Gandharvas and Cāraņas were thus conversing, the forces of the Rākṣasas sending up solemn sounds, furnished with horrible armour, arms and flags, conversing in heroic parlance, roaring at each other, stretching bows, momentarily yawning, sending forth shouts, and blowing trumpets. The commentator says the yawning was in consequence of the soldiers having during the conflict indulged in liquor. The universal uproar filled that (entire) forest. Scared and terrified at the hubbub the rangers of the wood fle: to quarters free from noise; nor did they cast their eyes backward. And that army resembling the ocean, and rife with sounds, equipped with various weapons, with furious speed came towards Rāma. And Rāma also versed in warfare, casting his eyes around, found the forces of Khara ready for fight. Another text:-The holder of Pinaka. Then stretching his dreadful bow, and swiftly taking out shafts, (Rāma) for compassing the destruction of the entire body of the Rākşasas, waxed furiously enraged. And like to the flaming fire at the universal dissolution, he, growing wroth, was incapable of being looked i at. And seeing him filled with energy, the sylvan deities were extremely pained*. And the aspect of the enraged Rāma appeared like that of the holder of Pināka, intent upon destroying Dakşa's sacrifice. Another reading is:-The sylvan deities fled away. Furnished with bows and ornaments and cars and mail hued like fire, that army of those subsisting on flesh, appeared like masses of blue clouds at sunrise.