Hearing those words (of Rāma) and learning his amicable feeling (in relation to Sugrīva) as also, seeing that Rāma was willing to assist Sugrīva, Hanuman, getting exceedingly delighted, remembered Sugrīva. Since this one of successful acts has been come by and also this business is in hand, the high-souled Sugrīva will most probably obtain the monarchy. Then transported with joy, that foremost of monkeys, Hanumān, in these words, replied to Rāma, deft in speech, saying, Why is it, thất accompanied with your younger brother, have you come to this dense and trackless forest, garnished with the woodlands of Pampā, and filled with various kinds of ferocious beasts? Hearing those words of his, Laksmana, directed by Råma, informed (Hanumān) of all about Rama, the son of Dasaratha. There was a king named Dasaratha. Possessed of effulgence, and attached to righteousness, he, in consonance with his proper duties, for aye, governed the four orders. He has no hater; nor does he hate any one. And in relation to all creatures he was like another great-father. And he celebrated Agniştoma and other sacrifices with presents (to Brāhmaṇas). This one is his eldest son, named Rama, famous among men. He is the refuge of all creatures, and competent to carry out the injunctions of his father. The eldest son of Dasaratha, he is foremost of all his sons in merit. He bears marks of royalty, and has the prosperity of a kingdom. Deprived of his kingdom, in company with myself, he has come hither with the view of dwelling in this wood. And, O highly exalted one, this one of subdued senses is followed by his wife Sītā even as the decline of day the exceedingly effulgent Sun is followed by (his spouse) Splendour. I am the younger brother of this one endued with gratitude and of various lore. Subdued by his virtues, I, Laksimana by name, have dedicated myself to his service. Worthy of happiness, homage, and intent upon the welfare of all beings, deprived of wealth and living in the forest, he has his wife carried off by a Rākşasa, wearing shapes at will. Nor have we yet (been able) to ascertain who is that Rākşasa that has carried off his wife. A son of Diti named Danu, had, by virtue of an imprecation, undergone Raksasa-hood. He it is who had related to us all about the capable Sugrīva.—That exceedingly puissant one shall have a knowledge of the ravisher of your wife? Having said this, Danu beaming (with a halo) went to heaven. Thus have 1 related to you all as it fell out. Both Rāma and myself have saught the shelter of Sugriva. Having given away profuse wealth and attained high fame, this one who formerly was the lord of the worlds, now wishes to make Sugrīva his master. That one attached to virtue, that refuge (of all)—the son of that shelter (of all beings) has come under the protection of Sugrīva. That spiritual guide, who ere now was worthy of being the shelter (of all) and who (actually) was the refuge (of all creatures) Rāghava, has saught the shelter of Sugrīva. That Rāma in whose happiness and favour the subjects found their felicity, seeketh the good graces of Sugrīva. Famed over the three worlds the eldest son of that monarch who had always and for aye honoured all the kings of the earth crowned with every virtue,-, viz. Rāma, has sought the protection of Sugrīva, lord of monkeys. On Rāma being overwhelmed with sorrow, tried by grief, and having come under his refuge,' it behoveth Sugrīva along with the leaders of bands to show favour to Rāma? When Sumitrā's son shedding tears had spoken thus, that one skilled in speech, Hanumān, answered in these words, 'Persons of such a stamp, endued with understanding, of controlled anger and subdued senses, should be seen by the master of monkeys, and such come within one's ken through blessed luck. He also has been driven out of his kingdom, and has incurred the hostility of Vali. And his wife torn away from him, he dwelleth in this wood, in fear, having been exceedingly harassed by his brother. That son of the Sun, Sugriva, along with us, will help you in seeking out Sītā. Having said these sweet and hurried words, Hanuman said to Rāghava, 'I will (now) repair to Sugriva.' When Hanumān had said this, the righteous Lakşmaņa duly paying homage to the former, addressed Rāghava, saying. From the glad way in which this son of the god of the wind is speaking, it appears that he also seeks your service; and, arriving (at this region) you also, Rāghava, have reaped success. He speaketh openly with a delightful light in his countenance; and cheerfulness. (It seems) that the heroic Hanuman, son to the God of wind does not speak anything that is false. Then that vastly wise one Hanumān the son of the wind god departed, taking with him the heroic descendants of Raghu, for (presenting them) to the monarch of monkeys. Renouncing the guise of a beggar, and assuming the form of a monkey, that foremost of monkeys went away, placing those heroes on his back. Then the heroic monkey, the son of the windgod, of wide fame, and great prowess, with his mind perfectly pure, considering himself as crowned with success, and experiencing exceeding delight, arrived at that best of mountains in company with Rāma and Laks mana.