Having received the homage of the ascetics, Rāma about sun-rise, having greeted them all, entered into the forest. And Rāma, followed by Lakṣmaṇa, saw the heart of the forest abounding in various kinds of beasts, ranged by bears and tigers, with its trees and shrubs torn and trampled, its pools turbid, and its birds crying. Having in company with Sītā arrived at that forest abounding in terrible beasts, Kākutstha saw a man-eater, resembling a mountainsummit, emitting tremendous roars, with hollow eyes, a huge face, frightful, having a deformed belly, disgusting, dreadful, cyclopean, misshapen, of a horrible sight, clad in a tigerskin, besmeared with fat, covered with blood, capable of frightening all creatures, with his mouth widely extended, like to the Destroyer himself, and uttering loud shouts,-who stood piercing with his iron dart three lions, four tigers, two leopards, ten Prşatas, and the huge tusked head of an elephant dripping fat. Having seen Rāma and Laksmana as well as Sītā the daughter of Mithilā, he growing angry, rushed (against them), like the Destroyer himself rushing against creatures at the universal dissolution. Uttering a dreadful yell, and, as if making the earth tremble, he took Vaidehi on his waist, and, going a little distance, said, “O you wearing bark and matted locks, O you of feeble strength, that accompanied by your (common) wife, have entered the forest of Dandaka, bearing bows and arrows and scimitars, why, being ascetics, do you wish to associate with a (single) woman? You wicked wretches, you imf.ous wights, who are you that bring disgrace upon ascetics? I am a Rākṣasa, Virādha by name. This forest is my fastness. Accoutred in arms, I range (here), feeding on the flesh of ascetics. This transcendentally beauteous one shall be my wife. And in battle I shall drink your blood, wretches that you are. Hearing the wicked and vaunting speech of the impious Virādha, as he said this, Janaka's daughter, Sītā, began to tremble from fear, like a plantain tree shaken by the wind. Seeing the graceful Sītā on the waist of Virādha, Rāghava with a blank countenance said to Laksmana, O amiable one, behold the daughter of king Janaka, my wife of pure ways, an illustrious princess brought up in luxury, on Virādha's waist. Lakşmaņa, what had been wished for by Kaikeyi with reference to us, (has taken place), and the dear boon (that she had asked) has born fruit. That far-sighted lady, my second mother, who had not been satisfied with having secured the kingdom in the interests of her son, and by whom I that was dear to her above all other creatures, had been banished to the woods, has to-day her wishes crowned with success. O Sumitra's son, nothing can impart to me greater anguish than the touching of Vaidehi by another, which surpasses my father's demise and my having been deprived of the kingdom.”' As Kākutstha with his eyes flooded with tears was speaking thus, Lakşmaņa flying into a rage, spoke like to a confined elephant: Why do you, O Kākutstha, being the lord of all creatures and resembling Väsava himself, and also backed by myself, your servant, grieve like one forlorn ? The earth shall drink the gore of this Rākşasa, Virādha, when deprived of life, after he has been slain with a shaft by my angry self. That ire of mine which I had conceived against Bharata hankering after the kingdom, will I discharge on Virādha; even as the wielder of the thunder-bolt hurls his weapon at a hi!l. Let my mighty arrow acquiring velocity from the speed imparted to it through the energy of my arms, light on his huge breast, and force his life from forth his body; and let him whirling (at length) fall down to the earth.