On being thus taunted by Śūrpanakha, Khara spoke these sharp words in the midst of the Raksasas. Arising from this your humiliating censure, my wrath is beyond compare. I can not bear it, like salt-water cast on a sore. From my prowess I count not Rāma who is a human being possessed of a frail life him who slain by me shall to-day in consequence of his misdeed give up existence. Restrain your tears, and remove your fear. I shall despatch a Rāma along with his brother to the abode of Yama. You shall O Rākşasī, quaff on the ground the hot blood of Rāma of evil life, slain by my axe. Overjoyed on hearing the words that dropped from Khara's mouth, she again through fickleness extolled that foremost of Rākşasas, her brother. At first reprimanded by her and then praised, Khara spoke to is general, named Dusana. Do you, O gentle one, array fourteen thousand of those those Rākṣasas, gifted with furious vehemence, ever following my wish, who never turn away froin the field; who are hued like to purple clouds, who revel in cruelty*, and who are elated (in consequence of their prowess). *The North-West Province's text has some additional sloka:-Dreadful, wearing forms at will, possessing the pride of the lion, having large mouth, high-souled, revelling in cruelty, endued with strength, of fierce energy. And you gentle one, do you at once bring my car as well as my bows, and pasty coloured arrows and scimitars, and darts, and various whetted javelins. O you versed in warfare, for slaying this haughty Rāma, I go in the very fore-front of the high-souled Paulastyas. Lit.-Pulastya's The Rākşasas commonly descended from Pulastya. As he said this, Dūşaņa brought his great car hued like the sun, yoked with excellent steeds of various colours. sons. were Thereupon in a passion Khara ascended that car resembling a peak of Meru, embellished with burnished-gold, furnished with golden wheels, open; having its pole studded with lapises; surrounded with fishes and flowers and trees and stones, and the sun and the moon and gold, and auspicious articles; and swarms of birds, and stars; having streamers and swords; garnished with bells; and yoked with superb coursers. Beholding that mighty army consisting of cars and arms and pennons, Khara as well as Dūşana, said to that multitude of Rākşasas, March forth! Then uttering tremendous roars, rushed out with great vehemence four and ten thousand of those terrible Rākşasas equipped with clubs and parțiśas and darts and sharpened axes, and scimitars and discuses, shining beautifully in their hands and saktis and dreadful parighas and innumerable bows, and maces, and musalas and vajras fearful to behold, griped fast. And those following the will of Khara issued out of Janasthāna. Seeing those Rākṣasas of dreadful forms rushing out, Khara's car remaining a little away (from the press), proceeded after a short space. Then taking the perinission of Khara, the charioteer drove at speed those powerful steeds decked in shining gold. And driven with speed, the car of Khara. slayer of foes, filled all directions with its rattle. Khara, fired with wrath, and having piercing voice, hastening to destroy his enemy like the destroyer himself, again urged his charioteer with roars, like a mighty cloud showering down stones.