Then coming out of the hermitage, Raghu's descendant, Rāma, after a while, from grief, spoke these words to the son of Sumitrā, When confiding myself in you, I had left Maithilī with you in the wood, why then did you go out, leaving her behind? O Laksmana, directly I saw you approach, renouncing Maithilī, my mind, apprehending great wrong, became really aggrieved. O Lakşmaņa, seeing you coming at a distance, renouncing her, my left eye and arm as well as my heart keep throbbing. Thus accosted, Laksmana having auspicious signs, afflicted with great grief, said to the aggrieved Rāma, I have not come hither, of my own accord, renouncing Sītā; but I have come to you, having been urged thereto by herself with rudeness. The cries of O Laksimana, save me, as if uttered by the master, came to the ears of Maithili. Hearing those distressful accents, Maithili from affection [for you], breaking out into lamentations, and overwhelmed with fear, spoke to me, Off, off. On being repeatedly urged, with Go, answered Maithili in these words, tending to inspire her confidence. I do not see such a Rākṣasa, as can excite his fear. Do you desist. These cries do not come from him; but must have been uttered by someone else. How can he that can rescue the celestials themselves, utter, O Sītā, such a blame-worthy and base word as-save me? Some one for some purpose, assuming my brother's voice, is crying-O Laksmana, save me. O beauteous lady, these words, save memust have been uttered by some Rākşasa from fear. You should not act like a mean woman. Do not be over-whelmed; and banish your anxiety. There breathes no person, nor yet shall there be born any one in these three worlds who in the field shall vanquish Rāghava in fight. Rāghava is incapable of being beaten in battle by the very gods headed by Indra.' Thus addressed (by me) Vaidehi, deprived of her sense, shedding tears, spoke to me these cruel words, You cherish the vile idea that on your brother perishing, you shall come by me; but me you shall never have. As you do not go to him albeit he is crying loudly (for help), you follow Rāma in consonance with a hint from Bharata. A foe going about in disguise, you follow Rāma for my sake, prying into Rāghava's draw backs; and it is for this that you do not go (to him)? Thus accosted by Vaidehi, I, with eyes reddened in wrath, and my nether lip swollen in ire, rushed out of the asylum. When Saumitri had spoken thus, Rāma transported by grief; said to Laksmana, O gentle one, you have done wrong in having come out hither without her. Although you knew (full well) that I was able to withstand the Rākşasas, yet did you sally out at the angry words of Mithila's daughter. I am not pleased with you that hearing her harsh speech spoken in wrath, you have come hither, leaving Vaidehi behind. You have every way done wrong in not acting out my mandate in consequence of being urged by Sītā, and under the influence of indignation. That Rākṣasa lie low, being wounded by my shafts—that had drawn me away from the asylum wearing the form of a deer. I hit him stretching my brow slightly and fixing the shaft on it; when, renouncing his deerform he became a Rākṣasa wearing a bracelet and began to emit distressful shrieks. Wounded by my shaft, he, assuming my voice, and in accents capable of being heard from far, uttered those dreadful words fraught with dole, hearing which, you have come hither, renouncing Mithilā's daughter.