Vāli, ranging on the verge of death, casting his looks arounds and sighing faintly, espied his younger brother Sugrīva before him. Welcoming that lord of monkeys with clear accents, Vāli addressed him affectionately saying. O Sugrīva, do you not take to your heart the improper conduct I have shown towards you, being attracted by inevitable foolishness, subject as I was to sin. Methinks, O brother, it is not our fortune to enjoy at the same time the double bliss of fraternal affection and the enjoyment of kingdom, or else why has it happened otherwise? Do you acquire to-day this kingdom of the forest-ranges and know me as one who has departed to the abode of Death. Soon shall I renounce iny life, kingdom, my exquisite grace and my blameless fame. It behoveth you, O hero, O king, to perform what I shall speak to you in this plight, however difficult it might be. Do you behold Angada fallen on the ground with tears in his eyes-a little boy, incapable, brought up in luxury and deserving happiness. Do you maintain this my son, dearer than my life, like to your own son, born of your loins, satisfying all his wants in my absence. O best of monkeys, like to me, you are his father, protector, conferrer of gifts and remover of fear. This graceful son of Tārā equals you in prowess and shall precede you in the destruction of Raksasas. This youthful Angada, Tārā's son, gifted with energy and strength, shall perform befitting exploits displaying his prowess in the battle. Surasen's daughter is wonderfully expert in ascertaining sabtle things and giving counsels in the time of danger. Do you, without the least doubt perform what shall the chaste lady instruct you to do; for Tārā's advice never goes without effect. It behoveth you to perform Rāghava's service fearlessly or else you shall be visited with sin: on his being insulted you shall be injured. O Sugrīva, do you put on this celestial golden garland-herein dwelleth the bounteous Sree who shall renounce me after my death. Having been accosted thus by Vāli, out of fraternal affection, Sugrīva renouncing joy again became pale like to the Moon possessed by Rahu. Renouncing his inimical feelings, being thus addressed by Vāli and carrying out his words energetically Sugrīva accepted the golden garland as ordered (by him). And conferring (upon Sugrīva) that golden garland and beholding his son before him, Vāli, resolved upon death, spoke to Angada, saying. Do you place yourself now under the control of Sugrīva, ascertaining time and place, putting up with misery for your welfare and injury. O you having long arms, Sugrīva shall not regard you much, if did you remain in the same wise in which you hadst been brought up by me before*. The significance of the passage is as follows:You wert a mere child while I brought you up. But now you are a grown up young man and this is the time for you to serve your elders. Do you therefore serve Sugriva. O slayer of foes, do you never mix with Sugrīva's enemies, and place yourself always under Sugrīva's control, having subdued your senses and being intent upon your master's (Sugriva's) welfare. Do you not cultivate too much of friendship nor be wanting in it-for both of these extremes are sources of disasters. Do you therefore follow the golden mean. After he had said this, his eyes became expanded, his teeth were opened and his appearance became ghastly. And greatly pained by shafts he breathed his last. And thereupon, the monkeys, the foremost of those who go jumping, having lost their chief, bewailed and cried. On that monkey chief's departure to the land of celestials, Kişkindhā was divested of her lord, and gardens, hills and woods were all rendered lonely. That best of monkeys, who fought a dreadful battle with the high-souled Gandharvas, being dead, all other monkeys became of pale countenance. Vāli entered into a terrible conflict with the mighty-armed Golava and fought for ten years and five, for nights and days without respite. And on the sixteenth year, Golabha was killed. Bringing about the destruction of that wicked Gandharba, Vāli, having terrible teeth, saved us all from fear. How has he been killed to-day? Like to kine, incapable of enjoying peace in a mighty forest filled with lions, their chief being dead, these forest-rangers could not attain to felicity on the demise of that lord of monkeys. Thereupon, Tārā, sunk in the gulf of disaster, eyeing the countenance of her deceased lord, fell down to the ground embracing Vāli like to a creeper clinging for its support to a mighty but broken tree.