Having pointed out to Rāma the expedient for finding out Sītā the wise Kabandha began with the following significant words. This is the way, O Rāma, leading to the mount Rsyamūka, where stand, beautifying the West, the Jambū (a) Priyāla, (b) Panasa, (c) Nyagrodha, (d) Plaksa, (e) Tinduka (1) ASvatha, (g) Karnikāra, (h) Cuta, (i) Naga (j) Tilaka, (k) Naktamālaka, (1) Neelaśokā, (m) Kadamba, (n) Karavīrā, (0) Agnimukhya, (p) Asoka, Raktacandan, (q) Paribhadraka, (r) and many other trees. Ascending those trees or lowering them by force on earth, do you proceed living on those fruits like to ambrosia. [a] A fruit-tree, the rose apple-lat. (Eugenia Jambolana). [b] A tree commonly Piyal-Lat. (Buchanania latifolia). [c] The bread fruit of Taka tree—Lat. (Artocarpus integrifolia). [d] The Indian fig-tree-Lat. (Ficus Indica). [e] Waved leaf fig-tree-Lat. Ficus infectoria). [f] A sort of ebony-Lat. (Diospyros glutinosa). [g] A holy fig-tree-Lat. (ficus religiosa). [h] The name of a tree commonly Kaniyar-Lat. Pterospermum acerifo lium). [I] The mango—Lat. (Mangifera Indica). [i] A small tree-Lat. (Mesua ferrca). [k] A kind of tree commonly Tila. [1] A tree Lat. (Galcdupaarborea, Rox). [m] Blue Asoka-Lat. (Fonesia Asock). [n] A plant commonly Kadamba-Lat. (Nauclea Kadamba). [o] A fragrant plant-Lat. (Oleander or Nerium, Odorum). [p] The marking nut plant-Lat. (Semecarpius anacardium). [q] Red Sandal. [r] The coral tree-Lat. (Erythrina fulgens). Passing by this forest, O Kākutstha, you shall reach another abounding in trees blooming with flowers like to the garden of celestials and Uttarkuru where in all the months of the year the trees produce fruits and honey and where all the seasons dwell as in the forest of Chaitraratha*. There stand beautifully many a tree lowered down with the burden of fruits, containing towering branches, dense as a collection of clouds or a mountain. Ascending those trees and lowering them, Lakşmaņa shall offer you, fruits like to ambrosia. The garden of the deity Kuvera. It is derived from Caitraratha a Gandharva in charge of the garden. O heroes, ranging from forest to forest, from high mountains to hillocks, you shall get at the lake Pampā, void of gravels and acquatic plants and hence there is no danger of falling down to the people, having level watering-places, covered with sands and blooming with red and white lotuses. There emit forth musical notes, swans, frogs, cranes and ospreys sporting in the lake Pampā. They are not filled with terror in view of human beings, inexperienced as they are in the matter of destruction. O Rāghava do you fare on those plump birds like to a lump of clarified butter and diverse fishes such as Rohita, Vakratunda+, and Nala. O Rama, the devoted Laksmana, shall offer to you, various other best fishes, devoid of scale and fins, plump, filled with bones, having destroyed them with shafts and roasted them in fire. And after you had feasted on them, Lakşmaņa shall bring you water for drinking on a lotus leaf, smelling like a lotus, coming in contact with flowers, delicious, pleasantly cold, wholesome, void of impurities, transparent like silver and crystal. The Rohi fist-Lat. (cyprinus Rohita Ham). A kind of fish resembling a wheel in appearance. A kind of sprai, according to some, a shrimp or prawn. While roaming in the evening he shall point out to you fat monkeys ranging in the wood and lying in the hollows of mountains. And you too, O best of men, shall behold those fat monkeys, who had drunk water, roaring like to oxen appearing on the banks of a river to drink water. And rambling in the evening, you shall assuage your grief beholding the pleasant water of Pampā and blossoming trees. There, O Rāghava, the Tilakas and Naktamālakas, crested with flowers and full blown white and red lotuses shall mitigate your sorrows. There live no person who wears garlands of those flowers. Garlands strung with those flowers never wither away, O Rāghava, because the disciples of the great ascetic Matariga lived there with concentrated hearts. Drops of perspiration, falling on the earth from the persons of those ascetics worn out with the burden of the wild fruits collected by them for their spiritual guide, have been transformed by virtue of their asceticism to these garlands. These garlands do never wither, O Rāghava, because of their origination from those drops of perspiration. Even at the present day, O Kakutstha, there live an immortal mendicant woman, by name Savari, who had waited in attendance upon those departed ones. Beholding you, O Rāma, who are adored of all creatures like to the Deity Himself, that mendicant woman, ever engaged in pious observances, shall attain to the abode of celestials. O Rāma, turning to the western bank of Pampa, you shall, O Kakutstha, behold the incomparable and secret asylum of Matanga. Fearing the divine authority of that great ascetic Matanga, the elephants, though there are many, dare not cross the threshold of his asylum. O Rāghava, this forest is widely known as Matanga wood. You shall sport, O Rāma, with a delighted heart in that forest resembling the celestial garden-Nandana and filled with various birds. There stands in front of Pampă the highly inaccessible mount Rşyamūka, ornamented with many a blossoming tree and guarded on all sides by little serpents. That mount is highly munificent. It was created by Brahmā in the days of yore. A person, sleeping on the summit of that hill and dreaming of an accession of wealth, really gets at it after the dream is over. A perpetrator of iniquitous deeds and engaged in impious observances ascending that hill, the Rākṣasas seize upon him, asleep, and bruise him. You shall hear the terrible roar of the young elephants ranging in the asylum of Matanga, situated on the banks of Pampā. You shall furthermore observe many a quickly moving, infuriated elephant, resembling clouds in hue and with red temporal juice oozing out of their heads, roaming here and there sometimes separately and again in a band. Those mighty elephants, roaming the forest, return to their woody homes, drinking the pleasant, pure and sweet smelling water of Pampā. Do you assuage your grief, beholding there the bears, wolves and Rurus of a tender countenance like to sapphire, who are harmless and never afraid of human beings. There is a huge cave, O Rāma, in that mountain, covered on all sides with rocks and where it is very hard to enter. At the entrance of that cave lies a beautiful, wide lake of cool water, hedged on all sides with trees abounding in fruits. There live with other monkeys the virtuoussouled Sugrīva, who sometimes reside on the summit of the hill. Having thus addressed Rāma and Lakşmaņa, Kabandha, highly powerful resembling the sun in effulgence and wearing garlands appeared beautiful on the sky. Thereupon Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, preparing to proceed spoke to that great one stationed in the sky, saying, Do you go' Whereto Kabandha replied, saying Do you proceed to make good your end and bidding them adieu, who were well pleased, departed. Regaining his pristine beauty and shining in grace and effulgence that Kabandha, who was on the sky, fixing his looks upon Rāma, and pointing out to him his way, said Do you make friends with (Sugrīva).