Then Virādha again spoke filling the forest, Do you tell me who ask you, who are you and whither are you going? The North-West Provinces text has additional Sloka : Having said this, the graceful Lakşmaņa spoke to Virādha as if jestingly, Who are you that coming to the forest, are ranging it pleasantly?- Thereupon, the highly energetic Rāma answered the Rākşasa with a flaming face, when he had thus asked (Rāma) that he belonged to the Iksvaku race. Know us that are in the forest, for Kșatriyas of respectable character. I also am anxious of knowing who you are, wandering in the Dandakas. Virădha answered Råma having truth for his prowess, Ah! I will tell you, O king. Do you,O Răghava understand! I am son of Java, and my mother is Satahradā. All the Rāksasas of the earth have called me Virādha. Having gratified Brahmă by my asceticism, IⓇreceived (this boon) that none in the world would be able to slay me by mangling my body with weapons. Forsaking this fair one, do you, renouncing all hope (of either recovering her or vanquishing me), speedily flee away to that place whence you had come; else I shall deprive you of your lives. Thereat, Rāma with his eyes reddened through wrath replied to that Rākşasa of a deformed shape, the wicked Viradha. Little! shame on you of base purposes! You surely seek your own death; and (death) you shall get in battle. Stay! You escapist me not with life. Then stringing his bow, Rāma, speedily aiming at the Rākşasa, pierced him with sharpened shafts; and (then) from his bow-string let go seven shafts, having their feathered parts plaited with good, furnished with great velocity, and coursing like Suparna or the wind. Thereat, resembling flames, those arrows furnished with peacocks, feathers, pierced. Viradha's body, and fell to the earth, covered with blood. On being thus pierced, the Rākṣasa set Vaidehi down, and, upraising a dart, rushed in wrath towards Rāma and Lakşmaņa. And sending forth a mighty roar, he took up a dart resembling the banner of Sakra and he then appeared like the Destroyer* with opening mouth. Then the brothers showered a blazing volley of shafts on that Rākşasa, resembling the Destroyer himself. The text has Kalāntakayamopame-abl..~~ resembling Kala, Antaka, or Yama. The commentator cites a sloka, which assigns three several functions to the three, Kāla execute his office on the occasion of the separation of life from the body; Antaka compasses the end; and Yama finally sits in judgement upon the departed soul. But this strikes me as misplaced erudition. I, however, give the commonsense rendering, Stationing himself at a spot, the Rākşasa, laughing terribly, yawned, and as he yawned the flest-coursing shafts fell off from his person, a And by virtue of the bestowal of the boon (by Brahmā), the Rākşasa Virādha drew up his vital energies, and, lifting up a pike, darted at the descendants of Raghu. That best of those bearing arms cut off with two arrows that dart resembling the thunder-bolt and flaming in the sky. And the dart severed by the shafts of Rāma, fell to the earth, as falls a crag severed by the thunderbolt. Thereat, swiftly raising up sword, resembling a black snake, each (of the Rāghavas) approached his antagonist, and began to assail him hastily. Thus hard beset, that terrible one, seizing them both with his arms, attempted to make away with those foremost of men, who, however, retained their calmness. Reading his purpose, Rāma spoke to Lakşmana, Let the Rākşasa bear us by this way. Not use of letting him. O Sumitra's son let the Rākşasa bear us wherever he likes. Even this, by which the ranger of the night is proceeding, is our way. And lifting up (Rāma and Lakşmana) by his might and. prowess, as if they were striplings, that haughty ranger of the night laid them on his shoulders. And having deposited the Rāghavas on his shoulders, Virādha-ranger* of night-sending up dreadful shouts, directed his course towards the forest. Another reading is:-That ranger of the night laid on his shoulders, those ones, who were puffed up with their exceeding prowess. And he at length entered the forest resembling a mighty mass of clouds, furnished with various kinds of trees, picturesque with diverse species of birds, and abounding in jackals, serpents and beasts.