Then the woe began Śūrpanakhā, in high wrath spoke harshly in the midst of the courtiers, to Rāvana, given to railing loudly against all creatures. Intoxicated with enjoyments, acting as you will, and without any control whatever, you do not see that a dreadful disaster is impending. The subjects do not esteem a monarch that is given to sensual enjoyments, in intent upon satisfying his lust and is covetous like the fire in a cemetery. The king that dose not act at the proper time, finds destruction along with his kingdom and acts. Even as elephants shun the muddy river, do people shun from a distance, the ruler that dose not send cut spies, who show now himself (to his subjects), and who had lost his independence. Like to rocks in the sea, those monarchs that do not administer their dominions, that are not dependent, do not prosper. Having incurred the hostility of the gods, the Dānavas and the Gandharvas of subdued souls and senses, how can you, who are fickle, and hast not employed spies, become the king? And. O Raksasa, you are childish and foolish; and dose not know what you should. How can you then become the king? O you best of conquerors, those kings whose spies, exchequer and morality are not free, are like the common head. It is because kings know distant dangers through spies, therefore they are styled farsighted. I believe you have no spies, and that your counsellors are common folks, since although Janasthāna with your kinsman is destroyed, yet you take it not to heart. Fourteen thousands of Raksasas of dreadful deeds, with Khara and Dūşana, have all been slain by Rāma single-handed; Rāma of untiring energy has inspired the saints with courage; the Dandakas have been benefited; and Janasthāna had been harassed. But you, covetous and intoxicated and in the power of others, do not understand that a great danger is over-hanging (you). People do not in times of peril assist a sovereign that is wrathful, stingy, intoxicated, haughty and deceitful. Even his own kindred slay a sovereign that sets immense store by his own self, is of light worth, regards himself highly, and irascible. They do not serve him; nor do they fear when he intimidates them. Such an one is speedily dethroned; and reduced to poverty and becomes like a straw. Even dry wood may serve a purpose; or stone, or dust; but no purpose is capable of being served by a sovereign that has been cast off his place. Like a cloth that has been worn, like a garland that has been trodden, a king that had been dethroned, although able, is of no consequence. But a king that keeps his wits about him, understands everything, is of controlled senses, and grateful, and of virtuous character, endure for ever. That king is honoured by men; that sleeping with his eyes, is awake as respects his eye of duty, and (the effects of) whose anger and favour, are seen (by all). But, you Rāvana, who hast not by means of spies; acquainted yourself with the slaughter of Rākşasas, are of evil understanding and bereft of all these virtues. Given to disgracing others, ignorant of the proper distribution of time and place*, and never taking care to distinguish merits and defects, : you, your kingdom being in danger, will speedily meet with disaster. The commentator, is silent here. the meaning evidently is, you do not discern the where and when of things. On his vices having been thus celebrated by her (Surpanakhā), that lord of the rangers of night, Råvaņa, musing awhile, was long plunged in thought.