My elder brother named Väli-destroyer of foes, was formerly highly, honoured both by my father and myself. At the death of our father, the counsellors, saying,-This is the eldest son', made him, who was well loved (of all), lord of the monkeys in the kingdom. While he was governing the kingdom which had belonged to his father and grand-father, I, at all times, in humiliation, remained like a servant. There was one endued with energy, named Māyāvi. He was the eldest son of Dunduvī. Formerly there arose a mighty hostility between himself and Vali. It came to pass that one night when all had fallen asleep, (Māyāvi) coming to Kişkindhā, began to emit roars in great wrath, and challenged Väli to an encounter. My brother, who was fast asleep, hearing those dreadful yells, could not bear them; but at once rushed out vehemently. And as he rushed out in wrath, for the purpose of slaying that foremost of Asuras, he was opposed by his wives as well as myself, who humbled himself before him. But moving them aside, that exceedingly powerful one sallied out. Thereupon out of affection I also went out with Vāli. And seeing my brother and me present from a distance, the Asura, seized with a panic, fled with speed. And as he was rushing on in fear and when we had proceeded further, the moon arising, discovered the way. And the Asura, coming by a capacious and impregnable hole covered with grass (on the surface), entered it amain; and we remained there. Seeing his enemy enter the hole, Vāli, overcome by anger, and with his senses agitated, spoke to me, saying, Do you, O Sugriva, carefully stay at the mouth of the hole, while I entering in, slay my foe in battle. Hearing his speech, that subduer of foes was besought by me (for permission to enter the cave along with him). But making me swear by touching his feet he entered the cave. After he had entered the cave, and as I remained at its mouth, a space of over a complete year rolled away. And seized with sorrow (I reflected), 'As I do not see my brother, he must be lost—and my mind was alarmed, apprehending his death. After a long time, I saw frothy blood issuing from the cave. There at I was greatly aggrieved. And roars of Asuras also reached my ears; but I could not hear the cries of my superior, engaged in conflict. And from these signs concluding my brother to be slain, I, closing the mouth of the cavern with a crag, huge as a hill, and afflicted with grief, after performing his watery rites, came (back) to Kiskindha, O my friend. And although I carefully concealed (the matter), the counsellors heard it all. There they, assembled together, installed me (in the kingdom). And, as I was ruling the kingdom with justice, it came to pass that after having slain his foe, the Dānava, that monkey (Vali) came to Kiskindha. Then seeing me installed, he, with his eyes reddened in wrath, slaying my counsellors, spoke harsh words to me. And although I was capable of chastising him, yet my mind influenced by a sense of my brother's dignity, did not incline towards that sin. Having slain his foe, he then entered his city; and I, honouring that high-souled one, duly saluted him. He withal did not with a glad heart utter his benediction. And, O lord, I, bowing, touched his feet with my crown; yet from anger Vāli did not extend to me his grace.