Thereupon smelling the face of that lord of monkeys, Tārā again addressed her deceased lord, known all over the world, saying. O hero, disregarding my words, you are lying on the uneven earth, hard and filled with gravels. O lord of monkeys, the earth is dearer to you than I, since you are lying there embracing her and are not welcoming me. O hero, O dear, O brave lord, wonder it is that God under the semblance of Rāma, has placed himself under the control of Sugrīva; hither to fore he shall be regarded as a hero. Why are you not awake, hearing the bewailings of bears and monkeys who used to wait upon you, powerful, as well as that of Angada and myself? Alas! you are lying on this bed of the heroes, being slain in the battle, where formerly, your enemies destroyed by you, used to lie down, O you born of a pure family, O you that are fond of warfare, O my dear, O conferror of honours, whither have you departed making me husbandless? Let not the wise, henceforth, confer their daughters upon the heroes. Alas! behold me, the wife of a hero, made a widow in no time. Shattered is my honour and destroyed is my happiness and I am sunk in the deep abyss of grief. Forsooth, this my firm heart is not sundered into hundred pieces, beholding my husband slain! You are my friend, my dear husband and a great hero-and you had met with destruction, being struck by another man. A husbandless woman is always styled by the wise as widow, although she might have a son and enough of riches. O hero, you are lying down in a pool of blood issuing out of your own person, like to your own bed having a red-dyed bed-sheet. Your body is on all sides besmeared with blood and dust and I am incapable of embracing you with my arms, O best of monkeys. Surely has Sugrīva satisfied his hostile intention to-day, whose fear has been removed by one shaft, discharged by Rāma. Thyself departing to the land of the dead. I have been eyeing you simply, being prevented from touching your person by the shaft piercing your heart.* The meaning is:-Lest by my touching that shaft you feelest a greater pain. Thereupon Neela took out that shaft from the person of (Vāli) like to a flaming serpent lurking in a mountain cave. There beamed the shaft extracted from his body like to the rays of the Sun, stationed on the summit of the setting hill. And there poured forth from all his wounds, streams of blood, like to showers of melted copper and other metals falling from a mountain. And (Tārā) washed, with tears, her heroic husband's body covered with dust and wounded with weapons. Beholding her husband thus slain and besmeared with blood, she spoke to her son, Angada, having coppery eyes, saying: Behold this terrible declining stage of your Sire. Here is the end of his hostilities collected by his impious action. O my son, do you how to your kingly father, the conferrer of honours, who has departed to the abode of Death, having a flaming person like to the rising Sun. Thus accosted, Angada rose up and, saying, I (do touch my Sire's feet), embraced his father's feet with his plump arms. (Thereupon Tāră said)—Saying 'Do you live long' why did you not welcome Angada, to-day as before, who has bowed to you? I am with my son, standing by you who are dead, like to a cow with her calf, having the bull slain by a lion. How have you, without me, your wife, bathed in the water of Rāma's shafts, at the end of your battle-like sacrifice? Why do I not behold here that favourite golden garland of thine, which was conferred on you by the lord of celestials, pleased in a battle? Royal grace has not renounced you, O conferrer of honours, albeit you are dead, like to the rays not quitting the king of mountains, even after the Sun is set. You didst not act by my wholesome words, nor could I prevent you. And I am now destroyed with my son, along with you in the battle. Truly has Sree (goddess of wealth) renounced me.