With a smile, Rāma jestingly addressed Śūrpanakhā who had been ensnared in the noose of love, in soft words. Gentle one, I am already wedded; this is my beloved wife. To females like to you co-wifehood is exceedingly miserable. This young brother of mine is good-looking, and is of an excellent character; he is graceful, and is still unwived. The powerful one is named Laksmana. He has not yet tested the pleasures of a wife's company, and is desirous of having a spouse. And he is youthful and of an inviting presence. He will become a fit husband for you, considering this your beauty. O you of expansive eyes, seek this brother of mine as your husband, even as the solar beam seeks Meru. (By doing so), You O supremely beautiful damsel, will not have to fear a co-wife. Having been thus addressed by Rāma, the Rākṣasī intoxicated with lust, at once leaving Rāma, spoke to Lakşmaņa. I am fit to be your wife possessed of transcendental grace, having regard to this beauty of yours. And with me you will happily range these Dandakas. Thus accosted by the Räkşasi, Sumitrā's son, Lakşmana versed in speech, with a smile appropriately observed to Śūrpanakhā, Why wish you to be the servant of me who am a servant myself*? O lotus-hued one, I am dependant on my noble brother. The text is difficult to render literally:—Why wish you to be the female servant of me who am myself a male servant. O you of expansive eyes, be you securing the sumimum bonum, with a joyful heart, become, O superbly beautiful wench, the younger wife of the noble one of great good fortune. Renouncing this frightful, unchaste, hideous, old wife possessed of a lean abdomen; he will devote himself to you. O paragon among damsels, O supremely charming lady, what man possessed of discernment, passing by such grace, would bear affliction to a human female? Thus accosted by Lakşmaņa, that hideous one having a lean abdomen being incapable of understanding jest, took his words as true. Thereupon as that subduer of enemies, the irrepressible Rāma, was seated in the cottage in company with Sītā, the Rākşasī, transported with lust, said to him. Forsaking this deformed, unchaste, horrible old wife of yours possessed of a lean abdomen, you do not regard me. To-day, you looking on, I shall eat up this human female. And I shall, rid of a co-wife, happily range with you. Having said this, even as a mighty meteor strike Rohiņī, that one having eyes resembling live coals, waxing exceedingly enraged, rushed towards that (damsel) with the eyes of a doe. Thereupon, hindering the Rākṣasi resembling the noose of death, as she was rushing on, the mighty Rāma, growing wroth said to Lakşmaņa. O Saumitri (Sumitrā's son), what is the good of jesting with a base and wicked one? No use of doing it. Look, I amiable one, Vaidehi (Videha's daughter) is well nigh dead. It behoves you, O foremost of men, to deform this frightful, unchaste Rākşasī of a huge abdomen, transported with lust. Thus desired the exceedingly strong Laksmana, fired with wrath, taking out his sword, in the sight of Rāma, cut off her nose and ears. Her ears and nose cut off, the terrible Śūrpanakhā, uttering frightful cries, fled a main into the forest whence she had come. And being deformed, and covered with gore, the dreadful Rākşasī sent up many a roar, like clouds rumbling in the rains. And bleeding profusely, the grimvisaged Rākṣasī, lifting up her arms, and roaring, entered the mighty forest. Then having been deformed, (the Rākşasī) approaching, her brother of fierce energy, Khara, come to Janasthāna, (seated surrounded by numbers of Raksasas), fell down to the earth, even as the thunderbolt bursts from the sky. Then that sister of Khara, bathed in blood, and deprived of her senses through fright, related all about Räma's arrival at the forest along with Lakşmaņa and his own wife, as well as the forest along with Lakşmana and his own wife, as well as the circumstances connected with her being deformed.