And to Khara deprived of his car standing with a mace in his hand, that exceedingly energetic one, Rāma, precluding his speech with mildness, spoke. Backed by this mighty host abounding in elephants and horses and cars, you have done an exceedingly wicked deed, execrated by all the worlds. Even if one happen to be the lord of the three worlds, one given to troubling creatures, and who is cruel and engaged in wicked acts, can not exist. All persons destroy, like a snake that has intruded itself, him that dose cruel deeds, hostile to the interests of every one. People delightedly behold the end of him that doing an action either from covetousness or desire, dose not like a Brāhmaṇi swallowing a Karakā, see the consequence thereof. What, O Rākṣasa, do you gain by slaughtering exceedingly pious ascetics engaged in righteous acts, living in the forest of Dandaka? Like to trees whose roots have been reduced, cruel persons, execrated of men, who perpetrate iniquitous acts, do not exist long. As a tree puts forth blossoms in season, the doer of sinful deeds, at the hour (of repentance) inevitably reaps their fruit in the shape of dreadful anguish (of the spirit). O ranger of night, as the effect of having taken rice mixed with poison, appears without delay, even so also people readily reap the fruit of their own acts. O ranger of the night, it is to take the lives of the perpetrators of dreadful sins, who wish ill to men, that I the king have come. Today the gold-decked arrows discharged by ine, piercing (your body), shall enter into the carth, cleaving it, like serpents falling into an ant-hill. Slain in battle, you shall in company with your army, follow those people practising piety, whom you have devoured in the Dandaka forest. Today let those great saints, who had formerly been slain by you, stationed in the sky, behold you slain (in turn) with my arrows, and inhabiting hell. Do you strike as you like. And youl that are of an odious race, do you put forth your energy. Today I will bring down your head, even as a palm falls to the ground. Thus addressed by Rāma, Khara enraged and beyond himself with passion, with eyes reddened, replied. O son of Dasaratha, why having slain inferior Rākṣasas in battle, do you praise yourself without reason? Those foremost of men that are puissant and powerful, do not, inflated with their energy, mouth (their own consequence). It is the mean-minded Kșatriyas of impure hearts that magnify themselves among men, even as you, O Rama,do. What hero, when the hour of his death has approached, publishes in the field his own lofty lineage and sings his own hymn. As brass wearing the semblance of gold, displays its own defect on being heated*, with a fire lit with Kusa, so you have betrayed your own lightness by this speech of yours. i.c. becomes dusky, (Ramanuja). You do not see me staying here mace in hand, like a moveless mountain dyed in metals, bearing mobile and immobile things. I can, mace in hand, deprive you and the three worlds to boot clean of your lives, like the very Destroyer with the noose in his hand. But I will not parley much with you as much as I could wish: the sun is going to set, and our fight shall be interrupted. Fourteen thousand Räksasas have been slaughtered by you. I will for their deaths wipe their tears to-day. Saying this Khara, highly enraged, hurled his mace+ provided with golden rings at Rāma, like to the blazing thunderbolt. Another reading is, plaited with gold. Thereat, reducing to ashes trees and shrubs, that mighty flaming mace, discharged by Khara's arm, fell before Rama. And Rāma severed in many fragments that mighty mace, resembling the noose of Death, as ascending the welkin, it was coming down. Thereupon, like a she-serpent brought down by force of incantations, the mace fell to the earth shattered and riven.