Sugrīva well pleased again addressed Rāghava, the son of Raghu, saying, O Rāma, this servant of thine, foremost of my counsellors, Hanumān, has related (to me), the reason of your arrival in this lone forest. Your wife, Maithili, daughter to Janaka, separated from you as well as the intelligent Laksmana, and weeping (in consequence) was carried off by a Rākṣa. Seeing for opportunities of doing mischief that Rākşa, having slain Jațáyu, has caused to you the grief that comes of separation from one's wife. But you with soon be relieved from the sorrow that comes of separation from one's wife. Her will I bring like to the ravished Devasruti. O repressor of foes, whether she be in the nether regions or under the sky, I will, bringing your wife, make her over to you. O Rāghava, know my words to be true. O mighty-armed one, like to poison, your wife is incapable of being digested even by the gods and Asuras with Indra (at their head). O mightyarmed one, leave off sorrow, I will bring back your beloved. From guess I find that it was doubtless Mithilā's daughter whom I saw when she was being carried away by that Räksa of terrific deeds. She was crying, Rama, Laksmana, Laks maņa,' and in the lap of Răvaņa she looked like the wife of the Snake-chief. Seeing me along with my four counsellors stationed at the hill, she dropped down her scarf and her ornaments. All these, O Rāghava, I have taken and kept (with me). I will bring them. It behoveth you to recognise them. There upon Rāma spoke to the sweetspeeched Sugrīva, 'Bring (them), at once, my friend. Why did you tarry?' Having been thus addressed, Sugrīva swiftly entered a deep cavern in the mountain, with the view of doing what was dear to Rāghava. Then taking the scarf as well as the ornaments. Look at this, (Saying this) the monkey held them before Rāma. Taking the sheet and the ornaments, (Rama) had his ayes filled with tears, like the moon covered by the dew. From affection for Sītā, (Rāma,) his eyes filled with tears, deprived of patience, fell down to the ground. And placing the elegant ornaments on his bosom, he sighed again and again, like an enraged serpent in a hole. Seeing Sumitrā's son at his side, Rāma shedding ceaseless tears, began to lament piteously, O Lakşmaņa, behold this scarf and these ornaments which Vaidehī, while being carried away, let fall from her person to the earth. Surely Sītā, while being ravished, let these fall on a sward, for these remain as before. Thus accosted, Laksmana spoke, saying, I do not know her bracelets; I do not know her earrings. But I know full well her bangles on account of my always bowing down to her feet. Thereupon Rāghava said these words to Sugriva, Tell me, O Sugriva, at what place didst you see Sītā, while she, dear to me as life, was taken away by the fierce-looking Raksasas? Where does that Rākṣa, who has brought on this high peril, and for whom I will slay all the Rākşasas, live? He, that has carried off Mithila's daughter, and roused my wrath, has certainly for his own end, opened the door of death. Tell me all about that ranger of the night, that deceitfully has carried away my dearest wife from the forest. My foe, O lord of monkey will I to-day send to the neighbourhood of Yāma.