Then Akampana bestirring himself, speedily issuing out of Janasthāna, spoke to Rāvana, O king, a great many Rākşasa living in Janasthāna, have been slain, and Khara also had been slain in battle. I alone have with much difficulty managed to come here. Thus addressed, the ten-necked one, flaming up in energy, with his eyes reddened in wrath, said this to Akampana, Who, having his days numbered, had ravaged the dreadful Janasthāna? Who shall no more wend the way of all beings? Doing me a bad turn, Maghavan himself, or Vaiśravana, or Yama, or Vişnu, cannot attain happiness. I am the destroyer of the Destroyer himself; and I burn even very Fire. And I can bring Death itself to mortality. I can by my impetus resist the force of the wind. And when enraged, I can by my energy consume the Sun and Fire. Thereat, Akampana, with joined hands, from fear replied to the ten-necked Rāvana, in faltering words, beseeching courage. Thereat that foremost of Raksasas, the tennecked one, granted him courage. Then inspired with confidence, Akampana without fear spoke, There is a son of Dasaratha, youthful, resembling a lion*, named Rāma. of broad shoulders, and possessed of excellent beauty of long and mighty-arms. (he) is sable-hued, of high fame, and of matchless prowess and vigour. It is he that in Janasthāna has slain Khara with Dusana. Another reading is Virunga: i upopetu: possessed of handsome person.- Hearing Akampana's words, that lord of the Rākşasas, Rāvana, breathing like a mighty serpent, said these words, Tell me, O Akampana, has Rāma come to Janasthāna, accompanied with the sovereign of the celestials and the body of the immortals? Again hearing Rāvana's words, Akampana described the strength and energy of that highsouled one. (He) is named Rama, and is exceedingly energetic; the foremost of al bowmenfurnished with celestial panoply; and is possessed of pre-eminent prowess in warfare. Like to him in strength, of red eyes, and gifted with a voice like the sound of a kettledrum, his younger brother, Laksmana has a countenance resembling the full-moon. He has met with him (Rāma) as the wind meeteth with a flame. he is endeued with grace, and is the foremost of monarchs. It is he who has ravaged Janasthāna. The magnanimous gods did not come there, No doubts need be entertained on this head. The feathered shafts, plated with gold near the plumed part, becoming five-mouthed serpents at up the Raksasas. Wherever oppressed with fear the Rākṣasas go, they see Rāma stationed before them. In this way, O sinless one, has Janasthāna been exterminated by him. Hearing Akmpana's words, Ravana said, “I will go to Janasthāna for slaying Rāma with Laksmana. When he had said this, Akampana said, He ar, O king, the true report of Rāma's prowess and manliness. Enraged, the highly famous Rāma cannot by putting forth vigour be checked. And by means of his shafts, he can me river in full flood turn its course. And he can bring down from the sky its stars and planets, and that graceful one can recover the depressed Earth. That lord can sub-merge all creatures by riving the continents of the sea, and with his shafts can resist the onset of the occan, and the wind; and that illustrious one that foremost of persons by virtue of his vigour, destroying the worlds, can again create all creatures. O ten necked one, forsooth, Rāma cannot be subdued in conflict, either by you or the world of Rākşasas, as heaven is incapable of being attained by a sinner. I deem him incapable of being slain by all the Gods and Asuras together. This alone is the means of slaying. Do you heedfully listen to it! He has a wife of sterling worth in the world, and that slender-waisted one is known by the name of Sītā. She is in the full bloom of youth, and has a symmetrical person-a jewel among womankind embellished with jewels. And neither a goddess, nor a Gandharvī, nor yet an Apsarī, nor a. Pannagī is equal to her; and what is a human female? Thrashing him, do you in the mighty forest, carry away his wife. Without Sītā, Rama shall cease to exist. Thereupon, the lord of the Rākṣasas, Rāvaņa, happened to relish those words; and reflecting (a while), that mighty-armed one addressed Akampana. Excellent well. I will go there alone, accompanied by my charioteer only. I will this very morning with a glad heart bring Vaidehi to this spacious palace. Saying this, Ravana departed, lighting up all sides, on a sun-shiny car, yoked with mules. And coursing the firmament, that mighty car of that foremost of Rākşasas looked like the Moon among clouds. And proceeding far, he, approaching the asylum (of Taraka's son), presented himself before him. And Mārīca entertained the king with meats and drinks passing human. Having entertained him personally with a seat and water (to wash the feet), Marica spoke these pregnant words. O king, O lord of the Rākşasas, is it well with the worlds? I am filled with fear: I apprehend that all is not right, since you have come hither (alone) in such post-haste speed. Thus addressed by Mārica, the highly energetic Ravana, versed in speech, said. My child, the guards (of Janasthāna) have been slain by Rāma of untiring energy; and all What Janasthāna, incapable of being slain, has (by him) been brought down in battle. Do you, therefore, assist me in carrying away his wife. Hearing these words of the lord of Rākş asas, Mārīca said. What enemy of yours in the guise of a friend, has spoken of Sītā to you? And, O foremost of monarchs, who, having been, entertained by you, dose not bear you good will? Tell me, who is it that has told you, 'Bring Sītā hither?' Who is it that has set his heart on severing the summit of the entire Räksasa world? He must be your enemy that excites you to this. Of this there is not the least doubt. he wishes to extract through your agency the fangs of a venomous snake. Who (intends) to lead you astray by imposing on you such a deed? Who, O king, has struck in the head, you that was slumbering in peace? Rāghava in war is like a mad elephant, having unblemished ancestry for his trunk, perspiration for his temporal exudation; and arms resting well beside him for his tusks. O Rāvaņa, you are not competent even to look at an him. You ought not to rouse up the slecping manlion, that slayer of skilful Rākșasas resembling deer, with his sport in the field, for his joints and down; arrows for his body and sharp scimitar for his teeth. O Sovereign of the Räkşasas, you ought not to plunge yourself into this dreadful, and abyssless ocean, having the bow for its alligators, activity of arms for its shine, arrows for its billows, and engagement for its waters. Be propitious, O lord of Lankā! O foremost of Rākşasas, with a contented heart, you had better go your way to Lankā. Do you ever sport with your own wives: let Rāma in company with his wife, sport in the woods. Thus addressed by Mārīca, the ten-throated Rāvana desisted, and entered Lankā the best of capitals.