After Sītā had spoken these harsh words, Rāvana, enraged, with a frown, replied. O you of a beatiful countenance, I am the step-brother of the Lord of wealth and my name is the mighty Ten-necked Rāvana May good betide you! Like to people fearing Death, the celestials, Gandharvas, Piśāchas, Pannagas and Serpents fly in diverse directions being frightened by me. I have subdued by my prowess, my step-brother, the Lord of wealth in a conflict, quarrelling with him for some reason. Thereat, that one carried by men, renouncing out of my fear this wealthy abode of Lankā, has been living on that Lord of mountains, Kailāśa. O you auspicious one, by virtue of my prowess I have taken away that beautiful chariot of his called Puspaka. Ascending that chariot you shall travei by the ethereal route. O Maithilee, when I am excited with ire, Indra and other celestials at the mere sight of my countenance fly away in divers directions out of fear. Wherever I live, the Wind bloweth cautiously and the Sun (of piercing rays) out of fear for me appeareth in the welkin like the Moon. What shall I say more? Wherever I live, even the leaves of the trees do not flutter and the currents of the rivers are stopped. Beyond the ocean stands my beautiful capital Larikā like to Indra's Amaravati, (the capital of the Lord of celestials), guarded on all sides by the terrible night-rangers and encircled by yellow walls. That beautiful city has gate-ways of ornamented and jewelled arches and golden apartinents. It is filled with clephants, horses and chariots, always resounds with the sounds of bugles, and is beautified with gardens having divers trees of wished-for fruits. O Sītā, O you the daughter of a king, in this city shall you dwell with me. O large-minded damsel, you shall never think of earthly women. O you of an exquisite countenance, enjoying these many things passing human, you shall not any more think of Rāma a human being of brief existence. Placing his beloved son on the throne, king Dasaratha has sent away his eldest son of weak prowess into the woods. O you of expansive eyes, what shall you do with that wretched ascetic Rāma who has been deprived of his kingdom? I am the lord of the whole world of Rākşasas; being pierced by the shafts of Kāma have I come by you. It does not behave you therefore to pass by me. O timid damsel, truly shall you repent afterwards if you did disregard me, like to Urvasi kicking Pururavā. Rāma is a human being and is not even equal to a finger of mine in battle. By your good luck have I come to you-do you give yourself up to me, O you of a beautiful countenance. Being thus addressed by him, Vaidehi exceedingly wroth and with blood-red eyes spoke to that Lord of Rākşasas in the lonely forest, these bold words. How do you wish to perpetrate such an impious deed after introducing as your brother that highly worshipful Kubera adored by all the deities. O Rāvana, surely shall all the Räkşasas meet with death, who have such a stupid, harsh and lustful person like you for their king. One can breathe on this earth carrying away Indra's wife, Śacī—but stealing me, the wife of Rāma, no body shall be able to live in peace. O Räkşasa, it might be possible for one to live on this earth treating contemptuously the wife of the holder of thunder-bolt, but insulting me none shall escape the hands of Death even if he drinketh nectar.