Beholding her husband lying dead on the ground with the life-destroying shafts of Rama, Tārā, having a moon-like countenance, approaching, embraced him. And seeing him slain with shafts like to an elephant, resembling a lord mountains and an uprooted tree, Tārā, racked with grief began to bewail. O hero, O foremost of monkeys, O powerful one, O you terrible in warfare, why did you not welcome me to-day who am guilty of some iniquity by you? Rise, O best of monkeys, and lie down on a better bed; monarchs do not stretch themselves on earth. O lord of earth, indeed earth is your favourite wife; since renouncing me, you, though dead, are serving her with your body. Evident it is, O hero, that while engaged in a lawful conflict, you hadst created another city of Kiskindha, in the region of the celestials. All your enjoyments with me in nectarsmelling woods, have been brought to a close. You, the lord of monkey-herds, being slain, I am deprived of joy and hope and am sunk in the abyss of grief. Forsooth, my heart is uncommon hard, since beholding you on the ground it has not been sundered into thousand pieces being overwhelmed with grief. Sugrīva's wife was carried away and banished by you and this is the result of your action, O foremost of monkeys. O lord of monkeys, out of your ignorance you didst neglect all my well meaning words which I said, being intent on your welfare and benefit. O worshipful one, you shall captivate today, the hearts of the dextrous Apsarās, proud of their youth and beauty. Forsooth, you had been by force brought under the control of Kāla, since you had been discomfited by Sugrīva, albeit you are above the control of others. Destroying Vāli unseasonably, while engaged in conflict with another person, and perpetrating such an iniquitous deed Kākutstha does never relent. Unused to miseries before how shall I, being an object commiseration, put up like one helpless, with my widow-hood and grief. How shall the heroic and youthful Angada, brought up in luxury and happiness, be regarded by his uncle, senseless with wrath? Do you cast for good, O my son, your looks towards your pious sire, for since now it will be hard for you to see him again. Do you console your son, favour me with orders, smell his head, as you are going to journey in a foreign land. By destroying you, Rāma, has performed a great action, since by this he has been released from his vow to Sugriva. O Sugrīva, do you gain your ends and get back your Rumā, devoid of anxiety do you govern your kingdom-your enemy, the brother has been slain. O lord of monkeys, why did you not welcome me, your beloved spouse, who am bewailing thus? Behold, your other wives are also mourning in the same wise. Hearing the bewailings of that she-monkey, others, taking Angada, distressed and overwhelmed with grief, began to cry piteously. O hero, having Arigada on your arms, why are you proceeding on a journey for good in a foreign land leaving behind (your son) Angada. It does not behove you (to leave aside) your dear son, gifted with diverse accomplishments and wearing a charming and beautiful cloth. you of long arms, O lord of monkeys, if I have offended you in any way, do you forgive me, after ascertaining my crime. O hero, I touch your feet with my head. Bewailing thus piteously with other sbemonkeys, Tārā, having a blameless countenance, stationing herself where Vāli was, resolved to put an end to her being by fastings.