Seeing Śūrpanakhā speak harsh words in the midst of the courtiers, Ravana, being enraged, asked her. Who is Rāma? And what is his prowess? And what his form? And what his power? And why had he entered the forest of Dandaka, difficult to range? And what Rāma's weapons, by means of which he had slain the Rākşasas?. And Khara has been slain in battle, and Dūşaņa and Trisirā. Do you, O you of a pleasing person, tell me the truth. And who had deformed you? Thus addressed by the lord of the Rākṣasas, the Raksasi, transported with rage, commenced to duly narrate all about Rāma. Rāma the son of Dasaratha is long-armed, of expansive eyes, clad in bark and dark deer-skin, and like Kandarpa in grace. And drawing a bow resembling that of Sakra, decked with golden rings, he discharges blazing nāracas, like to serpents of virulent poison. I do not see in the field, Rāma drawing his bow: I only see the host being slaughtered by a shower of shafts. And as Indra destroys (a field of) goodly crops, by pouring down hail stones, fourteen thousand Räksasas of dreadful prowess, as well as Khara and Duşaņa were in a little over a moment slain with sharp shafts by Rāma alone fighting on foot. And he had reassured the saints, and after having been deformed, I alone from fear of slaying a woman, have been let off by the high-souled Rāma knowing self. His brother is endued with mighty energy, and in merit, is of equal prowess, and he is devoted to his brother, and bear him regard; the puissant one is named Laksmana. And wrathful and invincible and victorious, and powerful, and intelligent and mighty, (he) is Rāma's right-arı-his life ranging externally. And Rāma's virtuously wedded beloved wife having expansive eyes, and a face resembling the full-moon, is ever to the welfare of her lord. And that fair-haired, fair-nosed, and fairthighed illustrious one possessed of beauty, grace the forest like a goddess, as if a goddess of wealth herself. Of the lustre of burnished gold, with her finger nails reddish and projecting, and graceful, that surpassingly lovely wench is named Sītā—the slender-waisted daughter of Videha. And neither a goddess, nor a Gandharvi, nor a Yaksi, nor a Kinnari, had I seen before on earth, possessed of such beauty. He that shall have Sītā for his spouse, and who shall be warmly embraced by her, shall live longer in the world than the Lord of celestials himself. That good-natured girl, unparalleled on earth in loveliness, who can well pride herself on her person, is a worthy wife for you, and you too are a fit husband for her. It is to bring over for you that one of spacious hips, and a high and well-developed bust, that I had put forth my endeavours. But, O mightyarmed one I have been disfigured by the wicked Laksmana. As soon as you have seen Vaidehi having a countenance resembling the full moon, you shall be afflicted with the shafts of Cupid. If it is your purpose to have her for your wife, at once stretch forth your right leg. for attaining success. If, O lord of Raksasas, you relish my speech, do you then, O Ravana, without fear, do as I tell you. Understanding their incapacity, do you, O lord of Rākṣasas, for making her your wife, by force carry away the frail Sītā of a blameless person. Hearing that Rāma by means of straight coursing shafts, has slain the Rākşasas that had gone to Janasthāna, and seeing Khara and Düşaņa, killed, do you ascertaining your course, adopt it.