That son of a king, stricken as he was with grief consequent upon separation from his dear one, was again overwhelmed with a terrible grief after causing sorrow to his brother, Sunk in the abyss of grief, Rāma, sighing hot and weeping piteously, spoke to Laksmana who was equally aggrieved, words worthy of being said on that occasion. Methinks there is none other on this earth like me, the perpetrator of vicious crimes. My heart or soul is not riven though crushed again and again without respite with a multitude of doleful events. Surely did I perpetrate many a vicious deed in of my my previous birth, the fruit of which I do now suffer and in consequence where-of misfortune after misfortune has befallen me. Coming within the compass remembrance, the loss of my kingdom, the death of my father, the separation of my mother and other kinsmen culminates my grief. Repairing to woods, O Laksmana, in Sita's company my grief was assuaged, nay I did not suffer physical affliction even. Without Sītā these sorrows have grown anew like to fire flaming again by means of fuel. Truly my wife, timid as she is, has been carried away by a Rākşasa by the ethereal track. Alas! doubtless it is, that one of pleasant accents, wept piteously out of fear many a time and oft. For certain my dear wife's breast round and sprinkled as it was with red sandal paste, was bathed in blood (while devoured by the Rākş asas) but there is no death for me. That countenance the beauty of which was enhanced by a head of curly hair and which used to emit forth tender, soft and clear accents, has become pale, being taken possession of by the Rākşasas like to the Moon almost devoured by Rahu. Surely have the Räkşasas subsisting on gore drunk her blood in the sky tearing off the neck of my dear one ever devoted to pious observances. Surely did that one of beautifully expansive eyes cry aloud poorly like to a hind when she was drawn hither and thither by the Rākşasas encircling her in the forest in my absence. O Lakşmana, sitting at the foot of this hill with me that large-hearted, pious Sītā, of smiling countenance, used to address you on many a topic. This is Godāvarī, the best of rivers, my dear wife took delight in her-has she gone there?—But she never goes there alone. Or has Janaki having eyes resembling lotuspetals has gone to bring lotuses? But how is that possible, she never goes without me to bring lotuses. Has she entered at her pleasure this forest filled with many flowery trees and diverse birds? But that is not possible too-she is timid and fear much to enter alone in this forest. O.Aditya, know you the pious and vicious actions of men; bear you testimony to the truth and untruth of their actions-do you tell me, pray, who am stricken with grief, whither has my dear on repaired, or whether has she been killed? O Air, there is nothing on earth which is not within the compass of your vision, do you relate to me whether Sītā preserving the fame of my ancestry, has been killed or carried away or if she wait on the way. After Rāma had bewailed thus being beside himself with grief, Saumitrī, ever treading the right path and not of poorly mind spoke words worthy of being said on that occasion. Do you take heart renouncing your grief and engage with energy of Sita. Persons of high energy are never exhausted on the earth in quest even in the face of arduous works. The highly powerful Lakşmaņa having spoken thus being afflicted with grief, Rāma, the best of Raghu's descendants, did not consider that worth pondering over. Renouncing patience he again indulged in excessive grief.