Seeing those foremost of Raghus, the Kākutsthas, carried away, Sītā carried in a loud voice, raising up her arms. * *Another reading is Subhujābhujau-That one of elegant arms (raising) them up. Rāma, the son of Dasaratha, the strong, the truthful and the pure, is, along with Laksmana, being carried away by you, Rākşasa of a terrible appearance. Me bears will devour and tigers and panthers. Renouncing the Kākutsthas, do you carry me away. I bow to you, O best of Raksasas. Hearing these words of Vaidehi, Rāma and Lakşmaņa bestirred themselves for compassing the death of that wicked one. And Sumitra's son broke his left arm; while Rāma at once broke the Rākşasa's right one. On his arms being broken, the Raksasa resembling a mass of clouds, growing weak, sank down on the ground in a swoon, like a hill riven by the thunderbolt. Thereupon, They assailed the Rākṣasa with their fists, arms and feet; and lifting him up once and again, and pressing him, they trod on him over the ground. Although he was sore pierced by full many an arrow and cut shortly by scimitars, and pressed down on the earth in various ways, yet the Rākşasa expired not. Seeing him utterly incapable of being killed, and resembling a hill, that inspirer of hope in times of peril, the graceful (Rama), said, O foreinost of men, in consequence of his austerities, yon Rākşasa cannot be vanquished with weapons in conflict. Therefore, let us cast him into a pit. O Lakşmaņa, dig a capacious pit in this forest* for this Rākşhasa resembling an elephant, terrible, and of a grim presence. *The reading slightly varies in some texts.-T Having said this to Lakşmaņa,-Do you dig a pit, the powerful Rāma remained planting his foot on Virādha's throat. Having heard Rāghava's words, the Rākşasa Virādha, spoke gently to the descendant of Kākutstha, the best among the men. Slain am I, O chief of men, by you possessed of strength equal to that of Śakra. Through ignorance, O foremost of men, I could not before know you. Now I know you that are Rāma, the worthy Son of Kausalyā, my child; as well as the highly virtuous Vaidehi and the renowned Lakşmaņa. By virtue of a curse, I entered this dreadful Räkşasi form, I a Gandharva, having been cursed by Vaisravaņa. Being propitiated by me, that greatly famous one said, 'When Rāma the son of Dasaratha, shall slay you in encounter, you, attaining your natural condition, shall repair to the celestial regions.' Getting wroth, he cursed me, who had been absent; and thus did king Vaiśravaņa address me, who had conceived love for Rambhā. Through your grace have I been freed from this fearful curse, I shall (now) repair to heaven. Hail, O repressor of foes! Half a Yojana hence, my child, dwells the righteous and potent Maharși, Śarabharga, resembling the Sun. Seek him speedily: he will bring about your good. Casting me (into this pit) in the wood, do you, O Rama, peacefully go your way. Even this is the eternal usage of the Raksasas. Those that die in the forest, attain eternal regions. Having said this to Kākutstha, the mighty Viradha, afflicted with arrows, having his body deposited (in the pit), attained heaven. Having heard that speech of Virādha, Rāghava ordered Laksmana, saying, O Laksmana, do you in this forest dig a capacious pit for this Rākṣasa resembling an elephant, dreadful, and of terrible acts. Having said to Laksmana, “Dig a pit," Rāma possessed of prowess remained fixing his foot on Virādha's throat. Then taking a hoe, Lakşmaņa dug a spacious pit by the side of the huge-bodied* Virādha. *Mahātmānam-lit.-high-souled. The poet may have applied the epithet in this sense in view of Virādha being really a Gandharva. I have, however, preferred the other sense, as being more in harmony with the character of Virādha as a Rākşasa; and have accordingly rendered the word, huge bodied. Then when his throat had been freed (Laks maņa) cast into the pit Virādha having ears resembling javelins, sending loud and dreadful sounds. Having vanquished him in fight, Rāma and Lakşmana possessed of activity and steady in fight, being exceedingly delighted, raising up the dreadful Räksasa by main force, cast him howling (into the pit). Reflecting that he was incapable of being slain (by sharpened weapons), those foremost of men, exceedingly well versed (in arms), compassed the death of that mighty Asura, Virādha, in the pit, after they had dug it. Virādha had himself sincerely wished for his death at the hands of Räma; and that ranger of the woods had accordingly told (Rāma),: My death cannot be effected by means of weapons. Having heard these words, Rāma decided upon casting him into a pit. And when the excessively strong Rākṣasa entered the cavity, he made the forest resound with his cries, Having thrown him into the hole in the earth, Rāma and Lakşmaņa, their fear being removed, and covered the Rākṣasa with rocks. And having slain the Rākşasa and taken Mithila's daughter, those ones having bows decked in gold, being delighted, rejoiced in that mighty forest, like the sun and the moon seated in the sky.