Rāma went first; in the middle, Sītā; and bearing a bow in his hand, Laksmana went in their wake. And they went with Sītā, seeing many imountain-peaks, and forests, and delightful streams, and Cakravākas haunting river islets, and tanks with lotuses containing aquatic birds, and herds of deer, and horned buffalo's maddened with juices boars, and elephants, foes to trees. Having proceeded a long way, when the sun was aslant, they together saw a delightful tank measuring a Yojana, filled with red and pale Swans lotuses, graced with herds of elephants, and abounding in aquatic cranes, and Kadambas. And in that tank containing charming and pleasant waters, they heard sounds of song and instrumental music; but no one was seen there. There at, from curiosity, Rāma and Lakşmana, mighty car warrior, asked an ascetic named Dharmabhrt. Hearing this mighty wonder, we have been worked up with intense curiosity. Do you tell us what this is. Thus accosted by Rāghava, the ascetic then at once began to expatiate over the potency of the pool. This tank goes by the name of Pancāpsara, and is always filled with water. It was made, O Rāma, by the ascetic Măndakarni, by virtue of his asceticism. In yonder tank, the mighty ascetic, living on air, performed signal austerities for ten thousand years. Thereat, exceedingly agitated, all the deities with Agni at their head assembled together, said, This ascetic wishes to have the position of one of us.' Thus all the deities present there were filled with anxiety. Then with the view of disturbing his austerities, the deities ordered five principal Apsarās, possessed of the splendour of live lighting. And for compassing the end of the celestials, that ascetic conversant with the morality and otherwise as well of this life as that to come, was brought by those Apsaras (nymphs) under the sway of Madana. And those five nymphs (ultimately) became the wives of the ascetic; and their hidden residence was reared in the pool. And there the five nymphs living happily, pleased the anchorite, established in youth through asceticism and yoga. As your sport, we hear the sounds of their musical instruments, and the sweet voice of their song mixed with the tinkling of their instruments. (Hearing this), the illustrious Rāghava along with his brother declared the story narrated by that one of a pure heart to be wonderful. Thus conversing, Rāma saw the collection of asylums, strewn with Kusa and bark, and be-girt with energy derived from Brahmā lore. Entering (the place) along with Vaidehi and Lakşmaņa, the highly famous Rāghava dwelt there respected by all the ascetics. Having happily dwelt in those collections of graceful asylums, honoured of the Maharsis, Kākutstha by turns went to the hermitages of those ascetics with whom that one well versed in arms had dwelt before. And Rāghava happily passed his days somewhere for ten months, somewhere for one year, somewhere for four months somewhere for five or six months, somewhere for many months, somewhere for a month and a half, somewhere for more, somewhere for three months, and somewhere for eight. And as Rāma lived in the asylums of the ascetics and amused himself through their good graces, ten years were passed away (in this way). Having gone round the asylums of all the ascetics, Rāghava cognizant of righteousness returned to the hermitage of Sutīkşna. Coming to this asylum, respected by the ascetics, that subduer of enemies, Rāma, stayed there for a time. Once upon a time, as Kākutstha dwelling in that asylum was seated, he humbly observed to that great ascetic. I have always heard from men speaking on the subject that that foremost of ascetics, the reverend Agastya, lives in this forest. On account of the vastness of this forest, I do not know that place. Where is the hermitage of that intelligent Maharsi? For propitiating that revered one, I, accompanied by my brother and Sītā, will go to Agastya for paying our respects to the ascetic. This great desire is burning in my heart, that I should myself minister to that best of anchorets. Hearing these words of the righteous-souled Rama, Sutiksna, well pleased, answered Dasaratha's son. I also am desirous of telling you this along with Lakşmaņa. Repair to Agastya in company with Sītā, O Rāghava. By luck you have yourself said this to me as to your purpose. I will, O Rāma, tell you where that mighty ascetic, Agastya, is. My child, go four miles from the hermitage in a southerly direction; and you will come to the hermitage of the brother of the auspicious Agastya situated on a land covered with trees, graced with Pippali woods, abounding in fruits and flowers, charming, and resonant with the notes of various birds. There are many tanks containing delightful waters, swarming with swans and Kārandavas, and beauteous with Cakravākas. Passing a night there, do you, O Rāma, in the morning, taking a southerly course, go by the skirts of the forest tract. Passing a Yojana, you । shall come upon Agastya's asylum, located at a charming woodland graced with many a tree. There Videha's daughter and Lakşınana shall experience delight in your company. O magnanimous one, if you intend to see the mighty ascetic, Agastya, in that charming woodland, containing a great many trees, then do you make up your mind to set out this very day. Hearing these words of the anchorite, Rāma, saluting him, along with his brother, set off for Agastya's (place) with his younger brother and Sītā. And, pleasantly proceeding by the way dire ted by Sutiksna, seeing picturesque woods, hills resembling clouds, watery expanses and streams flowing by their path; Rāma filled with delight said these words to Lakşmana, 'Surely we see the asylumn of that high-souled one, the ascetic, Agastya's brother of pious acts. These trees standing by thousands on the way bending beneath the weight of fruits and flowers, bear the signs that had been mentioned to me as belonging to this wood. And coming from the wood this scent is wafted by the wind the pungent odour of ripe Pippalis. And here and there are found heaps of firewood, and torn Darbha are seen, of the lustre of lapses. And the top of the column of smoke belonging to the fire lit in the asylum in this wood, appears like the peak of a dark mountain. And twice-born ones, having performed their ablutions in sacred and retired bathing places, are offering flowers gathered by themselves. O placid one, from what I had heard from Sutiksna, this would appear to be the asylum of Agastya's brother. The righteous Agastya it is who, wishing for the welfare of the worlds, destroying by virtue of his austerities a Daitya resembling Death, has rendered this quarter habitable. Once on a time here dwelt together two mighty Asuras, brothers, given to slaughtering Brāhmanas, the wily Vātāpi and Ilvala. Wearing the form of a Brāhmana, and speaking Sanskrit, the cruel one used to invite Vipras to a Śrāddha. And, cooking his brother wearing the shape of a sheep, he used to feed the twice-born ones according to the rites prescribed for Śrāddhas. Then when the Vipras had fed, Ilvala said'uttering a loud sound, O Vātāpi; come out.' Hearing his brother's words, Vātāpi, bleating like a sheep, came out, riving their bodies. In this way, thousands of Brāhmaṇas gathered together, were destroyed by flesh eating ones wearing shapes at will. (And it came to pass that once upon a time) the Maharși Agastya, having been invited to a Sraddha, fed on the mighty Asura. Thereupon uttering Finished' and offering water to wash hands with, Ilvala said to his brother, 'Come out'! And, as that brother of Vātãpi, given to slaughtering Vipras was speaking thus, that foremost of ascetics, the intelligent Agastya, said with a laugh, 'Where is the power of coming out, of the Rākṣasa, your brother wearing the shape of a sheep, who has gone to Yama's abode?' Hearing his words, from wrath the ranger of the night prepared to assail the ascetic, and he rushed against that foremost of the twice-born ones. And, being consumed by that ascetic of flaming energy with his eyes resembling fire, the Rākşasa met his end. This asylum graced with pools and groves belongs to the brother of him who has performed this arduous feat from compassion for the Vipras'. As Rāma was thus conversing with Sumitra's son, the sun set and evening approached. Then, duly performing his afternoon adorations along with his brother, Rāma entered the hermitage, and saluted the ascetic. Well received by the ascetic, Rāghava spent there a night, eating fruits and roots. When the night had passed away, and solar disc arose, Rāghava greeted Agastya's brother. O reverend Sir, I salute you. I have pleasantly passed the night. I greet you; I shall go to behold my preceptor, your elder brother. Thereat on the ascetic's saying, 'Go you,' the descendant of Raghu went away by the prescribed route. And Rāma viewed the forest, and Nivāra, and Panasa, and Sal, Vanjula and Tinisa, and Ciribilva, and Madhuka. And Bilva, and Tinduka, all in full flower, and graced with blossoming creepers, and trees in the wood by hundreds, roughly handled by elephants with their trunks, and graced by monkeys, and resounding with the voices of an hundred maddened warblers. Then the lotus-eyed Rāma said to that enhancer of auspiciousness, the heroic Laks maņa, who was by him, and was following him at his back, The leaves of these trees are glossy, and the beasts and birds are mild, even as (we had been told). This asylum of the pure-hearted Maharsi must not be far. This asylum capable of removing the fatigue of the weary, belonging to him that is known among men as Agastya by his own acts, is seen, with the (neighbouring woods) filled with smoke, and itself decorated with bark and wreaths, containing herds of mild deer, and ringing with the notes of various birds. This is the asylum of that pious one, who destroying (the Asura resembling) Death, has, desirous of the welfare of mankind, rendered the Southern quarter habitable, and through whose potency the Rākşasas from fear barely cast their eyes in this direction, but do not approach. Ever since that one of pious ways possessed himself of this quarter, the rangers of the night have foregone their hostility, and assumed a peaceful attitude. This Southern quarter rendered safe (by Agastya), and incapable of being harassed by those ones of tortuous ways, is created over the three worlds in connection with the name of the reverend ascetic. This graceful asylum ranged by mild beasts belongs to that long-lived one of renowned achievements, Agastya, in obedience to whose command, the Vindhya mountain-foremost of its kind, which had always obstructed the way of the Sun, does not increase. This pious one honoured of men, ever engaged in the welfare of the righteous, shall do good to us, who have come to him. I shall adore the mighty ascetic, Agastya, and, O mild one, O master, here pass away the remainder of the term of my banishment. Here celestials with the Gandharvas, and Siddhas and eminent saints, observing restrictions in respect of food, aye adore Agastya. And the ascetic is such that a liar cannot live here, nor a cunning or a crafty person, nor a wicked wight, nor one that is given to unrighteousness. And adoring righteousness, celestials, and Yaksas, and Nagas, and birds, live here restricting their fare. And high-souled Siddhas and eminent saints, renouncing their bodies, repair to the celestial regions in cars resembling the sun. And adored by auspicious individuals, the deities here confer on them the states of Yakşas and celestials, and divers kingdoms. Sumitra's son, entering the asylum before us, do you announce to the saints that I along with Sītā, have arrived here.