Beholding the king of vultures slain by Rāvana, that one possessed of a face fair as the moon, stricken with grief, broke out into lamentations. Throbbings of the eyes or other parts of the body, dreams, seeing birds or hearing their voice, are found to augur happiness or misery to men. And, O Rāma, although birds and beasts are scampering away before you on my account, you under-stand not the mighty mishap that has befallen you. O Rāma, this bird, who, moved by kindness, had come to rescue me, owing to my (ill) luck, lies slain on the ground. O Kākutstha, O Laksmana, save me! Thus did that best of females, afflicted with fear, bewail; and those near (her) heard her lamentations. Thereat, that lord of the Rākşasas, Rāvana, darted towards Vaidehi, who, with a faded wreath for her ornament, was bewailing in forlorn guise. Exclaiming repeatedly, Leave off! Leave off, the lord of the Rākşasas got at her, as she was clasping a mighty trees as if it were a creeper. And as she, bereft of the company of Răma in the wilderness, was wailing, saying, O Rāma, O Rāma, that one resembling the Destroyer himself, with the view of compassing his own end, seized her by her hair. On Vaidehi being thus outraged, this entire world consisting of mobile and immobile objects, had its nature altered. A dense darkness enveloped (everything). And the air did not breathe there; and the sun grew dim. Espying with his divine vision that Sītā was overcome, that Deity, the graceful Great-father exclaimed, Our work is accomplished. And seeing Sītā overpowered, the supreme saints inhabiting the Dandaka forest, concluding the destruction of Rāvaņa to be as good as accomplished without much ado, became at once delighted and aggrieved. As she went on weeping with ( Rāma, O Lakşmaņa, Rāvana-lord of Rākşasas—taking her, coursed through the sky. And then the king's daughter hued like molten gold, clad in a yellow silken cloth, looked exceedingly beautiful like to lighting. And on her yellow cloth streaming up, Rāvaņa looked surpassingly graceful like a hill aflame with fire. And coppery fragrant lotus-leaves belonging to the eminently auspicious Vaidehī showered upon Ravana. And her gold-glowing silken cloth, flying in the air, appeared like clouds coloured by the sunken sun. And her blameless countenance on Rāvana's lap in the sky did not appear beauteous without Rāma, like a lotus without its stalk; It appeared like the moon risen tearing away dark clouds. And in the aerial regions her countenance on Rāvana's lap furnished with a fair forehead and graceful hair glowing like the interior of a lotus, without scars, graced with white, shining, stainless teeth, having excellent eyes, lovely like the moon, having a shapely nose, a rubeous upper lip, wearing the splendour of gold in the sky, that captivating countenance of hers in consequence of her weeping, and of being stained with tears, as also owing to the violence it had undergone at the hands of the lord of Rākşasas,-did not appear beautiful without Rāma' like the moon risen during the day. And furnished with the hue of gold, Mithila's daughter beside the dark-bodied lord of the Rākşasas, looked like a golden girth round a sable elephant. Janaka's daughter, yellow-hued like lotus, having the lustre of gold-and adorned with shining ornaments, coming in contact with Rāvana, appeared like lightning embosomed among clouds. And in consequence of Vaidehi's ornaments sending sounds, the lord of Rākşasas resembled an entirely dark rumbling cloud. As Sītā was being borne away, showers of blossoms, falling off from her head, were scattered all around on the earth beneath. And that blossoms shower all around, drawn up by the vehemence of the ten-headed Rāvana, again alighted beside him. And the showers of blossoms scattered around Vaisravana's younger brother, looked like rows of burning stars round the foremost of mountains*. Sumerus And the bangles studded with gems, loosened . from Vaidehi's feet, fell on the earth, like the lighting circle. Instead of On the earth-some texts have [bangles] sweet-sounding. O hue like the light red of tender twigs, Vaidehi set off the dark-bodied lord of Rākşasas, as does a golden cover an elephant. Vaisravana's younger brother carried away Sītā, who, like a mighty meteor, filled the heavens with her splendour. And like stars of exhausted religious merit dropping down from the sky, her fiery ornaments began to fall to the earth with sounds. And the chain of the splendour of the moon, removed from Vaidehi's breast, falling down, shone like the Gangā dropping from the sky. The trees filled with various fowls, with their tops waving because of the wind blowing on high and swaying them, seemed to say, No fear, [to Sita.] And the pools with their lotuses faded and their fishes agitated, seemed to sorrow for the desponding daughter of Mithilā as for their friend. And following Sītā's shadow, lions, and tigers, and other beasts and birds, rushed from all sides in wrath. And the mountains, with their faces washed with water-falls representing tears, and their summits resembling uplifted arms, seemed to lament for Sītă, as she was being carried away. And beholding Vaidehỉ carried away, the glorious Sun, oppressed with sadness, had his rays dimmed and his disc darkened. Virtue is not; and where is truth? And there is neither sincerity nor kindness, in a case in which Rāvana is carrying away Rāma's Vaidehī; thus did all creatures lament in numbers. And the young of deer, afflicted with fear, wept with woe-began faces. And the sylvan deities, looking up now and again with eyes betokening fear, had their persons all in a tremble. headed one carried away the intelligent Vaidehī, bewailing bitterly, Sītā, who had come by such misfortune, sweet-voiced, crying, O Lakşmaņa O Rāma, and casting glances on the ground many time and oft, the ends of her hair waving and her tilika wiped out. Then oppressed with the load of fear, Sītā of luminous smiles, Mithila's daughter, bereft of her friends-not beholding either Rāma or Lakşmaņa, became pale of countenance.