After Kabandha had spoken thus, the two best of men, Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa took him to a mountain-cave and placed on fire. Laksmana kindled the funeral pile, which was ablaze on all sides. Thereupon the fire began to burn down slowly the huge and corpulent body of Kabandha like to a lump of clarified butter. Afterwards the highly powerful demon, shaking the funeral pile, rose up quickly like a smokeless flame of fire, wearing a clean cloth and a celestial garland. And the graceful demon, wearing an unsullied cloth and having all its limbs crested with diverse ornaments, rose from the pile high up in the welkin with a delighted heart. Thereupon mounting on a famed car, brilliant and drawn by swans* and lighting up all the quarters with the effulgence of his person, that highly powerful one, stationing himself in the heaven, addressed Rāma. By virtue of the pious observances performed by him in his previous existence and for his being burnt by Rāma that celestial car appeared there. Do you hear truly, O Rāghava, of the means by which you shall come by Sīta. There are six expedients. O Rāma, by virtue of which kings acquire all objects. He, in whom misfortune has culminated, should seek the company of one such+. The six expedients are as follow—(1) Sandhi, peace. (2) Vigraha war-fare. (3) Yāna, military expedition against an enemy. (4) Asana-halting. (5) Daidhibhava-sowing dissension. (6) Samaşraya seeking protection. This is a moral law referring to the sixth to or expedient, to be resorted by the kings-namely Samasrarya seeking protection. You have, O Rāma along with Laksmana, met with the culmination of misfortune and for which you have been assailed with such a disaster as the ravishment of your spouse. O you best of my friends, it behove you, therefore to make friends with such a person. Or else I do not find any means for your success. Do you hear, O Rāma, what I relate. There live with four monkeys a heroic, self-controlled monkey by name Sugrīva, on that best of mountains Rşyamūka, situated on the banks of the lake Pampā, being driven by his enraged brother Vāli, the son of Indra. That mighty, powerful, effulge lord of monkeys, of immeasurable prowess and truthful vows, humble patient, intelligent, great, expert, bold, graceful and puissant, has been banished by his brother, O hero, for kingdom. Surely he shall befriend and assist you in your search for Sītā. Do you not plunge your soul in grief. O you best of Ikşvākus, none can withstand destiny on this earth, truly unavoidable is it course. Do you proceed soon, O hero, to Sugriva of mighty prowess, and repairing hence even to-day do you contract friendship with him, taking vow in the presence of flaming fire* that you shall not envy each other. This refers to the the oriental custom of performing every sacred rite in the presence of fire as witness. The Hindus regard the fire with sacred reverence and for this in all their social and religious ceremonials fire plays, a very prominent and sacred part. Despise not that kingly monkey Sugrīva, because he is grateful, capable of assuming shapes at will, seeking protection and powerful. You too are able to accomplish his wished-for object. Benefited by you or not, he shall engage in your service. He was begotten of the Sun to the wife of Rkşarāja. He has been roaming the bank of Pampā being in constant fear of Väli after creating enmity with him. Do you make friends with that monkey ranging the wood and inhabiting the Rșyamūka mountain after placing your weapon in the very presence of fire as a witness, because that hest of monkeys know minutely all the abodes of Rākṣasas, living on human flesh. There is no place under the sun of many rays, O Rāghava, O slayer of foes, unknown to him. Exploring, with all his monkeys, the rivers, huge mountains, strongholds and caves, he shall learn about your spouse. He shall search that exquisitely fine damsel Maithili in Ravana's abode, bewailing on your separation, and to find her out he shall despatch, O Rāghava, many a monkey of huge proportions to various quarters. Whether on the summit of the mount Meru or in the region under the earth, that lord of monkeys, shall give you back your blameless spouse, killing all the Raksasas.