Being thus commended by Rāvana like a king to act against his will Mārica fearlessly addressed the lord of the Rākṣasas with the following bold words. What person of impious deeds has advised you ( ranger of the night thus in order to exterminate you with your kingdom, counsellors and children? Who of a vicious heart, O King, dose not feel himself happy at your welfare? Who has pointed out to you the way of your death under the cover of your means? O Ranger of night surely do your weak enemies wish to bring about your destruction by making you enter into a conflict with a powerful man. What little-minded man of evil intent has counselled you thus? O Ranger of night, really do they desire that you do bring destruction upon yourself by your own actions. You do not exterminate your counsellors O Rāvana, albeit they are worthy of being destroyed. For they do not prevent these entirely from your evil course. Wise counsellors do always restrain a king who wends a vicious track being guided by his impulses and passions; but about you they are quite unmindful, though you should by every means be brought under restraint. O you the best of conquerors, O you the ranger of high, ministers by the grace of their sovereign attain virtue, wealth, desires and fame. But those objects are never attained O Rāvana when they are not in good odour with their sovereign; moreover the subjects meet with dangers when he is devoid of all qualities. O you the best of conquerors, the king is the root of virtue and fame to the subjects; he should therefore be always protected by them. O ranger of night, proud kings of cruel temperament, acting against the subjects can never administer their kingdoms. So do the ministers of cruel counsel meet with their end like to a chariot driven into a wild track by an unskilled charioteer. Many a pious person, on this earth, ever engaged in the performance of religious services, have, for the folly of other persons, met with destruction along with their relatives. Verily the subjects, O Ravana, can never expect to prosper under the regime of hotnatured sovereigns acting against their subjects like to deer under the protection of a jackal. All the Rākşasas shall surely die, O Rāvana whose lord are you, foolish, cruel and under the control of your passions. I shall not be the least sorry if I do meet with a sudden accident—what I do deplore most is that you shall meet in no time with destruction along with your soldiery. Compassing my end Rāma shall exterminate you in no time and blessed I shall be being killed by an enemy in the conflict. Surely do you know that no sooner shall I see Rāma I shall be done away with; you shall carrying away Sītā meet with your end along with your kinsmen. And if do you bring Şītā with me from the asylum, none shall be saved, me, yourself, the city of Lankā and the Rākşasas. You do not relish my words O ranger of the night though prevented by me, who wishes you welfare; those men who range on the verge of death, well-nigh finishing the term of their existence do not receive with good grace the counsels of friends.