After Sarabhanga had ascended heaven, ascetics in bodies, assembled together, presented themselves before Kākutstha, Rāma of flaming energy. And Vaikhānasas, and Vālakhilyas, and Sampraksālas, Marīcipas, Aśmakuſțas in numbers, and those ascetics, Patrāhāras, and Dantolūkhalas, Unmajjakas next, and Gātraśayyās, and Asayyās® and Anavakāśikas, those ascetics, Salilāhāras, Vāyubhakşas after them, Akäśanilayas, Sthandilaśāyis Urdhvavāsis3 of controlled senses, and Ārdrapațavāsas given to Japa, practising penances, and engaged in performing the five kinds of austerities-all furnished with the grace that comes of spiritual energy, and all firmly concentrated in Yoga these ascetics presented themselves before Rāma, in the asylum of Sarabhanga. And coming before Rāma, the foremost of those practising righteousness, those sages conversant with morality, met in a body, said to that pre-eminently virtuous one, A mighty car-warrior, you are the foremost person of the lkshvāku race and the world; as well as their lord, even as Maghavān is the lord of the celestials. Famous over the three worlds in high worth and prowess, in you are found truth and virtue in profusion and obedience to the mandate of your sire. O lord, it behoves you cognizant of virtue and attached to it, to forgive us for what we as suiters say to you. The sin, O lord, of that monarch is mighty that take a sixth part of the subjects' incomes, but dose not protect them as sons. But he that, setting his heart on protecting the people, dose ever carefully protect all the inhabitants of his dominions, like his own life or like his son dearer to him than life itself, repeat, O Rāma, enduring renown extending over many years, and (at length) attaining the regions of Brahmā, is glorified there. The king that protect his subjects righteously, is entitled to a fourth part of the great religious merit that is reaped by an ascetic subsisting on fruits and roots. O Rāma, this many Brahmanas-this great body of men that have assumed the Vānaprastha mode of life, although having you for their lord, are being sorely troubled by Rákşasas, as if they had none. Come and behold the bodies of innumerable ascetics of pure hearts that have in various ways been slaughtered by Rākşasas in the forest. And great is the worry that is experienced by the dwellers on the river Pampā and the Mandakini as well as those that reside in Citrakūta. We cannot bear the terrible affliction of the ascetics in the forest at the hands of Räkşasas of dreadful deeds. Therefore, for obtaining refuge, have we come before you who are the refuge (of all). Do you, O Rāma, deliver us all, who are being exceedingly afflicted by the rangers of the night. O hero, we have no greater refuge on earth than yourself. Do you, O king's son, rescues us all from Raksasas. Hearing these words of the sages and ascetics, that righteous-souled one addressed them. It dose not behove you to speak thus. I should be commanded by the anchorets. I have entered the forest solely with a view to my own purpose. I have entered this forest in obedience to the mandate of my father, with the object (at the same time) of putting an end to these ravages of the Rākşasas on you. I have at my own will come hither for securing your interest. Then shall my stay in the woods be crowned with mighty fruit. I wish to slay in battle the enemies of the ascetics. Let the sages and ascetics behold my prowess as well as that of my brother. Having been conferred a boon by the ascetics, that hero entered upon a noble undertaking, and accompanied by the ascetics, in company with Laksmana directed his course to the hermitage of) Sutiksna.