Speaking these harsh words to Rāvana, Mārīca being afraid of him said, We shall both go. Surely shall I be deprived of my life b, (Rāma) taking up his scimitar and having a bow and arrows in his hands, if I go before hiin again. Meeting with his prowess you shall never return with your life; he is like the noose of Death to you though you had baffled its power. You are vicious-souled, what can I do for you? be you crowned with success O ranger of the night, I shall go. The Lord of Rākşasas being pleased with Mārīca's words embraced him warmly and said, This is worthy of your heroism that you have addressed yourself to act after my desire. You were another Raksasa before and have now become true Mārīca. Do you now with me ascend this chariot coursing in the air, crested with jewels and driven by asses having faces of a demon. Enchanting Vaidehī you shall wend your way and away shall I carry the daughter of the king of Mithilā by force (when there shall be neither Rāma nor Laksmana by her.) Thereupon Tārakā's son assented to Rāvana's words, and both of them ascending the chariot like to a heavenly car set out for the hermitage. And beholding diverse towns, forests, mountains, rivers, kingdoms and cities they reached the forest of Dandaka and the asylum of Rāma. And descending now from the golden car the lord of Rākşasas together with Mārīca beheld Răma's asylum. Taking him (Mārīca) by the hand Ravana spoke. There stands the asylum of Rāma surrounded by palm trees. Do you do that for which we have come here. Hearing the words of Rāvaņa, the Rāksasa Mārīca assuming the wonderful shape of a (golden) deer began to range at large before Rama's hermitage. The points of its horns were like to (two) excellent jewels, its countenance was diversified with white and black colour, its face was like a red lotus, its cars were like to two blue lotuses, its neck was little raised, its bclly was like a sapphire, its sides were like to Madhūka flowers, its colour was like that of a filament of a lotus, its hoops were like to Vaidurayas (a gem of a dark colour); of lean thighs; of firm joints; its tail having the diversified colour of a rainbow was upraised. It was of a pleasant and cool hue and crested with various jewels. And in no time the Rākşasa assumed the shape of a beautiful deer. To tempt Vaidehī that ranger of the night, assuming a beautiful countenance painted with diverse metals, illumining the beautiful forest and Rāma's asylum with its beauty, and ranging at large on the green field and living on grass, began to That one of lively presence having its body painted with hundreds of silver drops and living on twigs of trees began to range in the forest. Sometimes walking into the plantain house, sometimes walking around the forest of Karņikā, sometimes coming within the compass of Sītā's vision, that best of deer having its back painted with gold began to range slowly around the hermitage. It began to walk at pleasure near Rāma's asylum. Sometimes going, sometimes stopping, at one time running very swiftly and receding the next moment, that best of deer began to range at large. Sometimes playing around, sometimes lying on earth and sometimes following the deer-herd having come within the thresh hold of the asylum and then followed again by them that Rākṣasa assuming the form of a deer came back to see Sītā. He then began to range at large in the beautiful forest (extending far and wide). Seeing him other forest-deer came (by hiin) and smelling him fled away into different quarters. That Raksasa, though expert in killing deer, did not eat them up, though touching, in order to hide his real self. In the meantime Vaidehī, of auspicious looks whose eyes inebriate like wine, being engaged in plucking flowers, was going sometimes to the Karņikā grove and sometimes to the mango grove. That best of women, ever inured to living in the forest and possessed of a graceful countenance, walking and plucking flowers, saw that jewelled deer, having its body diversified with pearls and diamonds, It had beautiful teeth and lips and had its down resembling silver. She began to behold with affection and with her eyes expanded with surprise. That illusive deer seeing Rāma's wife began to inove around as if lighting up that forest (with the fire of its beauty). Beholding that deer ornamented with diverse jewels, and the like of which she had never seen before, the daughter of Janaka was struck with immense wonder. Beholding that deer ornamented with diverse jewels, and the like of which she had never seen before, the daughter of Janaka was struck with immense wonder.