Then wishing for my welfare I strove to propitiate my angry brother, wrought up with wrath, who was seated (there). By good luck it is that you had come off safely; and that you had slain the foe. O you that rejoicest the forlorn, you are the only protector of me who am helpless. I hold this. umbrella furnished with many ribs, resembling the moon risen; as well as this chowrī containing hair,—do you accept my service. O king, suffering greatly, I remained for a whole year at the mouth of the cave. And seeing blood issuing from the cave, I had my heart agitated with grief and my senses extremely overwhelmed. Then closing up the mouth of the cavern with a mountain summit, and returning from that place, I again came back to Kiskindhā. Seeing me enter in a dejected mood, the citizens and counsellors installed me, but it was not done with my will. Therefore it behoves you to forgive me. You are the king, O worthy of honour; and I am, as before, ever (your servant). I was entrusted with regal power in consequence of your absence. This kingdom consisting of courtiers and citizens, remains now rid of its thorns. It was established in me as a trust. And I protected it as such. Do not get wroth, O miid one, O destroyer of foes, I beseech you with bent head, and, O king, with joined hands. With the view of preventing any one to wish to conquer this kingdom vacant (of its ruler the citizens and counsellors unanimously, by force, entrusted me with regal authority. As I said this softly, the monkey reproaching me, said to me 'Fie on you,' and censured me greatly. And bringing together the subjects and favourite counsellors, spoke to me, before friends, highly improper words. “You know that formerly one night the mighty Asura Mayavi, getting' enraged, challenged me (to a fight) desirous of an encounter with me. Hearing his speech I sallied out of the palace, and was followed by this horrible brother of mine. Thereat seeing me with one to assist me, and finding that we had come upon him, that mighty Asura, fled, seized with fear. And fleeing on, he (at length) swiftly entered a huge hole. Knowing that he had entered that dreadful and large cave, I spoke to my brother of a crooked presence. Without slaying (this Asura) I cannot return to the palace. Do you wait at the mouth of the cave while I slay him. This one is stationed here-thinking thus, I entered that inaccessible cave. And as I searched (for the Asura), one entire year passed away. That wicked wight who had roused my alarm in consequence of his disappearance, was (at length) slain by me in one day, along with his friends. Then as he emitted yells in the subterranean region, the cave was filled with his blood and it became difficult to come out of it. Having with ease slain my powerful foe, I could not find the outlet of the cavern, its mouth having been closed. Then as I again and again cried Sugrīva, Sugrīva, I became exceedingly sorry for not receiving any reply. Thereat I threw down the stone after striking it many times with my legs. Then coming out by its mouth, I have come to this city. Seeking my kingdom, the crafty Sugrīva had shut me up there forgetting fraternal love.' Saying this, that monkey, the shameless Vali, exiled me with a single cloth on. O Rāghava, I have been discomfited by him, and been deprived of my wife. And from fear of him, I have wandered over the whole earth having forest and seas. And aggrieved in consequence of my having been deprived of my wife. I have (at length) entered this best of mountains, Rsyamuka, which for a certain reason* is incapable of being approached by Vali. *In consequence of Matanga's curse. Thus have I mentioned to you the great cause of this hostility, O Rāghava, innocent as I am, I have come by this mighty misfortune. O you that inspirest the fear of all creatures, by chastising Vāli it behoveth you to grant your grace to me, who am tormented with fear in connection with Vali, O hero. Thus accosted, that energetic one knowing righteousness, smiling, began to address Sugrīva in words fraught with morality. These sharpened shafts of mine, resembling the sun, and never missing, shall furiously fall upon the wicked Vāli. So long as you did not see that stealer of your wife, so long only shall the impious Väli of vile character, live. By what I myself feel, I see that you had sunk in a sea of sorrow. But I will deliver you; and you shall attain both your wife as well as this kingdom. Hearing that speech of his capable of enhancing joy and manliness, Sugrīva overjoyed, spoke those words informed with high sense.