While Jatayu, the king of birds, spake this, Rāvana, the lord of Rākşasas, wearing pendants made of pure gold, having his eyes reddened with ire, darted towards him. Thereupon they began a terrible conflict in the welkin, like to clouds driven by wind. There occurred a mighty conflict between Jatayu, the lord of vultures, and Ravana, the lord of Raksasas, like to two Malyavān* hills supplies with wings. A mountainous range described as one of the smaller mountains of India proper, lying eastward of mount Meru.— Thereat Răvaņa began to shower continually terrible and sharpened pikes, iron arrows and Vikarnis upon the mighty lord of vultures. Jatayu, the king of birds, began to withstand in conflict the arrows and weapons darted by Rāvana, and wounded Rāvana's person with his feet supplies with sharpened talons. Thereupon, to destroy his enemy, that mighty hero, the Ten-necked Ravana, being exercised with ire, took up ten terrible arrows like to the sceptre of Death, and stretching the bow to the full he shot those straight-coursing sharpened shafts at Jatayu, the king of birds. Beholding Jānaki with tears in her eyes in that Raksasa's car, Jatayu, the king of birds, disregarding those arrows, darted towards Rāvana, and with his feet broke asunder his bow with the arrows, adorned with pearls and diamonds. Thereat Rävana, almost beside himself with wrath, taking up another bow, began to shower arrows by hundreds and thousands. Being covered with those arrows, the lord of birds appeared like a bird lying in his nest. Pushing away these arrows by the wind of his wings, he again snapped that mighty bow with his feet, and with a stroke of his wings shattered Rāvaņa's flaming shield like to burning fire. Thereupon moving away with the wind of his wings Rāvana's blazing cuirass resembling flaming fire, Jațāyu in that conflict made away with his fleet-coursing asses having the faces of demons. Next crumbling into pieces with his impetus the mighty chariot of Rāvana, coursing at will, flaming like fire having steps studded with jewels, and a wooden pole, and throwing down the umbrella and chowris like to the full moon along with the Rākşasas engaged in carrying them, the effulgent and mighty lord of birds shattered the head of the charioteer with the strokes of his beak. Having his bow snapped and deprived of his car, horses and charioteer, Rāvana fell down to the earth, taking Vaidehi on his lap. Beholding Rāvaņa fallen on the ground and of broken conveyance, all creatures praised the king of vultures again and again and worshipped him. Thereupon, finding the lord of birds worn out on account of his old age, Ravana, highly encouraged, again rose high up in the welkin, taking Maithill with him. He had all his weapons broken in the conflict, and had but his dagger left to him. beholding him proceed thus pleased, taking the daughter of Janaka on his lap, all his weapons having been lost, with his sword alone left, the mighty and powerful lord of vultures, Jațāyu, rose up and, darting towards Rāvana, resisted him and said, O Rāvana of feeble sense, it is for the destruction of the whole line of Rākşasas that you carries away this spouse of Răma, having arrows like to thunderbolts. Like one thirsty drinking water, you do address yourself to drinking poison along with your friends, courtiers, four-fold forces, servants and relatives. Foolish persons unaware of the fruit of their actions, meet in a short time with their own destruction, so shall you very soon meet with your own end. You have been bound up by the noose of Death; and, proceeding whither, shall you save yourself, like to fish eating up baits with hooks for their own destruction? O Rāvana, it is beyond your power to defeat the Kakutsthas. They shall not forgive you for this your encroachment upon their asylum. What have been perpetrated by you coward, is blamed by all, and is the way taken recourse to by thieves and not by heroes. Do you fight. O Ravana, if you are a hero, or wait for a moment and you shall lie down on the earth like to your brother Khara. Truly have you for your own destruction engaged yourself in these impious acts, which are perpetrated by men on the eve of their death. What person do that which lead solely into sin? neither the lord of celestials nor the selfcreate Deity do engage in such an action. Addressing these moral words, the mighty Jațāyu swooped on the back of that Ten-necked Răkşasa. Like to the rider of a mad elephant, the lord of vultures began to tcar Rāvana with his sharpened claws, and that one having for his weapons his beak, talons, and wings, began to rive Rāvana's back with his beak and claws, and to uproot his hair, Being thus afflicted again and again by the king of vultures, the Răkşasa shook, with his lips quivering in anger. Beside himself with anger, Ravana, holding Jānaki fast by her left flank, struck Jațāyu with his palms. Jatayu, the subduer of foes, bearing the strokes, tore into pieces his ten left arms with his beak. His arms cut off, instantly sprang up as many others, like to serpents issuing out of ant-hills, being exercised with the pangs of poison. The mighty Ten-necked one, leaving aside Sitä, out of anger bore down Jațāyu with his fists and feet. Thereupon arose a mighty conflict between the lord of vultures and the lord of Rākṣasas of incomparable prowess. Jațāyu addressing himself to displaying his prowess for the benefit of Rāma, Rāvaņa taking out his dagger, cut off his two wings, two legs and two sides. The ranger of the night of cruel deeds having şundered his wings, the king of vultures approaching well-nigh the verge of death, fell। down on the earth. Beholding him fallen on the ground with his person bathed in blood, Sītā became exceedingly aggrieved and darted towards him like to a friend. The lord of Lankā beheld Jațāyu, fallen on the ground, resembling sable clouds, having a yellow breast and of exceeding prowess, like to an extinguished forest-fire. Then Sītā the daughter of Janaka, having a moon-like countenance began lamenting, clasping with her hands Jațāyu, crushed and fallen on the ground by the vehemence of Rāvana's prowess.