Being thus accosted with reasonable words, that lord, of monkeys, lying on the ground and wounded with shafts, gave no reply. Having his limbs dissevered by stones, being struck with trees and wounded by Rama's shaft, he became senseless at the approach of death. His spouse Tārā heard that Váli, the foremost of monkeys, had been killed in the conflict by Rāma's shaft. Hearing the heart-rending news of her husband's demise, she, big with a child, issued out of the mountain cave with a troubled heart. And beholding Rāma with a bow in his hand, the mighty monkeys, followers of Angada, fled away, terrified. Thereupon Tārā observed those monkeys flying away terrified like to deer alienated from their herd, having lost their king. The chaste lady, racked with sorrow, spoke to those monkeys, afraid of Rāma, wounded with shafts and exercised with grief, saying, O monkeys, why are you flying away, terrified and distressed, leaving behind that foremost of kings before whom you were used to fight? Hath Vāli been killed by Rāma, waiting at a distance with fleet and distant-coursing shafts, being requested by Sugrīva for kingdom? Hearing the words of that wife of the monkey, they, wearing shapes at will, addressed that damsel with words, worthy of being said on that occasion, O you, having your son alive, do you go back and bring up your son Angada. Death himself, under Rāma's semblance, has snatched away Vāli. He was killed by (Rāma's) shafts, resembling thunderbolts as if clapped by thunder itself, having bored trees and big stones (hurled by Vali). That king of monkeys, having Sakra's prowess, being made away with this host of monkeys have been taking to their heels being overwhelmed with consternation. Let the heroes defend the city and install Angada on the throne. And on his being installed the monkeys shall serve Vāli's son. O you having a fine countenance, the monkeys shall enter this stronghold, although it is a favourite place with you. Herein dwell many forest-rangers, wifeless and having wives. And we are really afraid of them, avaricious, and formerly deprived of their wealth by us. Hearing those words of the monkeys, lying at a little distance, that lady, smiling sweet, spoke to them, words worthy of herself. That great lord of monkeys, my husband, being dead, what shall I do with my son, my kingdom and myself? I shall place myself at the feet of that highsouled one, who has been killed by Rama's shaft. Having said this, (Tara) proceeded, overwhelmed with grief, weeping and striking her head with her hands. While proceeding, she espied her husband lying on the ground like to the destroyer of the lords of monkeys who have never been discomfited in a battle field, hurling mountains like to Väsava hurling thunderbolts; emitting a roar like to a big cloud assisted by a mighty wind; resembling Sakra in prowess and like to a cloud accompanied by rain; the repressor of repressor; a mighty hero discomfited by an equally powerful one; like to a lion killed by a tiger for flesh; worshipped of all men; like to a caitya*, adorned with pennons and altars, scattered and broken by Garuda with a view to kill serpents. *A pile of stones. She espied Rāma reclining his person on a mighty bow, his younger brother and her husband's younger brother. Passing them by and getting at her husband and beholding him killed in battle, she, losing her sense, fell down to the ground. And thereupon rising again like one asleep, she, beholding her husband engarlanded by death, cried aloud, exclaiming O son of worshipful sire. And beholding Tārā like to a she-elephant and Angada, bewailing in this wise, Sugrīva attained to an excess of grief.