Beholding those two high-souled brothers Rāma and Lakşmaņa, heroic and with great scimitars in their hands, Sugrīva became terrified. That best of monkeys, of a disturbed mind, cast his looks around and could not stand (patiently) at any place. Beholding those two of great prowess he could not make up his mind to remain there and the heart of that terrified monkey, sank. Pondering over what is more and what is less important the virtuous-souled Sugrīva became highly anxious along with that monkey-herd. Beholding Rāma and Laksmana, Sugriva, the king of monkeys, greatly exercised with anxiety spoke to his counsellors, saying. Forsooth, these two heroes, in false guises and wearing bark, despatched by Vāli, have come here traversing the forest stronghold. Beholding these two mighty archers the counsellors of Sugriva, quitting that mountainous expanse proceeded to another best of hills. Thereupon proceeding quickly the commanders of various monkey herds stood encircling the king of monkeys and the chief of · leaders. The monkeys thus sharing in the misery and happiness (of their chief) proceeded jumping from hill to hill shaking the summits thereof, with the velocity (of their persons). Thereupon those mighty monkeys, jumping, broke down the flowery trees of that stronghold. Those best of monkeys, springing all around that mighty hill, proceeded terrifying the deer, the wild cats and the tigers. Stationed on that best of mountains the ministers of Sugrīva, coming in the front of that monkey-chief, stood with clasped palms. Thereupon Hanumān, skilled in speech, spoke to Sugrīva, terrified and afraid of Vāli's wicked wiles. Let all the monkeys renounce Vāli's fear; in this best of mountains, Malaya-there is no fear of him. I do not behold, O best of monkeys, that wicked Vāli of terrible looks, afraid of whom you had fled away and for whom you are anxious. I do not observe here, O gentle one, the wicked-souled Väli your elder brother of impious actions and whom you do fear and I do not perceive any terror proceeding from him. O monkey-chief, truly manifest is your monkey-hood and it is through your lightheartedness that you are incapable of fixing your soul. Gifted with intellect and knowledge do you perforin all by means of gestures. A king void of sense cannot govern all creatures. Hearing those pregnant words of Hanumār in its entirety, Sugrīva addressed to Hanumān in better accents. Who is not terrified beholding those two mighty armed heroes, having expansive eyes, with bows, arrow, and daggers in their hands like to two sons of a celestial? Methinks these two best of men have been despatched by Vali. Kings have many friends. And it is not proper for me to place confidence in them. People should know that enemies, always treacherous by nature, range under false guises. And those foes, availing of their credulity, bring about their destruction whenever opportunity presents itself. Vāli is eminently expert in despatching business. Monarchs, cognizant of many a wily expedient, bring about others' destruction. It is proper to discern them by means of disguised spies. O monkey, do you proceed under a false guise and come by their intentions, examining them aright by their countenances, gestures and words. Do you ascertain their intention. If do you find them delighted, secure their confidence in my favour by eulogising me again and again and giving out to them my views. O best of monkeys, do you ask them why they have entered this forest, if you do perceive that these two archers are pure souled. O monkey, if you determine the fairness and unfairness of their purpose, their wickedness should be discovered by means of their gestures and conversation. Being commanded by that chief of monkeys, the son of Maruta purposed to approach Rāma and Laksmana. Assenting to the words of the terrified and unconquerable Sugriva and saying 'Be it so, Hanumān, the high-souled monkey proceeded where the heroic Râma was with Lakşmaņa.