Beholding the hermitage and cottage desolate and the seats strewn here and there, Rāma the son of Dasaratha looked around. And finding Sītā nowhere he raised up his beautiful arm and broke out into lamentations. O Laksmana where is Sītā? Where has she gone hence? O Saumitri, who has carried away my dear one or who has devoured her? O Sītā, if wish you to mock me, hiding yourself behind the tree, enough-~-enough it is-console me who am exercised with grief. O pleasant Sītā, without you these faithful little deer have engaged in meditation being bathed in tears. Without Sita I shall not breathe, O Laksmana. A mighty grief has overtaken me in consequence of her being carried away. My father the monarch shall surely behold me in the next world and ask me 'I engaged you in the observance of a vow; without fulfilling that, why have you come here? O shame on you!' For certain shall my father address me with these words relating to my passionate, false and base conduct. All my desires have now been baffled and I have lost all control over myself and have been exercised with grief. O fine damsel, O you of slender waist, where do you repair leaving me behind like to fame renouncing a person of vicious nature? Without you I shall renounce my own life. Being desirous of seeing Sītā, Rāma afflicted with grief began to bewail in this strain, but did not behold the daughter of Janaka. Being sunk in grief on Sītā's account he became worn out like to an elephant fallen in mud.' Thereat for his well being, Laksmana spoke to him. O you of mighty intellect-do not grieve. Do you put forth your endeavours along with me. There is that high hill, O hero, containing many a cave. Maithilī who is fond of ranging the forest and ever delight in beholding the flowery woods, must have entered therein or have gone to the watering-place blooming with flowers and lot''ses. She Las gone to the river abounding in fish and Vañjulas or has hidden herself somewhere in the forest to frighten us and to know, O best of men, how we can search her out. O you of great beauty, let us soon engage in quest of her. O Kākutstha, if think you that she is somewhere in this forest, we shall leave no quarter untried. Do you not grieve. After Laks maņa had spoken thus out of fraternal affection, Rāma, with a composed heart, set out along with him in quest of Sītā. And searching every nook and corner of the mountains, rivers, ponds, table-lands, hills and summits they found Sītā nowhere. And searching thus all the mountains Rāma spoke to Lakşmaņa saying Behold not I the auspicious Vaidehī on this mountain, O Saumitrī. Ranging the entire forest of Dandaka, Laks mana, sore distressed, spoke to his brother of flaming energy. Surely shall you come by Maithilī the daughter of Janaka like to the mighty armed Viş ņu obtaining this earth after having bound Vāli. Being thus addressed by the heroic Lakşmaņa, Rāghava, greatly afflicted with sorrow, replied in piteous accents . O you of mighty intellect I have searched every nook of this forest, this pool abounding in blown lotuses, and this mountain containing many a cave and fountain; but nowhere have I seen Vaidehi dearer than my life. Thus bewailing Rāma, racked with sorrow consequent on Sītā being carried away, became poorly and afflicted with grief and swooned away for sometime. He lost his sense and his whole frame was worked with grief. Being greatly anxious and breathless he sighed hot and fast and began to lament. And sobbing again and again the lotus-eyed Rāma bewailed with his voice choked with the vapour of grief, exclaiming “Ah Sītā!” Thereat his dear brother Lakşmaņa, aggrieved, consoled him with joined hands. But passing by the words dropping from Laks mana's lips Rāma again and again bewailed not beholding his dear Sītā.