As the high-souled Rāghava was dwelling there peacefully, after autumn had departed, the welcome winter commenced. And it came to pass that once on a time, when the night had passed away and day broke, that son of Raghu went to the romantic river Godāvarī for performing his bath. And as the humble son of Sumitrā Rāma's puissant brother bearing a water pitcher in his hand was following Rāma along with Sītā at his back, the former said to Rāma, O sweet-speeched one, now is come that season which you have ever held dear; and as if decorated by which comes on the entire auspicious year. Now people have their persons rendered rough from dew; the earth is replenished with com; water is difficult of being used; and fire becomes enjoyable. And men having worshipped the gods and the Pitſis by celebrating Āgrayana on the occasion of partaking new rice, have at this season, their sins purged off. The provinces overflow with food, and abound in milk and articles prepared therefrom; and kings bent on conquest, range about for surveying thein. And on the sun having veered steadily to the quarter presided over by the Destroyer*, the north appears like a female without her tilaka. ** *i.e.-The South, **A mark made with coloured earth's or unguents upon the forehead and between the eye-brows either by way of ornament or a sectarial distinction. Naturally abounding in snow, and now having the sun at a great distance, the mountain Himavān+ justly bear that name. Himavan means having snow.-T At midday the days are delightful to a degree to range in, feel highly agreeable, and have pleasant suns; while shade and water are uncomfortable. The days now have mild suns, are covered with dew severely cold, with the forests remaining idle, and the lotuses destroyed by frost. And now at night people cannot lie down in unsheltered places; and the nights are inferred from the presence of Pusya And at night the atmosphere (being covered with vapour) looks brown; and it is bitter cold then; and the hours are long And the good fortune of the Moon has fallen to the Sun; and the disc of the former is reddish with vapour; and like to a glass breathed upon, it dose not shine clearly. And the moonlight furnished by vapour dose not appear pleasant; and like Sītā pallid because of exposure to) sunshine, is perceptible, but dose not look beauteous, And at this season the western wind naturally of gelid feel, being permeated at present with cold, Flows with ouble coldness. And the forests enveloped in mist, and stocked with wheat and barley, look brilliant at sunrise, with Krauñcas and cranes crying (in chorus). Golden-hued paddy slightly inclined, appear graceful, with their heads like to date-flowers filled with rice. And the sun although high advanced. yet having its rays covered with thick mist, appear like the moon, And feeble at the first part of the day, and of agreeable touch at mid-day, the sunshine, being surcharged with mist, appear polish over the face of the earth. And in the woods, swards covered with green grass, and with dew-drops on it, look handsome on the morning sun brightening it up. And wild elephants waxing exceedingly thirsty, draw away their trunks, just as they touch beautifully clear and cold water. And those aquatic fowls seated by, do not dip themselves in the water, like to cravens shunning fight. And the rows of trees, shorn of their blossoms, on being enveloped with dew at night and mist at morn, look as if they were fast asleep. And the streams appear with their waters enveloped in vapour and the cranes, perceived through their cries, and their banks having their sands wet. What on account of the snow-fall, what of the mildness of the sun, and what through the cold, water even when it is on a mountain top, tastes sweet. And lotuses afflicted by the cold, with the stalks only left, and with their petals dropping down and their pericarps and filaments shrivelled up, do not appear beautiful. O foremost of men, at this season, influenced by regard for you, Bharata undergoing affliction of spirit, is performing mortification's in the city. And forsaking kingdom, and dignity, and the many and various enjoyments, Bharata practising asceticism and restraining himself in respect of food, in this winter lie down on the bare earth. He also for certain, at this hour of the day, surrounded by this subjects, daily wend to the river Sarayū for performing his ablutions. Brought up in luxury, and exceedingly tender, how can he, afflicted with cold, perforim his ablutions in the Sarayū during the latter part of the night? Of eyes resembling lotus petals, grey-hued, endued with grace, with a navel depressed, and mighty, Bharata understand righteousness, is truth-speaking, of restrained senses (in respect of other' wives) and also of subdued senses. And he speak fair, and is sweet-tempered, and longarmed and the vanquisher of foes. And renouncing various pleasures, he has devoted himself to the noble one. Your high-souled brother has secured heaven, since he, resorting to asceticism, is iinitating you that resident in the woods. The saying that people follow their mother and not their father, is falsified in the case of Bharata. How can mother Kaikeyī, whose husband is Daśaratha and son the righteous Bharata, have such crooked way? As the virtuous Lakṣmaṇa was speaking thus from affection, Rāghava, not bearing the blame cast upon his mother (Kaikeyi), said, My brother, you should by no means, tax our second mother. Do you talk of that lord of the Ikşvāku race, Bharata. Albeit my mind is firm as regards my sojourn in the woods, yet is my mind unsteady, being inflained with affection for Bharata. I remember his dear sweet words, taking the heart, resembling ambrosia, filling the soul with delight. When shall I; O son of Raghu, meet with the high-souled Bharata, and the heroic Satrughna, and yourself*. *The meaning is evident when shall we all meet together.-T Having bewailed thus, Kākutstha, coming to the river Godāvarī, there performed his ablutions in company with his younger brother and Sītā. Then having offered his adorations with water to the gods and the pitrs, those sinless ones hymned the risen sun as well as the celestials. Having with Sītā as the second and Laksmana, performed his bath. Rama looked beautiful like that lord the reverend Rudra in company with Nandi and the daughter of the king of mountains.