Then the grim Śūrpanakhā, coming to Rāghava's asylum pointed out to the Rākşasas those brother in company with Sītā. And they saw the mighty Rāma seated in the cottage in company with Sītā, and ministered to by Laksmana. And seeing her, as well as the Rākşasas who had come, Rāma remarked to his brother, Lakşınaņa of flaming energy. O Sumitrā's son, do you for a while guard Sītā. I shall slay these that have come to this asylum here. Hearing these words of Rāma versed in the knowledge of self, Lakşmaņa honoured his speech by saying, So be it. And the righteous Rāghava strung his mighty bow decked with gold; and addressed the Raksasas. We that have entered into this untraceable forest of Dandaka in company with Sītā are the sons of Dasaratha, the brothers, Rama and Lakşmana. Why do you intend to do injury to us. Subsisting on fruits and roots, having our senses under control, carrying on asceticism and leading a Brahmacarya life, we are passing our days in the forest of Dandaka. It is do destroy you, wicked, and troublesome that I equipped with the bow have come here at the desire of the saints. Stay there content you should not move further. If you have a care for your lives, desist, you rangers of the night. Hearing those words of his, those fourteen grim Rākşasas bearing darts in their hands, exceedingly enraged, with their eyes reddened, breathing high spirits, harshly said to the sweetspeeched Rāma, having his eyes reddened whose prowess they had not seen before. Having excited there our lord. the high-souled Khara, it is you that shal: lose your life no later than this day, being slain by us in battle. What power hast you, being one to stay before us many in the field, what shall I say of your coping with us in conflict? In consequence of the parighas (iron-clubs), darts, and pattisas (a kind of sharp-edged sword) discharged by our arms, you will surely lose your life, along with your prowess, and this bow which you press with your hand. Having said this in wrath, those fourteen Rākşasas, uplifting their weapons and daggers rushed towards Rāma. And discharged darts at the invincible Rāghava. Thereupon Kākutstha by means of shafts decked with gold, cut off those fourteen darts of theirs. Seeing this, that exceedingly cnergetic one, waxing highly enraged, look out fourteen darts with many golden arrows, whetted on stone, resembling the sun. And even as Satakratu hurls the thunder bolt, Rāghava drawing his bow and taking his aim at the Rākşasas, let go those shafts. And those Rākşasas, their breasts pierced with vehemence, and themselves bathed in blood, fell down to the carth, like snakes dropping down from an ant hill. And with their breasts pierced, they, dripping with blood, deformed and deprived of their lives, lay on the ground like trees whose roots have been severed. Seeing them fallen-on the ground, the Rākşasī, beyond herself in wrath, approaching Khara, with her blood a little dried up, again in distressful guise threw herself on the earth, like a plant exuding gum. And in presence of her brother, she set up a mighty roar; and then her face grown pallid, she dropped tears, emitting cries. Seeing those Rākşasas slain in battle, Śūrpanakhā again hastened (to his brother); and the sister of Khara, related in detail the slaughter of those Rākşasas.