And thereupon those foremost of monkeys waited there, surrounding Sugrīva exercised with grief and wearing wetted cloth. And they all, approaching the mighty-armed Rāma of unwearied actions, stationed themselves with folded hands like to the great ascetics around the Grand-Father of the celestials). Thereupon Hanuman, the son of Marut, resembling a golden hill and having a countenance resembling the rising Sun, spoke with folded hands, saying. By your assistance, O Kākutstha, O lord, this great ancestral kingdom of the highly powerful monkeys, having sharpened teeth, incapable of being acquired by the high-souled ones, has been attained to (by Sugrīva). Being commanded by you, he along with his friends, entering this city, shall perform the royal duties. And being duly bathed he shall worship you particularly, with garlands, jewels, scents and os adhis. It behoveth you to enter this pleasant mountain cave and satisfy these monkeys by installing (Sugriva on the throne). Being thus accosted by Hanumān, the highly intelligent Rāghava, skilled in speech and the slayer of foes, replied; O gentle Hanuman, abiding by my Sire's mandate, I shall not enter a hamlet or a city for these fourteen years. Let Sugrīva, the foremost of monkeys, enter this magnificent celestial cave and do you all install him speedily on the throne. Having thus addressed Hanumān, Rāma spoke to Sugriva, saying:-Conversant with customs as you are, do you install this generous and heroic Angada, gifted with gifted with prowess and honouring customs, as the heir-apparent of the throne. This brave and eldest son of your elder brother-Angada, is truly worthy of the heirapparentship. O gentle one, this month of Sravana, which is the first of those four months which make up the rainy season, has set in and this is not the time therefore enter your auspicious city and I shall live in this mountain along with Lakṣmaṇa. Pleasant indeed is this mountain cave, spacious, filled with air, water and many lotuses. You shall engage in endeavours to bring about the destruction of Rāvana, after Kārtika sets in. This is not the proper time, O gentle one, and do you enter your own city. And being installed on the throne do you enhance the joy of your friends. Being thus commanded by Rāma, Sugrīva, the foremost of monkeys entered the pleasant city of Kiskindha, reared by Vali. Encircling that lord of monkeys thousands of them entered the city. Beholding the lord of monkeys, the subjects bowed to him, lowering their heads on the ground. Welcoming the subjects and raising them up; the highly powerful Sugrīva entered the pleasant inner apartment of his brother. On his entering the city, his friends installed the highly powerful foremost of monkeys-Sugrīva, on the throne like to the celestials placing the thousand-eyed Deity (on the kingdom). The monkeys brought for him a coppercoloured golden umbrella, white chowries, a magnificent golden staff, diverse jewels, various seeds and medicating drugs, roots and flowers of glomerous fig trees, white clothes, white sandal paste, fragrant garlands, flowers growing in water and on land, celestial sandal and various scents, fried grain, gold, Pryangu' honey, clarified butter, curd tiger-skin, a pair of excellent sandals, gorocana? and red Arsenic. Carrying all those things there came sixteen maids, highly delighted. 1. A medicinal plant, and perfume, commonly known by the name Pryangu and described in some places as a fragrant seed. 2. A bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine of a cow, or committed in the shape of scibule by the animal, or according to some found in the head of a COW. Thereupon those monkeys pleased the foremost of twice-born ones with jewels clothes and eatables, with a view to install that best of monkeys. And these conversant with mantras threw clarified butter, sanctified by mantras, into flaming fire burning on a Kusa bed. And placing him on an excellent throne facing the east, uttering duly manträs in that golden room situated on the summit of the picturesque palace and beautified with magnificent coverlets and garlands, and collecting pure water from various rivers, sacred places and oceans, those foremost of monkeys kept it is golden jars. Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadna, Mainda, Divida, Hanuman and Jambuvan, installed Sugrīva with auspicious horns of a bull and golden jars according to the rites prescribed by śāstras and sanctioned by the great saints like to the celestials installing the thousand eyed Deity with pure, fragrant water. Sugrīva being installed thus, these high-souled and foremost of monkeys, by hundreds and thousands, began to clatter with delight Abiding by Rama's words, Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, embracing Angada conferred on him the heir-apparentship of the throne. Angada being thus installed, those best of monkeys, highly delighted adored the highsouled Sugrīva, extolling him again and again. Angada and Sugrīva being thus established, they all, greatly delighted, praised again and again the high-souled Rāma and Lakşmaņa. The city of Kiskindhā, filled with stoutly built people and adorned with pennons and flags, appeared beautiful in the mountain cave. Communicating to the high-souled Rāma the news of installation the highly powerful lord of monkey hosts (Sugrīva) getting back his wife Rumā, regained the kingdom like to the lord of celestials.