Having offered him the gift of water, those two descendants of Raghu wended their way in that forest in quest of Sītā and proceeded towards the south-west*. In this sloka west is mentioned and in the next one there is reference to their turning to the south and hence west here refers to south-west. Then turning to the south, with bow and arrows in hand, they reached a track not wended by the people. It was a ghastly, impenetrable forest, covered on all sides with groves, trees and creepers, Proceeding by the southerly direction, those two mighty ones, passed hastily by that terrible, dreary forest. Thereupon, the highly effulgent descendants of Raghu entered the dense forest of Krauñca, situated at a distance of six miles from Janasthāna. It was a dense forest like to a collection of clouds, as if smiling on all sides blooming with charming flowers of diverse hues and frequented by various animals and birds. Waiting for sometime here and there they, exercised with Sītā's ravishment, explored the entire forest in quest of Vaidehi. Proceeding three Kośas towards the East and passing by the forest of Krauñca the two brothers descried on their way the asylum of Matanga. Having seen that dreary forest frequented by various animals and birds and covered with diverse trees and dense groves, the two sons of Dasaratha beheld a cave in the mountain deep as the region under the earth and ever enveloped with darkness. Arriving there they espied hard by a grimvisaged Rākşasī, having a formidable figure, ever causing fright to persons of feeble courage, loathsome terrible-looking, having a huge belly, sharpened teeth, a high person and rough skin, devouring voracious animals and looking fearful with dishevelled hair. Beholding there the two brothers, Rāma and Laksmana, she neared the heroes and saying, 'come, we shall sport' assailed Laksmana who had been going before his brother. And embracing him she spoke to Saumitrī the following words:-My name is Ayomukhi; it is a great gain to you that you have becoine my beloved one, O my lord. Do you sport with me, for ever, O hero, in these mountainous strongholds and on the banks of the rivers. Thereat, exercised with ire, Laksmana, the subduer of foes, uplifting his dagger, chopped off her nose, ears and breast. Having her nose and ears cut off, that terriblelooking Räkşasi, emitting fearful cries, fled away whence she had come. On her departure, proceeding quickly, the two brothers, Rāma and Lakşmaņa, the conquerors of foes, reached a dense forest. There upon the highly effulgent and truthful Laksmana, possessing a pure character, spoke, with folded hands, to his brother of flaming energy. My left arm is throbbing, my mind is filled with anxiety and I perceive before me many a bad omen. Do you put on your habiliments, O worshipful one, and act by what I say for your well-being. Methinks from these bad omens some calamity shall soon befall us. O Rāma, this terrible bird Vanjulaka is emitting fearful cries as if announcing our victory in the conflict. Thereupon while they began to explore the entire forest with their prowess there arose a terrible sound as if breaking down the wood. The forest was enveloped on all sides with a mighty wind and everywhere was audible a roar filling the wood-land. With a view to ascertain whence the sound proceeded, Rāma, with a dagger in hand, along with his younger brother, espied a Rākşasha of huge proportions, having big thighs. The two brothers beheld that Rākşasa stationed before them, having a huge body, devoid of head and neck and therefore a headless demon and having its mouth on its belly. Its body resembled a huge mountain and was covered with sharpened down; its look was terrible like to sable cloud and its roar resembled the muttering where of. Its one terrible, expansive eye, seeing all, was on the fore-head placed on its breast and shone forth like to the flaming fire and it had huge yellow eye-lashes. Its mouth was greatly widened and covered with rows of huge teeth and it was again and again licking that terrible mouth. And stretching forth its two huge arms extending over a Yojana it was devouring bears, lions and deer. It was catching and throwing with its huge hands many an animal, bird and bear. Hindering the way-fare it was awaiting those two brothers. And proceeding a Krosa, they espied that fearful, grim-visaged, headless demon, hindering all creatures with its arms, terrible-looking and appearing like a kabandha from its very situation, Thereupon that one, of huge arms, stretching them forth, got hold of those two descendants of Raghu crushing them with its strength. Those two highly powerful brothers, of mighty arms, with daggers and bows in their hands, were assailed and got hold of by that Raksasha. Rāma was heroic and patient by nature and consequently was not much afflicted; but Laks maņa was a mere boy and impatient by nature and was consequently greatly afflicted. Being greatly distressed, the younger brother of Răghava spoke to him, saying Do you behold me, O hero, brought under the hold of this Raks asha, and renouncing me only, O Rāghava, do you get yourself cff. And offering me as sacrifice, do you escape at your ease. Methinks for certain, O Kākutstha, you shall soon come by Vaidehi and regain your ancestral kingdom. But remember me always, O Rāma, when you shall find yourself placed on the throne. Being thus addressed by Lakşmaņa, Rāma spoke to Saumitrī—Fear not in vain, O hero; persons of your prowess are never afflicted (with fear). Meanwhile the wicked headless, demon, of huge arms, the foremost of Dānavas, addressed the two brothers Rāma and Lakşmaņa. Who are you two youthful figures having the neck of a bull and with mighty daggers and bows in your hands? Arriving in this fearful place you have by chance come within the compass of my vision. Tell me now what have you to do here, and what for have you come? I have been waiting here being hungry, and you have come here having daggers and bows with arrows in your hands like to two oxen having sharpened horns. Nearing me quickly, it will be hard for you to draw your vital breath. Hearing those words of the vicious-souled Kabandha, Rāma having his countenance dried up, bespoke Laksmana-O you, having truth for your prowess, again and again, greater and worse calamities have been threatening us. We have already met with a dire disaster leading to our death, consequent on my separation from my dear one. Mighty is the course of Destiny in all creatures, O Lakşmaņa. Do you O best of men, behold even yourself and me stricken with calamity. But O Lakşmaņa it is not very difficult for destiny to afflict all creatures. Under the influence of destiny even the mighty heroes, well habited in armours are distressed like to a bridge of sands. Addressing these words to Saumitrī, the resolute, powerful and highly famous son of Dasaratha, having truth for his prowess, composed himself by dint of his own understanding.