As a person desirous of meeting with his end dose not take medicine, Ravana, the king of night-rangers paid no heed to the appropriate and sound words of Márica skilled in speech, foreboding good to him. Moreover he addressed him with the following harsh words. O, Marica, what you have spoken to me, shall bear no fruit like to seeds sown into a desertland. I shall not be frightened thereby to fight with that foolish Rāma—a human being of vicious deeds. Surely shall I before you take away from that Rāma the destroyer of Khara his favourite wife, at whose words he has sojourned into woods renouncing his father mother, kingdom and friends. I have made this firm resolution in my mind O, Marica; even Indra, with the celestials and Asuras shall not be able to shake it. It would have been proper for you to give vent to these expressions had I but asked you for advice to ascertain my duty, the propriety or impropriety of my action its way or losses, A wise counsellor who wishes prosperity to himself should always communicate to his master his desire with joined hands whenever asked to do so. It is always proper to speak before monarchs such pleasant and favourable words as are intended for the welfare of the master and are sanctioned by the royal etiquette. A respectable king dose not receive with good grace friendly words even when they are expressed disre .pectfully. Sovereigns of superb prowess assume the semblance of five deities–Agni, Indra, Moon, Yama, and Varuna. Powerful kings, O Ranger of the night, assume haughtiness, power, a placid look and contentment and administer punishment to the wicked. They are to be adored and honoured therefore on all occasions. You are ignorant of kingly morality and fully absorbed in illusion. It is for this that you do out of your wickedness of heart address me your guest with these harsh words. I do not ask you, O, Raksasa about the propriety (of my conduct) or about my welfare. I did only ask you for your help. Listen what you shall have to do at my request in my aid; assuming the shape of a deer having golden skin painted with silvery drops do you proceed to the asylum of Rāma, and ranging at large before Vaidehī do you after captivating her take your wished-for way. Vaidehi, being struck with wonder seeing you a golden deer capable of illusions, shall request Rāma to get you soon for her. Kākutstha issuing out of the asylum, you shall, at a great distance utter such cries as O Sītā, O Lakşmaņa imitating his (Rāma's) voice. Hearing those cries Lakşmaņa also, at the behest of Sītā, shall proceed to Rāma, When both Rāma and Laksmana shall go elsewhere in this way, I shall to my felicity carry away Vaidehī like to the thousand-eyed deity carrying away Sací. O Rākşasa, do you go wherever you like after doing this. I shall confer on you, O Mārīca, half of my kingdom. O you of auspicious look, do you proceed towards the forest of Dandaka to compass this end of mine; I shall follow you in my chariot, Acquiring Sītā without any conflict, after imposing upon Rāma I shall return to Lankā successful along with you. I shall kill you, O Mārīca, if do you not obey my behest. I shall compel you to do this. No body can attain to prosperity and happiness, acting against his sovereign's will. Truly shall you risk your life if you approaches Rāma, but you shall meet with sure destruction if do you act against my will. Consider about it, and do what you think proper.