Hearing those pleasant words of Sugrīva, the highly effulgent Rāma, to create his confidence, took up his bow. That one, conferring honours upon others, holding his terrible bow and a shaft, darted it towards the Sāla, filling all the quarters with a sound, The arrow, clear as the gold itself, hurled by that one of mighty strength, perforating the trees, entered into the mountainous expanse and the sevenfold regions of the earth. And that shaft, gifted with wonderful velocity, piercing all the trees entered again into the quiver. Having beheld those seven trees bored by Rāma's arrow, that monkey chief attained to an excess of surprise. Thereupon Sugrīva, exceedingly glad, and delighted with his actions, bowing down his head on the earth and stretching his ornamented person on the ground, addressed with clasped hands, that heroic descendant of Raghu. Rāma, the foremost of those conversant with religious lore, with the following pious words. O best of men, O lord, what of Vali, you are capable of destroying with your arrows, in the conflict, even the celestials headed by Indra. O Kākutstha, who can stand before you in a battle, who has pierced the seven trees, and the mountain, and the earth with one arrow? Obtaining you as my friend like to Mahendra and Varuņa, my grief has been removed and I have attained to an excess of delight. Do you, O Kākutstha, even to-day destroy, for my welfare, my brother Vāli. This I do pray to you with folded hands. Thereupon embracing Sugrīva, of a pleasant countenance and like to Lakşmaņa, the highly wise Rāma spoke to him, saying, Soon shall we repair to Kiskindha.-Do you go before, O Sugriva, and invite your false brother, Vali, to battle. Thereupon proceeding quickly to Kişkindhā, Väli's capital—they all stood waiting in that dense forest, hiding themselves under the trees. With a view to call Vāli, Sugrīva, tying fast his cloth (around the waist) set up a terrible roar, as if rending the sky (therewith). Hearing the terrible uproar of his brother, the mighty Vāli, highly angered, issued out of his city, like to the Sun from the western shores (where he sets). Thereupon there arose a mighty conflict between Vāli and Sugrīva like to the planets Mercury and Mars fighting with each other on the sky. The two brothers, exercised with ire, struck each other with palms like to Asani and with fists resembling adamant. Thereupon Rāma, with bow in hand, beheld those two heroes resembling each other, like to two Aświns. And Rāghava did not discharge that mortal shaft until he could perfectly ascertain who was Vāli and who was Sugriva. In the mean time, being defeated by Vāli, Sugrīva fled away and not beholding Rāghava, proceeded towards Rșyamuka. And wearied, worn out with blows, and having his person bathed in blood, he, followed by Vāli, angered, entered that mighty forest. Beholding him enter that forest, the highly powerful Vâli could not pursue him there for fear of the curse but said:-You are released today And Rāghava too, with his brother and Hanumān, entered that forest, where the monkey chief Sugrīva was. Beholding Rāma approach with Lakşmaņa, Sugrīva, stricken with shame and casting his looks on the earth, addressed him poorly, with the following words. Accosting me with 'do you call (Vāli),' displaying your valour and making me struck by the enemy, what improper, conduct have you shown by me? You should have spoken me then truly, O Rāghava,-I shall not destroy Vali and I would not have gone there. The high-souled Sugrīva speaking thus poorly, Rāghava again spoke to him, saying: Do you hear, O Sugriva, O worshipful one, why I did not discharge my arrow then. By ornaments, dress, stature and movements yourself and Vali are just the same, O Sugriva. By voice, by words, by looks or by valour, O monkey, I could not make out any distinction. O best of monkeys, being thus surprised by the similarity of your countenances I could not discharge that foe-destroying and quick-coursing shaft. I was so afraid of your resemblance with Vāli that I thought that lest the mortal shaft might destroy you. O hero, O lord of monkeys, if any disaster befalleth you, who are already overwhelmed with miseries, through my ignorance childishness, they shall be known all over the world. Mighty is the sin that ariseth from the destruction of one who has been offered shelter. Myself, Laksmana, and that exquisitely fine damsel-Sita-are all at your service-you or are our only refuge in this forest. Do you again enter into conflict, therefore, and do not fear, O monkey. And do you behold even, in this very moment, Vāli, moving restlessly on the breast of the earth, wounded by my shaft. Do you make some mark on your person, O lord of monkeys, by which I shall be able to recognize you when engaged in a duel (with your brother). O Lakşmaņa, plucking this auspicious Gaja flower, do you put it round the neck of the highsouled Sugriva. Thereat that highly graceful one with the garland around his neck appeared like to a cloud. And appearing in a graceful person and attentive to Rāma's words he again entered Kiş kindhā with him.