Not beholding Sītā the virtuous-souled Rāma, of mighty arms, having eyes resembling lotuses, beside himself with grief, lamented in many a way). Pierced with the shafts of Manmatha, Rāghava, as if beholding Sītā though he actually did not see her, uttered the following piteous accents O my dear, you delights greatly in flowers. Covering your own Person with Asoka twigs you are increasing my grief. Your thighs are like to the trunks of plantain trees and you have hidden your self behind the plantain grove. But I perceive you, O fair one, you are incapable of keeping yourself hidden. O auspicious one, you have entered smiling the Karņikara grove. Now more with your pastime, O dear one, leading to my death. Moreover it is not proper to sport in this way in a herinitage. I know it full well, O my dear, that you are by nature fond of pastimes. But O you of expansive eyes, this cottage lie desolate, do you came here. Evident it is that Sītā has either been devoured by the Rākşasas or carried away by them, and therefore she dose not approach me, O Laks mana, who am thus bewailing. These deer, O Lakşmaņa, with tearful eyes have been as if declaring that Sītā has been devoured by the night-rangers. O chaste one, O you of exquisitely fine hue, O worshipful madam, whither have you repaired? O Sītă, truly has the desire of Kaikeyi been fulfilled to-day. I came out with Sītā and shall return home without her. How shall I enter again that inner apartment void of Sitā? Surely shall the people blame me as being cruel and destitute of energy. That I have no prowess has already been manifested in the destruction of Sītā. When the king Janaka shall come to me after my return home from exile, to ask me of my welfare how shall I meet him? And surely shall he be overwhelmed with grief on his daughter's account when he shall find me without Sītā. Blessed is my father since he is in heaven now. I shall not repair to that city protected by Bharata. Without her even the heaven itself appears to me as desolate. Do you therefore repair to the city of Ayodhyā Icaving me in this forest. By no means shall I breathe without her. Embracing him warmly do you tell Bharata, as instructed by me-Rāma has given you permission to administer this kingdom. As ordered by me do you with proper respect salute "ll my muchers Kausalyā, Kaikeyi and Sumitrā and protect them all with great care and respectful compliments. O destroyer of foes, do you relate at length to my mnother the story of Sītā's destruction. Rāma bewailing thus, being overwhelmed with grief on account of his separation from Sītā having a head of fine hair, Laksmana became of pale countenance and was greatly distressed at heart.