O Mărîca, hearken to me, my child, as I relate (everything to you). I am distressed and in this distress of mine, you are certainly my great refuge. You know Janasthāna, where lives my brother Khara, and the mighty-armed Dusana, and my sister, sūrpanakhă; as also that Räksasa subsisting on (human) flesh, the long armed Trisirā, and many other heroic night rangers besides, of high enthusiasm in battlesRākşasas, who had been living there at my command, troubling in the mighty forest the ascetics carrying on their pious offices. And fourteen thousands of Rākşasas of dreadful deeds, heroic, high-spirited, Raksasas possessed of exceeding prowess; while residing in Janasthåna of late, clad in mail and equipped with various weapons, headed, by Khara, met with Rāma in the field. Getting enraged, Rāma in conflict without returning any harsh speech, by means of his shafts shot from his bow, has, a human being, and fighting on foot, with his flaming arrows slaughtered fourteen thousand Rākṣasas of fierce energy. And Khara has been slain in battle, and Dūşaņa also has been brought down. And having slain Triſirā too, (Rāma) has rid the Dandaka of all fear. Having been expelled by his enraged sire, that disgrace of Kșatriyas, the weak Rāma, living in company with his wife has effected the destruction of this army. He is of a vile character, crabbed, foolish, covetous, of uncontrolled senses, bereft of morality, sinful, and ever engaged in the evil of all creatures, by whom, violently without hostility my sister has been deformed in the forest by having her nose and ears cut off. Of him will I carry off by force from Janasthāna, his wife, Sītā, resembling the daughter of a celestial. Be you my help in it. For certain, O exceedingly strong one, if you help me at my side, if my brothers also back me, I do not think much of all the celestials. Therefore, be you my help; for, you are capable, O Raksasa. In prowess in battle, and in indomitableness, there is none like you. You are a mighty hero commanding resources, and conversant with potent illusory displays. Taking this to my heart, I have come to you, O ranger of the night. Do you listen as to the business in which by my command you are to help ime. Becoming a golden deer, marked with silver spots, do you range about in Rāma's asylum in presence of Sītā. Seeing you helpless, in the shape of a deer, Sītā will say to her lord and Lakşmaņa also, Do you catch it. When they shall have departed, I shall carry off from the empty asylum, Sītã without let, like Rāhu depriving the Moon of his splendour. Then when Rāma shall be sore afflicted because of the carrying off of his wife, I shall easily, crowning my soul with success, safely bear away Sita. Hearing Rāma's words, the face of the highsouled Mārīca became blank and he was seized with apprehension. And licking up his dried lips, with winkless eyes, (Marica) as if dead, and exceedingly distressed, eyed Ravana, steadily. And alarmed because of Rāvana, with his mind depressed, Mārīca who well knew Rāma's prowess in the forest, with joined hands in agitation spoke words lending to his own as well as Rāvana's welfare.