Seeing him fly up into the air, Janaka's daughter, Maithili, became aggrieved and exceedingly agitated, and great was the fear that possessed her. Her eyes expressing rage, weeping and fright, Sītā, as she was being carried away, weeping piteously, spoke to the grim-eyed lord of the Raksasas. Do you not, O base wretch, O Ravana, feel shame on account of this act-you, who, knowing that I was alone fly away, carrying me? Coward that you are, you it was, who, desirous of carrying me off, by the shape of a deer, had, by your (powers of] illusion taken away my lord. And he also that endeavoured to rescue me, has been slain by you—the ancient king of vultures, who was the friend of my father-in-law. Great, forsooth, is found to be your might, you vilest of Rākşasas, in that you have carried me off; by simply declaring your name, but have not won me in war. Why do you not, O execrable one, take shame to yourself, having perpetrated such a heinous act-having carried off another's wife in the absence of her husband? This fell and foul ict of yours fraught with unrighteousness, heroic persons shall bruit about the world. Fie on your heroism and your truth, of which you did speak at that time; and fie also on this character of yours, calculated to sully your line in this world. What can I do (to you), as you proceed with speed? But stay you for a moment; and you shall not return with life. Should you come within the range of the vision of those sons of the king, you could not, although you should happen to be accompanied with your army, live for a moment. Even as a bird cannot bear the touch of a flaming fire in a forest, you can never bear the touch of their arrows. Effecting your own welfare, do you, O Ravana, leave me. If you do not let me go, iny husband along with his brother would strive for your destruction. As intent upon sensual enjoyment, you endeavour to ravish me, this very endeavour of yours O mean wight, shall come to naught. Not beholding my lord resembling a celestial, I cannot, come under the sway of my enemy, bear to live long. As one dwelling on earth perceives objects in their reversed relations at the time of one's death SO you do not perceive what is for your good or profit. Those moribund do not relish what would do them good. I see with the noose of Death wound round your neck. As, O ranger of night, you are not affected with fear, albeit the situation is one calculated to raise one's apprehensions it is clear that you will see the golden treus, the dreadful river Vaitaraṇī flowing with blood, the terrible wood, O Rāvana, rife with leaves in the shape of swords, and a sharp Šalmali containing blossoms of shining gold, having lapises for its leaves, and bearing iron thorns. But, O shameless one, like a person that has drunk poison, having done this wrong to that high-souled one, you with not be able to save yourself. O Rāvana, you are fast fettered in the noose of Death. Having done this foul turn to that high-souled one, repairing whither, shall you obtain respite? Shall not that strong and heroic Rāghava, skilled in all weapons, who without his brother, in the twinkling of an eye, in battle slew fourteen thousand Rākṣasas, slay you, who carries away his beloved wife? Thus and in other ways, Videha's daughter, lying on the lap of Rāvana, overwhelmed with fear and grief, indulged in piteous lamentations. And the wicked (Rävaņa) with a shaking frame carried away the daughter of the king extremely distressed, speaking much, and speaking piteously, uttering lamentations, and putting forth endeavours (to free herself.) saw