Having been well entertained by Sutīksna, Rāma in company with Sumitrā's son, having passed away the night there, awoke in the morning. And arising in due time, Rāma along with Sītā, bathed in cool waters odorous with the aroma of lotuses; and having in proper time duly worshipped Fire as well as the deities, in that forest containing abodes of ascetics, Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa and Videha's daughter, their sins purged off, seeing the sun risen, approached Sutīksna and spoke to him these mild words. O Reverend sir, we we have stayed here pleasantly, being excellently ministered to by you. We greet you, and go away. The ascetics urge speed upon us. We hasten to view the collections of asylums that belong to the holy sages inhabiting the forest of Dandaka. Now we crave your permission along with that of these foremost of anchorites, steady in virtue, crowned with asceticism and selfcontrolled, resembling smokeless flames. And we intend to set out ere the sun like to a low-sprung one that has attained to auspicious fortune through evil ways, with rays incapable of being borne, shines too fiercely. Having said this, Rāghava along with Sītā and Sumitrā's son bowed down to the ascetic's feet. And as they touched his feet, that best of ascetics, raising Rāma and Lakşmaņa up, embraced them closely and said, O Rāma, go your way safely, in company with Sumitrā's son and this Sītā that follows you like a shadow. Behold the beauteous asylums, O hero. of these pure-spirited ascetics inhabiting the forest of Dandaka. You will see blossoming woods garnished with fruits and roots, containing goodly deer, and mild feathered tribes; tanks and pools laughing with blown lotuses, containing pleasant waters, and abounding in Kārandavas; charming mountain-springs; and romantic forests picturesque with peacocks. Go, O child; and go you also, O Sumitra's son. And come again to my asylum after having seen these. Thus addressed, Kākutstha along with Laks maņa, having gone round the ascetic, prepared for departing. Then Sīlā of expansive eyes handed to the brothers excellent quivers bows and shining swords. Then fastening the graceful quivers, and taking the sweet-sounding bows, both Rāma and Lakşmaņa issued from the hermitage. And permitted by the Maharşi, the Rāghavas furnished with grace, equipped with bows and scimitars, swiftly set out along with Sītā.