R훮ma highly aggrieved on account of S카ta's being carried away, addressing himself to destroy the world like to the fire of dissolution and casting his look, sighing again and again, upon the stringed bow like to Mahadeva desirous of burning down the whole world at the time of dissolution, Laksmana, having his countenance dried up, beholding his rage not seen before, began with folded hands. Ere this you had been gently, self-controlled and engaged in the welfare of all beings. It dose not behove you now to renounce your natural temper being influenced by ire. Ever manifested itself in you, glory Par excellence like to splendour in the Moon, lustre in the Sun, motion in the wind and forgiveness in the Earth. It become you not to devastate the whole world for the crime of an individual being. Methinks for certain, this shattered car must be the property of an individual person, not of many. But I do not know whose is this car with yokes and dresses and what for it has been shattered? Behold, O you the son of a King this terrible spot bathed in blood and raked with hoofs and wheels. Surely here took place a conflict. O you the foremost of those skilled in speech, it appear from these signs that this skirmish did take place with one, not with two. Here are not to be seen the foot-marks of a large army. It therefore dose not behove you to destroy the whole world for one's individual offence. Kings, gentle and mild by nature, do always administer punishment, proportionate to the amount of offence. You are always the stay and the best refuge of all animals. Who shall think well, O Raghava, of the destruction of your wife? The celestials, Danavas, Gandharvas, rivers, seas, and mountains-none can act unfriendly by you as the learned priests cannot act improperly towards those initiated by them. It is your duty, O king with bow in hand to search out the person who has carried away S카t훮, along with me and the devotees. Explore shall we, with great care, the seas, the forest, the mountains, the fearful caves, the pools and the abodes of the celestials and Gandharvas until we find out the person who has carried away your wife. If the celestials do not return you peacefully your wife, O Lord of Kosala, you shall adopt imeasures, befitting the occasion. You shall then uproot the whole world, O lord of men, with your gold-feathered arrows resembling the thunderbolt of Mahendra, if you do not come by your wife by resorting to good conduct, self-control, lowliness and polity.