Meditating thus the highly intelligent monkey speh in accents, sweet and in such a tone as they mighty be, heard by Vaidehī. There reigned a noble and pious king named Dasaratha, highly glorious among the Ikşvākus, the lord of the warrior-cars, steeds and elephants. Devoid of envy, high-minded, kind, having truth for his prowess, the foremost of the Ikşvāku race, wealthy and the enhancer of wealth; gifted with royal marks; highly beautiful; the foremost of the kings; famous all over the world of many occans; the conferrer of happiness and himself happy. His eldest and most beloved son was the Moon-bright Rāma, wise and the foremost of those who know the science of the bended bow. He was the protector of his own character, of his own kinsmen, of the whole world of creation and of virtue and subduer of foes. And banished by his old and truthful sire's commands, that hero, along with his wife and brother (Laksmana) repaired to the forest. And while roaming a-hunting in the forest he slew many a heroic Raksasa wearing shapes at will. And having heard of the destruction of the Rākşasas of Janasthāna and of Khara and Duşaņa, the illusive Rāvana, assuming shapes at will, beguiling Rāma, it the forest, stole away his consort-the Janaka's daughter. And roaming the country around in quest of the blameless and worshipful Sītā, Rāma found a firm friend in Sugrīva. And bringing about the destruction of Vāli, Räma, the conqueror of others' cities, conferred the monkey-kingdom upon the high-souled Sugriva. And by Sugrīva's decree, thousands of monkeys, wearing shapes at will, have been searching that worshipful dame in various directions. And by Sampāti's counsel and for that largeeyed dame, I have leapt a hundred leagues across the deep. I have at last got her. And such were the form, grace and the marks that Rāghava mentioned to me. Having said this, the foremost of the monkeys ceased. And greatly wondered was Sītā hearing those words. Thereupon that timid dame, having good curling hair, raising up her face covered with hairs, looked up to the Singshapă tree. Hearing the words of the monkey and casting her eyes to all directions and quarters, Sītā attained an excess of delight, being engaged in thoughts, concerning Rāma. And looking around her and upwards, she beheld, like to the rising sun, the Wind god's son, gifted with inconceivable intellect, the minister of the king of monkeys.