Then they saw the ocean—abode of Varuņashoreless, resounding, rife with dreadful billows. Exploring the mountain fateness of Maya*, they spent the month that had been set by the king. *Named Rhiksavila. Then sitting down at the foot of the Vindhya mountain, containing blossoming trees, at that time* those high-souled ones indulged-in reflections. *i.e. at the beginning of winter. Beholding vernal trees bending beneath the load of flowers, and environed by hundreds of plants, they were inspired with apprehension. And each knowing that spring had appeared, they, the term appointed for their task having run out, dropped down on the ground. Thereat, with bland words properly honouring the aged apes and the rest dwelling in the woods, that monkey having the shoulders of a lion or a bull, and plump and broad arms-the youthful prince Angada, endowed with high wisdom, spoke, We have come out at the mandate of the monarch of monkeys. While we sojourned in the cave, a full month had passed away, you monkeys. Why do you not understand this? We set out, engaging that our term of search should reach no further than the end of Kärtika;* but that has expired. Now, what next is to be done? *October. Having received the orders (of the king), you, conversant with polity, engaged in the welfare of your master, expert in every work, incomparable in execution, and renowned in every quarter, have come out, commanded by the lord of monkeys. Now, having failed to attain our object, we shall meet with death. There is no doubt whatever about this. Who, having been unsuccessful in doing the mandate of the king of monkeys, enjoyeth ease? Now all the rangers of the forest should fast for death. Naturally stern, Sugrīva, established as our master, shall not forgive us, when we repair there, after having transgressed thus. Sītā not having been found out, Sugrīva, for certain, shall commit this sin.* Therefore it is fit that, forsaking our sons, and wives, and wealth, and homes, we this very day sit down to starve ourselves to death. *i.e. slay us. Death at this place is preferable to the unequal punishment (we must meet with at the hands of Sugriva). And, further, I have not been installed heirapparent by Sugrīva: I have been sprinkled by that foremost of kings, Rāma of untiring energy. Entertaining enmity against me of old, the king, seeing this lapse, must be firmly determined to take my life by means of a severe sentence. What is the use of suffering my friends to look on my disaster at the last moment of my existence? Therefore even on this sacred shore of the sea shall I sit down to starve myself. Hearing the tender prince speak thus, all those principal monkeys pathetically observed, Sugrīva is harsh by nature, and Rāghava loveth his wife dearly. The time appointed having passed by, seeing us (come) without attaining success in the task, and seeing us arrive without obtaining a sight of Vaidehi, (Sugrīva) shall certainly slay us from the desire of doing what is agreeable to Rāghava. Those who have transgressed, cannot come to the side of their master. Having come hither as the principal servants of Sugrīva, we shall either see Sītā or obtain information concerning her, or else, O hero, we shall repair to the mansion of Yama. Hearing the speeches of the monkeys afflicted with fear, Tārā said,-No use of indulging in grief. If you relish it, let us all entering the cave, dwell there. This place abounding in flowers and waters, meats and drinks,—which has been brought forth by the power of ilusion, is incapable of being approached. Here we have no fear from Purandara, or Rāghava, or the king of monkeys. Hearing the welcome words of Angada, the monkeys,-being convinced, said,-Do you this very day so order that we may not be slain.