Alighting from the car, Hanumān possessed of vigorous activity, leader of monkeybands-nearing the wall, looked like lightning within a mass of clouds. And having gone round the mansions of Ravana, and not seeing Janaki, the monkey Hanuman said, Striving after Rāma's welfare, I have again searched through Lankā; but I do not see Vaidehi's daughter, Janaki, having all her limbs endeued with loveliness. And I have explored pools, and watery expanses, and tanks, and rivers, and streams, and marshes, and and woods, and citadels, and mountains, yea, all this earth; but Janaki I do not fimd. The vulture-king Sampati had told that Sītā was in the mansion of Rāvaņa. But why do I not see her (here)? Or dose Maithili Sītā, daughter to Janaka, sprung in the Vaidehī line, forcibly carried off (by Rāvaņa), and completely in his power, abide by the mandate (of that monarch)? I conceive that while taking Sītā, the Rākşasa darted upward, he being influenced by fear of Rāma's shafts; (and accordingly losing control over his movements), she fell off by the way. Or I fancy that while that noble lady was being carried away along the way ranged by Siddhas, she lost her life on beholding the ocean. Or I think that on account of the vehement spced assumed by Rāvana, and also oppressed with his arms, that large-eyed noble lady has been bereft of her life. For certain, while (Ravana) was soaring higher and higher, Janaka's daughter, rolling (on the car), dropped down into the sea. Alas! trying to preserve her chastity, the forlorn Sītā, practising self-mortification, has been devoured by this abject-minded Rāvana. Or that darkeyed innocent one, has been eaten up by the wives of the Rākşasa chief, actuated by wicked motives.* *Jealously, according to the commentator. (Ever) contemplating Rāma's countenance, resembling the full Moon, with eyes like lotusleaves, she, exercised with sorrow, has breathed her last. Bewailing much with exclamations of 'Oh Rama and Laksmana!' 'Ah Ayodhya!' that lady Vaidehi has renounced her body. Or secretly kept in Rāvana's mansion, that girl, like a female parrot in a cage, is weeping bitterly. How can the slender-waisted wife of Rāma, born in the race of Janaka, furnished with eyes resembling lotus petals, come under the sway of Ravana? I shall not be able to say of Rāma's beloved wife that she has been sullied, or that I have seen her, or yet that she is dead. To say this is censurable; not to say it is also such. *This is evidently the sense, having regard to the preceding sloku, although the commentator gives the apparent meaning of vinastha perished. What is my course? I find myself in a false position. Things having drifted to this pass, what should I say, now that the time has come?' Thus thinking, Hanumān again reflected, "If without seeing Sītā, I repair to the abode of the lord of monkeys, what then shall I gain as the object of my exertions? This my bounding over the main comes to nought; as also my entry into Lank, and the sight of the Rākşasas. And what shall Sugrīva say? Or the assembled monkeys; or those twin sons of Dasaratha; to me when I shall have come to Kiskindhā? If going there, I should say a harsh speech to Kākutstha-'I have not seen Sitā'-he shall renounce his life. Hearing harsh, terrible, unsufferable, fierce and foul words concerning Sītă, calculated to set the senses on fire, he shall not exist. Seeing him come under misery, with his mind expiring, the intelligent Laksmana, firmly attached (to Rāma), shall also cease to exist. And hearing that his two brothers are dead, Bharata also shall give up existence. And seeing Bharata dead, Śatrughna shall also renounce his life. And beholding their sons dead, their mothers, Kausalya, Sumitra and kaikayi, shall, certainly, resign their lives, Seeing Rāma in that plight, the lord of the monkeys, Sugrīva, grateful and having his heart fast fixed in truth, shall give up his life. Rumā, aggrieved, heart-wrung, distressed and bereft of happiness and assuming the garb of a female ascetic, because of grief for her husband, shall resign her existence. And oppressed with grief arising from Vāli, and weighed down by sorrow, the queen Tārā, also, resolving on death shall cease to exist. In consequence of the death of his father and mother and the calamity befalling Sugrīva, the prince Angada also shall next forego his existence. The dwellers of the woods overwhelmed with grief got of (the decease of) their master, shall strike at their heads with their clenched fists and hands. And the monkeys affectionately cherished by the famous lord of the monkeys with soothing words gifts and regard, shall resign there lives. No more in woods, and rocks, or secret spots, shall the foremost monkeys, assembled together, indulge in sports. They, along with their sons and wives, and counsellors, distressed on account the disaster that has overtaken their master, shall fall from the tops of mountains down to places even or uneven. The monkeys shall take poison, or hang themselves, or enter into flaming fire, or fast, or fall on their own weapons. I fancy that a loud wailing shall arise on my return (to that place); and the race of Iksvāku as well as the rangets of the woods shall meet with destruction. Therefore I will not repair hence to the city of Kiskindhā; nor can I see Sugrīva without Mithila's daughter. On my not going there and staying here, those righteous-souled Maharathas as well as the fastfleeting monkeys, shall preserve their lives through hope (of hearing tidings concerning Sītā). And not having seen Janaka's daughter, I will lead the Vānaprastha mode of life, partaking (of fruits) falling into my hands or mouth, restraining my senses, and staying at the foot of trees. Preparing a funereal pile on a tract bordering on the sea, abounding in fruits, and flowers, and water, I will enter into flaming fire. As I sit to fast, and for effecting the separation of self from my body and centring my identity in the spirit crows and beasts of prey shall feed on my body. I think the sages have enjoyed another way of exit. I shall, failing to see Janaki, enter into water. My illustrious and exalted garland of fame, begot of excellent acts, has perished for good in consequence of my not seeing Sītā.* *Tirtha reads chiraratriyam for chiraratrya. Then the sense is. This illustrious live-long fairrooted and auspicious night crowned with a garland of fame, has borne no fruit, in consequence of my not seeing Sītă. The commentator, I presume, refines a little too much. Or restraining myself, I shall become an ascetic living underneath trees; but return I will not, without obtaining a sight of that dark-eyed damsel. If I return without seeing Sītā, all the monkeys with Angada shall cease to exist. Incalculable are the ills of my putting a period to my existence; (on the other hand) if I live, I imay come by good. Therefore my life I will maintain. If I live, it may conduce to happiness." Having thus indulged in a variety of harassing thoughts in his mind, that foremost of monkeys could not cross over to the other shore (of the sea of distress). Then summoning energy, that elephantine monkey endued with fortitude reflected, Or I shall slay the Ten-necked Rāvaņa possessed of great strength. Sītā has been carried off; but by this I shall avenge myself. Or throwing him repeatedly into the sea, I (shall take him) and present him to Rāma, even as one presents a beast to Pasupat." 'An appellation of Siva-lit. lord of beasts-in allusion to animal sacrifices to Śiva. Reflecting thus, the monkey, not finding Sītā, agitated with sorrow and anxiety, thought. So long as I do not find the illustrious spouse of Rāma, Sītā, I will explore the city of Lankā again and again. If in consonance with Sampat's speech, I bring Rāma hither, Rāghava, not seeing his wife, shall burn all the monkeys. (Therefore) even here I shall stay, restraining my fare and mortifying my senses. All those principal monkeys ought not to lose their lives because of any act to which I may commit myself. This is the Asoka wood, extensive and containing mighty trees. This I shall explore, as it has not yet been searched by me. And saluting the Vasus, the Rudras, the Aditya, the twin Asvins, (and Rāma and Laks mana), I enhancing the sorrow of the Raksas, shall go into it. Having vanquished the Rākşas, I will bestow on Rāma the lady of the Ikşvāku race like the fruit of asceticism conferred on an ascetic. Having thus reflected for a space, the mightyarmed offspring of the Wind-god, his senses agitated with anxiety, arose. “I bow to Rāma with Lakşmaņa, and to the revered daughter of Janaka, I bow to Rudra, and Indra, and Yama, and Wind-god, and I bow to the Moon, to Fire and to the Maruts." Having bowed to them all, as also to Sugrīva, the offspring of the Wind-god, surveying all he cardinal points, mentally entered the Asoka wood. Having mentally entered the Asoka wood, that monkey, son to the Wind-god, reflected as to what he should do next. The sacred Asoka wood, sanctified with every purifying rite and abounding in woods, needs must be full of Rāksas. And warders, directed there to, forsooth, protect the trees, and that worshipful Soul of the universe does not breathe here vigorously. I contract my person in the interests of Rāma, and in order that Rāvana may not see me. May all the deities along with the saints confer success on me. May the revered self-create Brahınā, and the deities, and the ascetics, and Fire, and wind, and the much invoked bearer of the Vajra,* and the noose-handed Varuna, and the Moon and the Sun, the high-souled Aśvnis, and all the Maruts—(confer) success (on me). And all beings, and the lord of them all," and others that, albeit not specified in the scriptures, are yet visible in the way, will confer success on me. *Indra. +Prajapati. When shall I behold the blameless face of that noble lady, with its protruding nose; having luminous smiles, having eyes resembling lotuspetals; and bright as the complacent lord of stars? Ah! today how shall feeble forlorn one that has been borne down by the force of the mean, abject and grim-visaged (Ravana), fierce yet wearing (at the time of the rape), a dress tending to inspire confidence, come in my sight?