Hearing those harsh accents, that lord of Rākṣasas, replied to Sītā, of comely presence, with the following unpleasant words. It is generally found on earth that the more a woman is courted by a man, the more she is brought under his influence, (But for you) the more kindly I have been behaving towards you, the more roughly I have been treated. Truly dose my love for you keep in control the wrath like to a good charioteer restraining the swerving steed. O mighty is amour to men, for on whom this amour fall, albeit she is an object of wrath, becomes an object of kindness and affection. O you of fair countenance, it is for this reason, that I do not destroy you, although you, who are engaged in false asceticism, are worthy of being killed and dishonoured. do you O Maithili, for each and every one of all those harsh words which you had used by me, deserve death. Having spoken thus to Vaidehi, Ravana, the lord of Raksasas, having his wrath subdued, again bespake Sītā. I shall wait for those two months, of which I have made a contract, after which you shall have to share my bed. O you of a comely presence. Even then if you do refuse to regard me as your husband, my cooks shall mince your limbs with steel and serve you for my morning meal. Beholding the lord of Rākşasas remonstrate with the daughter of Janaka is this wise, the daughters of the celestials and Gandharvas became exceedingly sorry. Some with lips, some with eyes, and some with gestures of their faces, they all consoled Sita, thus distressed by that Raksasa. Thus consoled by them, and being proud of her good conduct and her husband's heroism, Sītā thus addressed Rāvana, the lord of Raksasas. Forsooth there is no person in this city who desire your welfare and therefore prevent you from such an impious deed. Who is there in the three worlds, who even desire me in mind, who am the spouse of the virtuous souled (Rāma) like to Indra's Sacī. O you the vilest of the Rākşasas, for using those vicious words towards the spouse of Rāma, of immeasured prowess, repairing whither shall you escape vengeance? Like to an infuriated elephant encountering a hare in the forest, you shall O Vile! a hare as you are, meet with that elephant-like Rāma. You are not ashamed of railing that lord of Ikşvākus, so long as dose you not come within his ken. O base! why do not your grim, terrible, coppery eyes, looking so viciously at me, fall down on earth. O vicious wretch, I am the spouse of that virtuous-souled (Rāma) and daughter-in-law of Dasaratha—using these vile words towards me, why dose not your tongue fall off? O Ten-necked one, I can instantly reduce you to ashes but for Rāma's mandate and my ascetic observances. You could not have ravished me in the presence of the highly intelligent Rāma. And undoubtedly for your destruction this has been brought about by God. You are heroic and Kubera's brother and great in prowess, why didst you then take me by stealth after despatching Rāma away from the hermitage?” Hearing those words of Sītā, Rāvana, the lord of Rāksasas, whirling his grim eyes, looked towards the daughter of Janaka. He was like to a mass of blue clouds and his arms and necks were long and spacious. He was gifted with elephantine gaits and his tongues and eyes were sharp and flaming. The top of his crown was shaking and he had charming garland around his neck and his person sprinkled with paste. He had crimson-coloured garlands and clothes on and his charming arms were adorned with ornaments. Encircled with a sword-belt around his waist he appeared like to Mandara, entwined by a snake at the time of the churning of the ocean. With his two plump arms, ihat lord of Rākşasas appeared like to the hill Mandara with its two huge summits. And adorned with a pair of Kundalas (A kind of ornament worn on ears.) resembling the newly risen Sun he looked like a hill covered with two Asoka trees enveloped with crimson flowers and leaves. He was like to Kalpa tree (A fabulous tree granting everything desired.) and spring incarnate. And albeit adorned, he looked terrible like to a Caitya (A monument or sculpture raised in honour of a deceased person on the site of a funeral pyre.) on the cremation-ground. And having his eyes red hot with ire, sighing again and again like to a snake and casting his looks upon Sītā, Rāvaņa addressed her again, saying. O you following asceticism, this your vow is without any meaning and beyond the pale of morality. Even shall I destroy you today like to the Sun dispelling darkness with his rays. Having thus addressed Maithili, the inimical king Rāvaņa cast his looks towards the grimvisaged Rākşasīs. And among those Rākṣasīs, some had huge ears, some had ears like those of kine, some had ears as long as arms, some had long ears and others were without any. And some had legs like those of an elephant; some had like those of a cow and some had legs covered with hairs. And some had one eye, some had one leg, some had capacious legs and some were without any. And some had huge heads and necks and some had breast and belly beyond proportions and some had faces and eyes above human size. Some had huge tongues and nails. And some were without noses. And some had leonine faces, some had faces like those of kine and some had those of boars. And casting his look towards such Raksasis, he said-You Raksasis, do youall endeavour to bring Sītā, the daughter of Janaka, under my control. By good or bad conduct, by conciliation or gift, by threat or blandishment, do yo so endeavour as Vaidehi's soul night be bent to me. And having ordered thus again and again, that lord of Rākşasas, stricken with amour and ire, addressed Sītā, roaring fiercely. Thereupon approaching speedily and embracing the Ten-necked one, one Rākşasī named Dhānyamālīnī bespoke him. Do you sport with me. O great king. What shall you do with her? O lord of Rākşasas-a human being poorly and of a pale countenance. O great king, forsooth, the celestials have not destined for her enjoyment all those objects which you had procured by your prowess. Again he who desire for an unwilling dame burn his own person—and he who desire for a willing damsel, attain excess of delight. Having said this, the Rākşasī took away Rāvana by force. And that Rākşasa too, resembling a mass of clouds, laughing, turned back. And that Ten-necked one, strode away as if shaking the whole earth and passed within (his queen's) abode resembling the effulgent Sun. And encircling Rāvana those daughters of celestials Gandharvas and Nāgas, entered into an excellent abode. And having remonstrated with and left behind, the firm and pious Sīta with a trembling person, Rāvana, possessed by amour entered into his own palace.