Then that lord of monkeys, the successful Sugrīva, spoke to Rāma-lion among men and destroyer of hostile hosts-saying, Those foremost monkeys endued strength and capable of wearing any shape at will, and possessed of the splendour of the mishty Indra,-that inhabit my territories, have come and stationed themselves. And these monkeys-dreadful, and resembling Daityas and Dānvas are accompanied by powerful monkeys of terrific prowess, who have displayed their virtue in many a field, and are of famed renown in battle and, powerful, and who have mastered languor and are celebrated in prowess and sterling in their profession. O Rāma, these koțis of apes that have arrived, inhabiting earth and water and various mountainous tracts, are at your service. All abide by your command all are intent upon the welfare of their master, and, O subduer of foes, they are competent to bring about your end. And in company with many thousands and innumerable ones that have shewn their ability in many a field, have come monkeys dreadful, and resembling Daityas and Dänavas. If, O lion among men, you conceive that the time is ripe, tell it (to me). It behoves you to command those forces, remaining under your sway. Although I am full well acquainted with the work in which they are to be employed, yet you ought to order them as to what they are to accomplish. When Sugriva had spoken thus, Dasaratha's son, Räma, embracing him with his arms, said, O placid one, do you learn whether Videha's daughter is alive or not; as well as ascertain the country, where, O you endowed with eminent wisdom,.liveth Ravana. Having come at Vaidehi and Ravana's abode, shall I then appoint the time along with you. O lord of monkeys, I am not the master in this matter, nor Lakşmaņa: you are the cause of this undertaking, as well as, O monarch of monkeys, the lord. Do you therefore, O lord, command these as to what is to be done by them in my behalf. O hero, you certainly know my business. My second friend (Laksmana being first), you potent, wise, conversant with seasonableness, cognisant of profit, and engaged in our welfare. Thus addressed, Sugrīva in presence of Rāma and the intelligent Lakşmaņa, said to a leader of herds of lord of apes, named Vinata, having the splendour of a hill, blazing and emitting sounds as those of clouds, O foremost of monkeys, accompanied with apes resembling the sun and the moon, you cognizant of time, place and morals, and sagacious in deciding course of action,-surrounded by hundreds and thousands are of active apes, march towards the Estern quarter, furnished with woods, forests and hills. There, in mountain fastnesses, and forests and rivers, do you search Videha's daughter, Sītā, as well as the abode of Rāvana. And while on the search around for Rama's beloved wife, Sita, daughter-in-law to Dasaratha, you should search the beautiful Bhāgirathi, and the Sarayu, and the Kausiki; the Kalindi, and the charming Yamunā, and the mighty hill bordering thereon; and the Saraswati, and the Sindhu, and the Sona with water resembling ruby; and the Mahi and Kālamahi, garnished with woods and hills,-the large tracts-Brahmamālas, Videhas, and Mālavāns, and Kāsikosalas, and Māgadhas, and Pundras, and Angas; and grounds native to silkworms, and containing mines of silver; and mountains and cities embosmed in the sea. Do you also search through the houses in Mandara,-belonging to people having ears resembling cloths, reaching their nether lips, and mouths resembling iron,-one-footed and fleet withal; and whose descendants never, deteriorate;-and to anthropophagi; and hunters dwelling on islands; having sharp hair, goldhued, pleasing, and subsisting on raw fish; and to creatures-tiger-man forms-~-terrible to behold; and, you dwellers of woods, do you carefully search those places that are accessible by crags and bounds, and the island of Yava, adorned by seven several kingdoms, and the island of Suvarna, and Rupayaka,-thronged by gold miners. And, going beyond the island of Yava. (one comes upon) the hill called Sisira, which pierceth the heavens by its peaks, and is inhabited by gods and demons. In all these mountain fastnesses, cascades and woods, do you together search for the renowned wife of Rama. Then, arriving at the rapid red waters going under the name of Sona, and repairing to the other shore of the ocean, the abode of Siddhas and Chāraņas, do you search all round for Răvaņa in company with Sītā in the sweet sacred spots and picturesque woods. And you should explore forests, mountainsprung streams, wild tracts subject to storms, and montains cer.aining ceverms. Then it behoves you to examine horrible ocean islands, heaving with waves, terrific, resounding,-of haughty bearing in consequence of winds. There, huge-bodied Asuras, hungering for a long period, permitted by Brahmā, capture creatures, resorting to shades. And adroitly arriving at that great sea, like to clouds at the universal dissolution, inhabited by mighty snakes, sending loud sounds. And there, after passing the terrific sea of red waters called Yellow, you will behold a mighty knarled Śālmali. There, built by Viśvakarmā, peak-like, gigantic, resembling Kailāsa, (towere) the mansion of Vinata's offspring. There, grim Raksasas named Mandehas, resembling hills, of diverse shapes, capable of inspiring fear, hang head foremost on the rocks. Day after day at sunrise, these Rākşasas heated (by solar rays) and struck dead by Brahmā energy,* again and again (hang on the crags). *The commentator explains: energy darted from the three orders. Then wilt you, O you that are hard to repress, proceeding, view the sea named Kșiroda, having the hue of pale clouds, and looking like a necklace, because of the ripples (on its surface). In it there are the mighty white mountain going by the name of Rsabha, covered with trees bearing odorous blossoms; as well as the tank known under the name of Sudarśana, swarming with swans and shining silver lotuses having golden filaments. Desirous of sport, resort to this tank delighted troops of Vivudhas and Charanas, Yaksas, Kinnaras and Apsarās. Leaving behind Ksiroda, O monkeys, you will soon after behold the Jaloda sea, striking terror into all beings. There presideth that mighty ireborn Energy of him*. (embodied in) the mouth of a mule. This wondrous (universe) containing mobile and immobile things and fraught with great impetus, is the aliment of this Energy. There are heard the cries of feeble creatures inhabiting the sea, who began to wail on witnessing the mouth of the mule. *Sage Aurvi. On the north of the Swādu sea, lie thirteen Yojanas (of land), named Jātarūpasila, * exceeding spacious, and of the splendour of gold. Lit. of gold and stone. There, you monkeys, you will behold that serpent, the holder of Earth-resembling the moon, and with expansive eyes like lotuspetals-seated at the summit of the mount,-that one worshipped of all deities, having a thousand heads,-the god Ananta, clad in blue apparel. And by the dais (there) at the top of the mount is the golden palm, planted by that high souled one,—which is like a banner. The chief of the celestials reared it in the Eastern region. After that is the fair Rising mountain. Its golden peak measuring a hundred Yojanas, reaching to the heavens, rises nobly, with mountains at its base; and looks beautiful with Sālas, palms, Tamālas, and flowering Karnikāras,-golden, splendid and resembling the sun. There, spreading a Yojana around, towering up ten, is the peak named Saumanasa-all certainly of gold. There, formerly on the occasion of invading the earth with three paces, that foremost of persons, Vişņu, planting his first foot planted the other on the summit of Meru. The sun, having passed by Jambūdwipa on the north, and, arriving at that mighty and eminent summit, (Saumanasa), again becomes visible to the dwellers of Jambūdwipa. There are seen those Vālakhilya Maharșis, named Vaikhānasas,-wearing the hue of the sun, leading an ascetic mode of life. This is the island of Sudarsana, before which all creatures inspire energy and have their sight granted to them. You should search for Rāvana with Vaidehi all round the top of that mountain as well as in its forests and woods. (Here) the first twilight enfolded in the glory of the golden hill and that of the high-souled Sun, appeareth roseate. As this is the first gateway of both Earth and Heaven, and as the sun first rises in this quarter, this is called the East. You should search the breast of its mountain, and fountains, and caves for Rāvana in company with Vaidehi. Beyond that, is the exceedingly impassable Eastern quarter, thronged by the celestials, covered with darkness and devoid of the sun and the moon. Do you search for Jānaki in all those rocks, woods and streams as well as in such spots as I have not mentioned. You foremost of monkeys, the monkeys are competent to proceed thus far. Beyond this, of the tract without sun and without limit, I know nothing. Meeting with Vaidehi and arriving at) Rāvana's mansion, do you, having reached the Rising hill, turn back, when it shall be a full month. Do not stay longer than a month. If you do, you shall be slain by me. Having attained your end, do you turn back, having met with Maithili. Having adroitly explored (the tract) loved of Mahendra, plated with woods, do you, you monkeys, having come at Sītā—the beloved wife of that descendant of Raghu-desist, attaining happiness.