And located within that excellent mansion, Hanumān, son to the Wind-god, saw a superior and grand structure, stainless and spacious; half a Yojana in width and one in lenght, belonging to the lord of the Rākşasas, and abounding with many a palace. Searching for Videha's daughter, the large eyed Sītā, that slayer of enemies, Hanumān, ranged all through (this edifice). Hanumān beheld the goodly edifice where the Rāksasas used to dwell in common. And (at length) that one came upon the mansion itself of the lord of Rākşasas, having three-tusked and four-tusked elephants, and protected by persons with upraised arms, and covering a capacious area. And (Hanumān beheld) the residence of Rāvana thronged with his Rākṣasi wives, as well as with princesses forcibly brought thither (by him), like to the sea teeming with alligators and Makaras, abounding in timingilas and fishes and snakes, and agitated by the force of the wind. The same enchanting splendour that is in Vaiśravaņa or the ray-riding Moon, remained ever constant and abiding in, Rāvana's abode. And the prosperity of king Kubera, or Yama, or Varuna, was here present in the house of the Rākşas, or even surpassed by the prosperity (of Rāvana). In the midst of that mansion the Wind-god's offspring found another.* excellently constructed, having innumerable mad elephants; that noble car embellished with all gems, entitled Pushpaka, which had been constructed in heaven by Viśvakarmă for Brahmā himself. *The car Puspaka, according to Tirtha, whose view is accepted by Rāmānuja. According to Kataka, Vesma means a bedchamber of husband and wife. Which Kubera obtained for the Great-father through high austerities, and which, vanquishing Kubera by his prowess, the Rākṣasa chief god possession of. And the mighty monkey ascended the splendid car Pushpaka, containing figures of wolves, made of Karttasvara and Hiranya; graced with ranges of goodly pillars; as if blazing in splendour; throughout garnished with narrow secret rooms and saloons, piercing the heavens, and resembling Meru of Mandara, and like to the flaming Sun; skilfully reared by Viswakarmā; with golden staircases and graceful and grand raised seats, rows of golden and crystal windows, and daises composed of sapphires, emeralds and other superb gems; embellished with noble vidrumas, costly stones, and round pearls, as also with plastered terraces; pasted with red sandal, like to gold, and furnished with a sacred aroma; and resembling the sun new risen. And stationed thereon, Hanumān smelt the rich odour of viands and drinks that was spreading on all sides; and like one dear friend smelling another, he also smelt the mighty Air, impregnated with aroma, which seemed like embodied Odour. And (the Air) said to Hanumãn, "Come here, where that Rāvana is." 'i.e. on Puspaka. Then (descending form Pushpaka and repairing to that sleeping apartment of Rāvana), Hanuman saw the same grand and graceful; belonging to Ravana; of transcendent beauty; comely like to a lovely lady; diversified with jewelled staircases; illumined with heaps of gems; with its terraces constructed of crystal; having statues of ivory, pearls, diamonds, coral, silver and gold; aborned with jewelled pillars; and embellished all round with pilasters; and upheld on all sides by straight, elevated and gorgeously ornamented pillars of equal dimensions, resembling prodigious wings, (the mansion) appearing to tower to the sky; containing spacious and parti-coloured woollen cloths bearing the marks of the Earth;* extensive as the Earth is, with kingdoms and dwellings; resounding with the roars of infuriated elephants; redolent of divine fragrance; furnished with gay canopies; inhabited by the sovereign of the Rāks as; cloudy with aguru and dhupa; spotless; of a swan-like whiteness; engarlanded with flowers and leaves like to the dappled and brilliant cow (of Vasishtha); bringing delight to the heart; and enhancing the grace (of all creatures); removing sorrow; noble; and the generatrix of Grace herself. And as soon as Hanuman entered the mansion protected by Rāvaņa, it like a mother regaled his senses with their proper objects. *i.e. four-cornered, The Earth, in Hindu cosmogony, is a flat surface having four corners. This must be svarga, or the region of the immortals, or the city of Amarāvatī, or the supreme Siddhit thought the Wind-god's offspring Svarga is the region where persons reap the fruit of Jyotishtoma, etc. Siddhi is Illusion spread by Gandharvas. And he saw the golden lamps (shorn of their brightness),* like to gamblers worsted at dice by others exceedingly skilful, and, in consequence, plunged in thought. * By the superior splendour of Rāvaņa. And (Hanumān) conceived that (Rāvana's sleeping apartment) was in a conflagration, on account of the display of the lamps, Rāvana's energy, and the splendour of the ornaments. And when the night had been half spent, (Hanuman) saw thousands of superb dames, adorned in various attires, and bearing apparels of diverse hues, and wreaths, who having given up sport, and come under the influence of wine and sleep, were fast asleep on woollen sheets. And in consequence of the silence that reigned (in the apartment) embellished with (ornaments), it resembled a large lotus-grove, where the swans and the black bees are silent. And the Wind-god's offspring beheld the countenance of those beauteous women, with closed eyes, having their lashes shut through languor; and odorous with lotus-perfume. And their faces appeared like lotuses blowing on the expire of night and closing their petals by night. “These lotus-faces like to very lotuses themselves, ever the six-footed ones* seek once and again.” Thus thought with discrimination the graceful, mighty. monkey; and on account of their perfections, he confessed those countenances to be equal to water-sprung (lotuses). * Şatpadā—six-footed—a name of the black bee. "Salitodbhavas, water spiung—a name of the lotus. And that apartment, in consequence of being graced by those women, appeared splendid, like the autumnal, complacent sky decorated with the stars. And surrounded by them, the Rākṣasa chief resembled the fair Moon encircled by the stars. “Those stars that drop from the firmament on their virtue deteriorating, have assembled here in a body," thus thought the monkey at that time. And the shine, form, and splendour of those females resembled, forsooth those of magnificently displayed, noble and lustrous stars. And on account of their having been bereft of consciousness through sleep, induced by fatigue brought on by drink (and dance), their hair was dishevelled, and their full wreaths and goodly ornaments lay scattered about. And some of those paragons had got their beauty-spots, smudged; and some, their bangles loosening off, some, their chains running to one side. And others had their pearl necklaces burst, and their cloths getting away (from their persons), and the chains of their zones straying irregularly; resembling way-worn mares. And others again were without their ear-rings, and had their garlands torn and crushed; and resembled blossoming creepers, trodden down in a vast forest by mighty elephants. And the pearl chains of some shining females resembling moon beams, having got topsy-turvy, was lying like sleeping swans between the breasts of the damsels. And the lapis chains of some resembled water-crows;* and the fine golden chains turned upside down of other appeared like ruddy geese. *Kadamba-a drake; or, according to some, a teal; a gander; or the species gallinula porphyria. And those ladies resembled rivers having hips for banks; containing swans and Karandavas, and beautified with ruddy geese. Those sleeping females appeared like streams; having Kinkiņis for their ripples; and large gold lotuses;* marks* of amorous encounter on their persons for ferocious aquatic animals; and perfections,** for their banks. 'i.e. the faces of the females are meant. Another meaning is, gold for large lotuses. *Vilasa, may also mean arch displays by way of ecquetry. **Yasa, according to some, here means grace. On the tender frames, as well as on the tops of the breasts, of graceful scratches consequent pressure, appeared like ornaments. The scarf-ends of some stirred by the air that some on was blowing about their faces, flapped on them again and again. At the nether part of the faces of Rāvana's wives, they (the scarf-ends) appeared beauteous like uplifted streamers of exceeding elegance, composed of many-hued golden yarn. The ear-rings of some dames possessed of a pleasant sheen, stirred by the air that was breathing about their faces, were undulating gently. The sweet breath of their faces, naturally fragrani, and redolent of sugar and asava, was then rogaling Rāvana. Out of fear sprung from sleep and intoxication, some of Rāvana's wives were again and again smelling the faces of those, co-wives with them, taking the faces to belong to Rāvaņa. From their hearts being firmly fixed on Ravana, those excellent women, having their sense of separateness removed, (albeit thus dealt with), did what was dear to them.* *The sense is very imperspicusous only by reason of he unskilful use of the pronouns. The damsels kissed did not resent the act; but kissed the kissers in turn. Other females, making their gay scarf-ends (for their sheets), and making their arms, their pillows, were lying down there. And some were lying on others' bosoms; and others again, on the arms of the latter. And some lay on the laps of others; and others, again, on the breasts of the latter. They reposed on each other's thighs, flanks, waists, and backs; and coming under the influence of wine and amour, they lay on each other's persons. Those females having elegant waists, receiving pleasure from the contact with others' persons, were sleeping there, with their hands fastened by each other. That garland of females strung by the threads of their hands, appeared beauteous, like a real wreath strung on a thread, with maddened black bees (seated thereon). That multitude of females in a mediey appeared like an assemblage of blooming plants in the month of Caitra,* with its wreaths formed in consequence of their coming in contact with one another, and of its clusters touching each other, on account of the breeze blowing; with the plants encircling the graceful (necks of the trees), and rife with Bhramaras chasing each other. 'March-April. Although the ornaments of those women wearing ornaments, attires and wreaths, were put on proper places; yet (on account of the profusion of the ornaments themselves, as well as because of the circumstance of the dames sleeping, * it was difficult to ascertain which ornament belonged to one damsel and which to another. *In consequence also, remarks the commentator, of the uniformity running through the ornaments, as well as of the close contact of the persons of the ladies. It seemed as if, Rāvana having attained rest (through sleep), the flaming golden lamps furnished with various rays, were gazing at the girls with winkless eyes. Daughters of Rajarsis, of Vipras, of Daityas, of Gandharvas, and of Rākşasas, having come under the influence of desire, had become his wives. And all those women had been procured by Rāvana because he sought fight (with their relations) and some haughty dames, rapt with desire, had of themselves come to this place. There was no woman there, who had been won by force by (Rāvana), possessed as he was of prowess; but they had all been subdued by his qualities. And save the surpassingly worthy daughter of Janaka, no female (had been brought), who had set her heart on another, or who had known any other before. There was none who, being his wife, was not of high extraction; none who was defective in grace; none who was not an object of desire of her lover. as The lord of monkeys endowed with uprightness of sense, thought, “If the righteously wedded wife of Rāghava were one of the wives of the king of the Rākṣasas, it would well for him." Again reflected he, “Sītā is crowned with chastity and other virtues; and the powerful lord of Lankā, assuming an illusory form, has with much ado perpetrated this ignominious act.” as The lord of monkeys endowed with uprightness of sense, thought, “If the righteously wedded wife of Rāghava were one of the wives of the king of the Rākṣasas, it would well for him." Again reflected he, “Sītā is crowned with chastity and other virtues; and the powerful lord of Lankā, assuming an illusory form, has with much ado perpetrated this ignominious act.”