Thereupon, Laksmana, the slayer of foes, commanded, entered, at the behest of Rāma, the pleasant city of Kişkindhā situated in the centre of caves. Beholding Lakşınaņa, the highly powerful monkeys, having huge persons and waiting at the gate, stood all with folded hands. And seeing Dasaratha's son highly enraged and sighing again and again, the monkeys stood silent and did not interrupt him. The graceful Lakşmaņa espied that huge picturesque and celestial cave adorned with jewels and flowery gardens. It was filled with palatial buildings, various jewels and flowery trees, producing at all times wished for fruits. It was beautified with good-looking monkeyschildren of the celestials and Gandharabas wearing celestial garlands and clothes and assuming shapes at will. It was fragrant with the sweet smell of sandal wood, Aguru and lotuses and its highway were equally fragrant with the smell of honey. And Lakşmaņa beheld there many spacious buildings like to the hills Vindhya and Meru and rivers of clear water. And he also surveyed the picturesque dwellings of Angada, Mainda, Divida, Gavaya, Gavaksa, Gaja, Sarava, Vidhutmali, Sampati Suryakşa, Hanumāna, Beerabāhu, Subāhu, Nala, Kumuda, Susena, Tara, Jambavan, Dadhivaktra, Neela, Sunetra and Supātala like to sable clouds adorned with excellent garlands, filled with rice and jewels and beautiful damsels. Unobstructed the highly powerful Saumitri entered the picturesque abode of Sugrīva like to the Sun entering into a collection of dense clouds. The abode of this lord of monkeys was like to the palace of the Lord of celestials, ornamented with the tops of white buildings resembling the summits of the Kailasa hill and flowery trees producing at all times, wished-for fruits, covered with beautiful trees having cool shades and bearing celestial fruits and flowers resembling the molten-god. And that virtuous-souled one, crossing the seven rooms filled with conveyances and seats beheld the secret apartment (of that monkeychief), having many a gold and silver bed-steads with excellent coverlets and fine seats. No sooner had he entered the inner apartment than he heard a musical sound, well-measured and accompanied by the music of the stringed instrument. And that highly powerful one beheld in the abode of Sugrīva many a beautiful damsel proud of their youth and beauty sprung from respectable families, adorned with splendid ornaments, engaged in stringing excellent garlands. And he observed Sugrīva's servants, well fed, contented, not hurry in offering their services and without splendid ornaments. Hearing the sounds of women's girdles and their Nupurs*, the graceful Lakşınaņa became highly ashamed. *An ornament for their toes or feet. And highly enraged at the sound of the ornaments, the hero filled all the quarters with the twang of his bow. Lakşmaņa of mighty arms stood silent in a nook, thinking of his improper conduct of entering into (Sugriva's) seraglio, albeit he was wrought up with ire in consequence of Sugrīva's neglecting Rama's service. Thereupon Sugrīva, the lord of monkeys, being apprised of Laksmana's approach by the twang of his bow and terrified, trembled on his throne, and thought aside. Forsooth has Saumitri, fond of his brother, come, whose approach was announced by Argada before, Informed before by Angada of his approach, and made doubly sure by the twang of the bow, that monkey came to know of Lakşmaņa's arrival and turned pale. Thereupon Sugrīva, the foremost of monkeys, wrought up with fear, addressed the fine looking Tārā with the following well-meaning words. O beautiful lady, did you know, why has the mild-natured younger brother of Rāma, arrived here enraged? O blameless lady, did you perceive any cause of the Prince's wrath? Forsooth, that best of men, is not enraged for a slight cause. Considering aright, did you speedily inform me if I have performed any improper act towards Rāma. O fine lady, do you approach him in person and pacify him with soothing words. Beholding you, that pure-souled one shall not be worked with ire; great men do never behave roughly towards the females. Approaching him do you console him and thereafter I shall see that conqueror of foes having eyes resembling lotus-petals. Thereupon Tārā, with faltering feet and eyes wild with wine, the golden chains of her zone flowing (about her her hips),-graced with auspicious marks, saught Laksmana's presence with downcast looks. Beholding Tărā, the queen of the lord of monkeys, Laksmana, the high-souled son of a king, restraining his anger on the approach of a female, stood with his head hung down, conducting himself like an ascetic. Renouncing modesty under the influence of liquor, and finding the king's son well pleased, Tārā spoke to Lakşmaņa, bold and loving words, in order to console him. O son of a king, what is the cause of your wrath? Who is there who has not abode by your commands? Who can remain without anxiety, beholding fire in a forest filled with dried trees? Hearing the soothing words of Tārā, Laks maņa, undaunted, spoke again, greatly manifesting his friendship. O you intent on your husband's welfare, did you not perceive that your husband is by and by losing piety and wealth, being addicted to amorcus enjoyments.? O Tāră, your husband does not think of us who are moved with sorrow—but is addicted to sensual enjoyments only, being surrounded by parasites. (Having promised that he would institute enquiries about Sītā after four months), that lord of monkeys has well-nigh spent the entire period, being influenced by liquor and addicted to enjoyments along with you. For the attainment of piety and wealth, drinking is not a proper course. It is by drinking that people lose piety, wealth and desire. He who does not return the services of his benefactor, loseth piety. He who who loseth friendship with a qualified friend, loseth wealth. He is the best friend who is gifted with wealth and is truthful; and your husband has relinquished such a friend gifted with these two qualities. And, therefore, he does not abide by the virtue of preserving friendship. O you expert in business, this being the case, do you advice us as to what we should do. Hearing the sweet words of Lakşmaņa consonant with piety and wealth, Tārā again addressed him about Räma's business, yet remaining unaccomplished with words inspiring confidence. O son of a king, this is not the time for displaying your wrath; it is not proper to be angry with one's own friends. O hero, it behoveth you to put up with the error of him who has your welfare in view. O prince, who, accomplished with excellent virtues, gets enraged with one of inferior merits? O prince, who, like you, an offspring of asceticism, is worked up with ire against the virtue of forgiveness? I know the cause of the) wrath of that heroic monkey's friend. I know the time for action. I know what you had done for us. I know what is due from us to you. And, O foremost of men, I also know the irresistible force of Kāma. I know by whom Sugrīva has been taken captive, and that his heart is not now in the work. As you had come under the governance of anger, your mind has not felt the influence of desire. Even a human being that has conceived love, does not stay for place or time or interest Do you forgive that lord of the monkey race, your brother influenced by carnality, who is by you, and who through the urgency of lust, has banished shame. Even Maharșis finding delight in religion and asceticism, setting their hearts upon satisfying lust, (ultimately) become fast bound by ignorance. But this is a monkey, volatile by nature, and has, further more, been enjoying regal state-why should he not act thus? Having thus said Lakşmaņa of immeasurable intelligence words fraught with high import, that female monkey, her eyes drooping with languor, again sadly spoke in this wise for the behoof of her husband. O foremost of men, although Sugrīva has come under the sway of desire, he has, to secure your good, ere this issued orders for preparations to be made. And monkeys by hundreds and thousands and koțis, inhabiting various mountains, possessed of exceeding prowess, have already arrived (here). to Do you therefore, O mighty-armed one, come. (Having rushed towards the inner apartment), you had not suffered in character. For the good to behold others' wives in a friendly spirit, cannot bring on unrighteousness. Permitted by Tārā, that long-arined repressor of urged on by (the required) speed, entered the inner apartment. There seated on a superb seat spread with a costly carpet, he found Sugrīva resembling the sun himself, his person decked with noble ornaments, of a dignified presence, famous, wearing gay garlands and attire, invincible like to the great Indra. And surrounded by dames adorned with elegant ornaments and wreaths, Sugrīva with his eyes still more reddened in wrath, looked like the destroyer himself. Then deeply embracing Umā, the large-eyed hero of the hue of fine gold, seated on an excellent seat, saw the powerful Saumitri having expansive eyes.