Hanumăn then resolved to travel through the air or the path of Cāraņas (heavens), in quest of Jānaki who had taken away by Rävaņa. In order to perform that arduous task he raised his head and stiffened his neck quite erect, for which he looked like a bull. Then he, wise and mighty monkey walked over the earth, green with grass, with irresistible steps. At that time, he brushed aside all animals like a lion and crushed down many trees, and thereby scared away the feathered denizens of the forest. There were various minerals on the Mahendra hill was shining by rosy, ruby-like and white and black hues, which was constantly visited by Yaksas, Kinnaras,, Gandharvas, Nāgas resembling to the celestials capable in their pristine lustre, there Hanumān standing at its foot looked like an elephant immersed in a lake! After this, he bowed down to the Sun, Indra, Svayambhu, Wind-god, and all beings with joined palms and then facing the west he saluted his father and then began to increase in dimension like the sea. The foremost of the Vānaras at this stared at him, he swelled in size for the purpose of Rāma as the ocean swells on the full-moon days. Hanumān got ready for crossing the ocean having grown his body immensely. He caught hold tightly of the mountain with his hands and feet. The hill at once shook and flowers began to drop down from the trees. Having discharged that fragrant flowers from trees covered all the sides of the mountain which appeared as though it were all flowers. Hanumān began to press the mountain more and more, and it began to spurt forth water like an elephant shedding its temporal sweat, and the golden, silvery and collyrium hues of the different minerals were all destroyed by that torrent of water. Heavy boulders rolled down with large blocks of red-arsenic; then the hill looked like the smoke of a burning flame. Beasts and birds shrieked in fear and ran in every direction and the snakes reissuing their spacious hoods began to bite at the rocks, as if they vomited fire in anger. Big rocks bit by those snakes crumbled into pieces and those fragments began to burn with fire-like venom. Although there were many medical herbs, capable of counteracting poison, which had sprung up on that mountain, could not neutralise that poison of the snakes. At this sudden convulsion, the hermits thought that they were being driven by the Rākşasas. The Vidyādharas with their woman ran away from their drinking haunts, leaving their golden seats, goblets, bowls, delicious articles for chewing, various kinds of meat, oxen, hides and swords with golden hilts. Fair damsels wearing necklaces, bracelets, anklets and carnation garlands, besmeared with red sandal paste and with their eyes red with wine dallying in amorous sports being startled by this strange occurrence, with their lovers, rose in the sky and watched the thing with delightful curiosity from above. Looking like a mountain, the hermits thought about Hanumān, son of wind-god, undertaken for the benefit of Rāma and Vānaras in general, and blessed that he would be able to cross the ocean, the abode of Varuņa easily. Hearing this from the hermits, the Vidyādharas were struck with wonder and they repeatedly looked at Hanumān. Meanwhile the fire-like mighty hero trembled in his limbs and his hairs stood on their ends, and he roared like the rumbling of a cloud. He lashed his roundish tail covered with down and again on his back just to get ready for the spring. It seemed as if Garuda, the king of the birds, was flying off with a huge snake. The monkey firmly planted his arins like bolts, on the mountain; then crouched at the waist and contracted his legs. Contracting his arms, neck and abdomen He, the glorious and powerful Hanumān then, mustered his strengh. He looked up to survey the distance, he suspended his breath in the heart while looking into sky. Then doing firm his feet and contracting his ears in order to spring, addressing other Vanaras, mighty Hanuman said. I shall reach Lankā with the velocity of wind, just like an arrow shot by Rāma and if I do not find Jānakī there I shall, at the same speed, go to the region of the gods. If I do not see Sītā in heaven even after exerting myself, I shall bring Ravana, the ruler of Raksasas, in bondage. At anyway with success, I shall come with Sītā or then I shall bring Lankā uprooting it with Rāvana. With these words, Hanumān who was full of vigour, sprang into the air accounted himself like a compeer of Garuda. As he flew up with vehemence, trees growing on the mountain, were uprooted from all sides. Hanumān coursed through the sky along with these trees, borne up by the violence of his flight. The ſala and palm trees went after him for a short time as people follow their friends bound for a distant land, or as the troops follow their king. Hanumān thus being covered with buds and blossoms looked like a hill lit up with glowworms. Then the heavy trees being deprived of their flowers by the velocity of the flight began to drop down into the sea like mountains bode, afflicted with the fear of Mahendra. And strewn with various sprouts and buds and blossoms, the monkey resembling a mass of clouds, looked lovely like a bill filled with glowworms. And uprooted by the force of his rush, mose trees, their flowers fallen off, plunged into the sea, like friends returning to their homes (after having accompanied their friend some way). And blown by the wind caused by the a monkey, the various variegated flowers of the trees the consequence of their lightness, showered down on the sea. And covered with heaps of fragrant flowers of diverse hues, the monkey resembled a mass of clouds embellished by lines of lightning The waters of the ocean) strewn with blossoms carried off by his motion, operated like the sky garnished with charming stars (cresting the same). His arms stretched in the sky, seemed like five-hooded snakes issuing from mountain. He appeared as if he was drinking up the mightily deep with its multitudes of waves, or as if that redoubtable monkey was desirous of sucking up the sky itself. As he coursed the orbit of air, his eyes flashing like lightning, resembled two craters a glow on a mountain. And the eyes of that foremost of tawny-hued ones resembled the sun and the moon stationed in a vast yellow aureola. Beside his coppery nose, his face looked coppery, as looks the solar disc on the approach of eve. And the uplifted tail of the Wind-god's offspring engaged in bounding, appeared beautiful in the sky like the raised standard of Sakra. The exceedingly wise son of the Wind, Hanumān, having white teeth, with his tail coiled up, looked handsome like the sun with his disc. On account of his waist being deeply coppery that mighty monkey appeared like a mountain running, mighty torrent mixed with minerals and red chalk. The wind that had got into the armpits of that leonine monkey who was crossing over the main, roar like clouds. As a meteor consisting of many smaller ones, darting from above fall down (to the earth), rushed on that foremost of monkeys. Then that stalwart monkey resembling the careering sun, resembled a mad elephant fettered by the middle, whose bulk has increased immensely. As he coursed above, on account of the reflection cast by his body (on the boson of the deep), the monkey* by his progress, looked link a bark swayed by the breeze. *Under water. And wherever that mighty monkey went about the sea, the state of things appeared to undergo a violent convulsion owing to impetus imparted by his body. That mighty monkey possessed of exceeding speed rushed on, raising multitudes of surges on the sea by his breast resembling rock. And the wind begot of the monkey as well as that of the clouds, issuing out, made the dreadsounding ocean roll violently. Pushing up multitudes of high-heaving billows from the salt waters, that tiger-like monkey rushed on separating earth and heaven. And that one endued with vehement speed passed over surges in the mighty main resembling Mandara or Meru; as if counting them. The waters lashed up to the clouds by the force (of his speed), looked like autumnal clouds overspreading the sky. Then whales and alligators and fishes and tortoises appeared plainly visible, like the persons of individuals, when the cloth has been taken off then. And sea-serpents, seeing that tiger-like monkey proceeding in the sky, took him for Suparna himself. The shadow the leonine monkey, measuring ten Yojanas in width and thirty in length, seemed the handsome in consequence of his speed. That shadow resembling masses of white clouds, rallying on the salt waters and following the wind-god's son, seemed exceedingly beautiful. on more And that exceedingly energetic highly monkey possessed of a gigantic body, appeared splendid in the unsupported aerial way, like a winged mountain. And the deep beside the course that was being vehemently pursued by that elephantine monkey, was suddenly urned into a water-course.* *The sense is hard to hit. The commentator says, that agitated by Hanuman's peed, the clouds began to pour down showers on the ocean. And coursing through the regions of fowls like the monarch of the feathered race, Hanuman, pushing away masses of clouds, resembled the wind himself. And colossal clouds scattered by the monkey, pale and crimson and blue and mangistha-hued, looked exceedingly lovely. And now entering into the clouds, and now emerging from them, he looked like the moon, sometimes hid and sometimes visible. Beholding that monkey engaged in bounding with celerity, gods, Gandharvas and Dānavas began to strew blossoms (on him). As he was leaping, the Sun did not burn him; and the Wind ministered to him, for the success of Rāma's work. And the saints hymned his praises, as he was leaping on in the sky. And applauding the ranger of forests, they raised the voice of song. Nagas and Yaksas, and various (races of) Raksasas, eulogized (him), on beholding that tiger-like monkey, Hanumān, in the act of bounding. Hanumān, that lord of monkeys, being engaged in the act of bounding, the Ocean, who sought to do honour to the race of Ikşvāku within himself. He said himself, ‘Truly shall I be blamed of all persons if I do not assist this lord of monkeys-Hanumān.' Reared I have been by Sagara, the foremost of the race of the Ikşvākus and this monkey is their counsellor. It therefore dose not behove me to tire him out. It become me to do that by which the monkey may take rest in me and, relieved, may happily traverse the remaining way. Having arrived at this wholesome resolution, the Ocean spake upto that best of mountains, Maināka, hued in gold and situate in the waters, saying. O lord, you had been placed here by the king of celestials as an outer gate against the Asuras inhabiting the region under the earth. You too, from then, had been waiting at this gate, unapproachable by the Asuras, rising up again and again and whose prowess is wellknown (to the Lord of celestials) O mountain, you are capable of expanding yourself upwards, downwards and on they sides. I do command you therefore, O best of mountains, to rise up. That best of monkeys, the energetic Hanumān, the performer of mighty deeds, engaged in Rāma's service, worn out with fatigue, wait above you. Beholding the exhaustion of that leader of monkeys, it behove you to rise up. Hearing the speech of the Ocean, the golden mountain Maināka, covered with tall trees and creepers, rose up instantly from his watery bed. Like to the Sun of bright rays rising out of the watery expanse, he uplifted himself from the Ocean. Being thus commanded by the Ocean, the great mountain, covered on all sides with water, immediately brought forth his peaks. The sky was as if cleft by these golden summits like to the rising of the Sun, inhabited by Kinnaras and large Serpents. To golden summits of that mountain being thus lifted up, the dark-blue sky assumed the golden hue. And by those highly resplendent golden peaks that best of mountains assumed the brilliance of a thousand suns. Beholding before him that up-heaved mountain in the midst of the salt Ocean Hanumān regarded it, as a barrier for aye. Like to Wind dispersing clouds, that mighty monkey with great velocity crushed down those up-lifted peaks with his breast. Being thus crushed down by that monkey, the best of mountains, being apprized of his prowess, began to shout with joy. Thereupon, with a glad heart assuming the semblance of a man ånd stationing himself upon his own summit, that mountain-chief addressed Hanumān, saying. O best of monkeys, forsooth had you been engaged in this arduous task. Coming down on my peak do you take rest. This ocean was reared by one born in the family of Raghus. And beholding you engaged on Rāma's behoof he is worshipping you. The best and everlasting virtue consists in returning benefits to one who has benefited us. Bent on returning benefits to Raghu's race, he deserve respect from you. And to welcome you properly I have been despatched by him with the message-traversing over a hundred yojans this monkey has been worn out with fatigue; let him voyage to the remaining way after resting for a while on your summit. Do you therefore, O best of monkeys, remain here and take rest. And feasting on these many fragrant and sweet fruits and roots, O foremost of monkeys, do you relieve yourself of the toil and proceed. O leader of monkeys, my relation with you is replete with many virtues and known all over the three worlds. O Son of Maruta, O best of monkeys, I know you to be the foremost of all monkeys. Even an ordinary guest should be adored by him who abide by virtue, what of you great as you are? O you lion among monkeys, you are the son of Māruta, the foremost of celestials and are his equal in speed. You that are conversant with virtue, being worshipped, Maruta himself receive offerings. You are therefore worth of my adoration. Hearken, there is another reason for it. O worshipful one, in olden times, the mountains, gifted with wings, began to range all quarters with velocity like to Garuda. They moving thus, the celestials, the ascetics, and all creatures became almost faint with fear of their falling down. Highly enraged therefore, the thousand-eyed Deity, the performer of hundred sacrifices, hundred with his thunderbolt, the wings of hundreds and thousands of them. When with his thunderbolt, the Lord of celestials, wroth, approached me, I was all on a sudden thrown down by the high-souled Wind. O best of monkeys I was these cast done in this salt ocean and preserved unhurt by your ancestors having my wings hid. I shall therefore adore you and you are object of my worship O Maruta! And this my relation with you, O foremost of monkeys, is pregnant with many virtues. The time for returning benefits having arrived, O high-souled one, it behove you to afford me and the ocean, satisfaction with a blessed heart. best of monkeys, relieve yourself of the fatigue and accept my affectionate offering, who am worthy of your respect. For his relationship with Wind whose son was Pitupanthānam-the text means "his father's path”-Wind being Hanumān's father the passage means-"aerial way."-Happy am I to see you. *Wrath in consequence of his inability to accept his offerings. Being thus accosted by Maināka, the best of mountains, Hanumān, the foremost of monkeys said, saying: Pleased am I and you had shown me enough of hospitality. Do you give up your wrath. Business wants me to go soon and the time is well-nigh spent. Besides I have promised that I shall not halt at any intermediate place. Thereupon touching the hill with his hand that highly energetic monkey wended, smiling his aerial way. Ocean Thereat the and the mountain respectfully looked towards him and adored and welcomed him with blessings worthy of the occasion. Leaving the mountain and the ocean and rising his up, he proceeded in the clear welkin traversing the aerial way. Rising high up and casting his look down on the hill, that foremost of monkeys proceeded by the unsupported aerial track. Beholding this singularly arduous work of Hanumān the celestials, the Siddhas and the ascetics all praised him. All the celestials and others living on its summit, were highly pleased with the mountain arrayed in gold and having beautiful sides. And the thousand-eyed Vásava was also pleased. And greatly pleased that highly intelligent Saci's lord, himself, addressed that best of mountains having picturesque sides, saying. Greatly delighted am I, O lord of mountains, O you having golden peaks. 'No fear' I do declare to you. Proceedest you therefore, at your ease, O gently one! Greatly had you hoped Hanumān, crossin fearlessly an unceasingly, over hundred yojanas so that he might not fall in danger. This monkey, is going in the interests of Rāma, Dasaratha's son—and you had welcomed him to the best of your mighty. Therefore I am greatly pleased with you. Beholding that lord of celestials the performer of an hundred sacrifices, highly gratified, that best of mountains attained to an excess of joy. Having received boons (from Indra) the Mountain occupied again its pristine place. And Hanumān in a short time crossed over the main. Thereupon the celestial along with Gandharvas, Siddhas and the ascetics, spake to Surasā the mother of serpents, resembling the Sun, saying. The highly effulgent son of Wind named Hanumān is crossing over the main. You are required to throw obstacles in his way for a while. Assuming therefore the semblance of a terrible, grim-visaged Rāksasa, resembling a huge mountain and having terrible teeth and a face with coppery eyes, do you touch the welkin. We are anxious to learn if he defeat you by some means or comes by grief." Thus addressed the worshipful Surasā, having been honoured by the celestials, deformed and horrible and capable of exciting the fear of all beings, and obstructing Hanumān as he was coursing on, said. O foremost of monkeys, you had been ordained as my fare by the gods themselves. I will eat you up, do you enter my mouth. Even this is the boon that was conferred on me by the Deity. Having delivered herself thus, speedily, she was opening her mouth wide, stood before the son of the wind god. Thus accosted by Surasā, (Hanumān) with a glad countenance, said, Rama, son to Dasaratha, had entered the Dandaka forest in company with his brother, Lakşmaņa, and his wife, Vaidehi. He having created hostility with the Rākṣasas, his illustrious wife, Sītā, while he was engrossed in some work, was carried away by Ravana. At Rāma's command, I go to her as his envoy. It behove you, living in (Rāma's) dominions, to lend him your help. Or having seen Mithila's daughter, as well as Rāma of untiring deeds, I will enter your mouth. This I promise you truly." Thus addressed by Hanumān, Surasā, capable of wearing forms at will, said, “None shall pass me without being devoured by me, even this is the boon that I have received." Then seeing him go away, the mother of the Nāgās, Surasā, desirous of essaying the strength of Hanuman, spoke. O best of monkeys, you shall have to go, today after entering my mouth. Even this is the boon that was conferred on me by the Deity. Having said this swiftly, she extending her capacious mouth wide, stood in front of the wind-god's son. Thus addressed by Surasā, that foremost of monkeys, waxing wroth, said, “Extend your mouth so, that you may contain me." Having said this to Surasā, having her mouth measuring ten yojanas, Hanumān enlarged himself as many yojanas. Thereat-Surasā enlarged her mouth twenty yojanas. Threat, Surasă, extended her mouth forty yojanas, and thereupon the heroic Hanuman attained the altitude of fifty yojanas. Surasā enlarged her mouth sixty yojanas; and the heroic Hanumān anon heightened himself seventy yojanas. Şurasā widened her mouth eighty yoyanas; and Hanumān like to Fire raised himself ninety yojanas. And Surasā enlarged her mouth an hundred yojanas. Seeing that mouth with its long tongue opened by Surasā which was extremely terrible and was a replica of hell. Thereat diminishing his body like to a cloud, the wind-god's son at that moment measured one thumb only. Then entering her mouth and coming out of it, that exceedingly powerful powerful and graceful one, stationing himself in the sky spoke thus. O descendant of Dakşa, I have entered into your mouth. I bow down to you. I will repair to where Vaidehi is Your boon has proved trve. Seeing him out of her mouth like the Moon out of the mouth of Rāhu, the venerable Surasā spoke to the monkey in her native form, saying. For compassing your end, go, O foremost of monkeys, O mild one, at yours ease. And bringing to Vaidehī tidings touching the highsouled Rāghava do you meet her. Witnessing that third act* The third feat, remarks Rāmānuja, is Hanuman's issuing out of Surasā's mouth. The preceding two are not mentioned. — of Hanumān's hard to perform, all beings extolled the monkey exclaiming, "Excellent! Excellent!" *A kind of also or agallochum.-Wilson. Then he, resembling the wind in rush, arrived at the irrepressible ocean-abode of Varuņawent on, enveloping the welkin, on the aerial way, visited by showers, ranged by fowls and Gandharvas, graced by the rşis; embellished by shining vehicles rolling on, drawn by lions, or elephants, or tigers, or bird-serpents; presided over by eminently pious and righteous persons who have won the regions of heaven; and therefore appearing as if adorned by the (five) Fires; of the touch of Asani or Havya; (ever) served by Fire bearing sacrificial oblations; garnished by planets and stars and astral luminaries, and the Sun and the Moon; thronged with Maharsis, and Gandharvas and Nāgas, and Yaksas; and pure, and speckless;-the support of the universe-inhabited by Viswavasu; lorded over by the elephants of the king of the celestials; the orbit of the Sun and Moon, endowed with auspiciousness constituting the canopy of this live world blameless; and made by Brahmā; crowded with countless heroes, and Vidyādharas. And the wind-god's son Hanumnān, scattering clouds like the very Wind himself, coursed on in the aerial way like Garuda. And mighty clouds, hued like Kālāguru red, and yellow and sable, on being disperse I by the monkey, burst into brilliance. Again and again entering into the clouds and emerging out of them, he resembled the Moon during the rains now entering into clouds) and now issuing out of them. And everywhere Hanumān, son to the wind god coursing through the unsupported sky, looked like the monarch of mountains furnished with wings. And it came to pass that beholding him in the act of bounding, a Rākşasi named Sinhikā, of great age, and capable of wearing forms at will, thought herself. Today after a long lapse of time I shall have my fare. This mighty creature has after a long time come within my power. Having thought thus in her mind, she seized (Hanumān's) shadow. On his shadow* Brahmā had conferred on her a boon that she should secure her prey by pulling at it by means of its shadow.— "As a mighty bark is retarded in its course in the sea by adverse wind, have I, my prowess paralysed, been suddenly obstructed in my career.” Then looking above and below and sideways, the monkey saw a mighty creature arisen from the salt waters. *i.e. of securing his shadow.-being secured, the monkey reflected. Seeing that one of a distorted countenance, the wind-god's son thought, This one is, without doubt, the creature of wonderful form, possessed of exceeding prowess, given to securing its prey by means of its shadow, which had been described by the monkey-king. And concluding her to be Sinhikā from her act, the intelligent monkey attaining a gigantic body, increased himself, like a mass of clouds during the rains. Seeing the enlarged body of the mighty monkey, she extended her mouth measuring the sky and the nether regions. And roaring like to a mass of clouds, she rushed against the monkey. Thereat, that intelligent and mighty monkey marked her deformed and huge mouth, her body and its asticulated members. And the redoubtable monkey hard as the thunderbolt, contracting himself in a moment, threw himself into her mouth. And the Siddhas and Chāraņas saw him sink in her mouth, as the full Moon is taken by Rāhu during a Parva. Then tearing her limits by means of his sharp claws, the monkey, endowed with the celerity of thought, vehemently sprang forward. Then slaying her by his acuteness of sight, endurance and skill, that heroic, self-controlled monkey again began to swell himself amain. Her heart having been crushed out by Hanuman, she, rendered lifeless, fell into the water. The self-create had created him for compassing her destruction. And seeing Sinhikā speedily slain by the monkey, and fallen, creatures ranging the sky addressed that foremost of monkeys, saying, Terrible is the deed that you had performed to day. Mighty was the creature that has been slaughtered by you. Compass you yours wishedfor end without let, О foremost of monkeys. He, O chief of monkeys, that, like you, is endowed with endurance, sharp sightedness, sense, and ability, dose not feel depressed in action. Honoured by these and wished well as to his purpose, that monkey, worthy of being honoured, set out, enveloping the sky, like him that subsist on serpents.* *Garuda. And it came to pass that as he had almost arrived at the other shore (of the ocean), he looking about on all sides at the end of an hundred yojanas saw a range of woods. As he went on, that best of monkeys saw an island decked with diverse trees, and groves pertaining Malaya. He surveyed the sea, and lands bordering thereon, and trees growing on the sea shore, and the countenance of the spouses of the Sea. Surveying his own person resembling a mighty mass of clouds, and as if closing up the sky, that self-possessed one ascertained his course of action. Soon as the Rākṣasas shall behold my enlarged body and the vehemence of my motion, they shall be seized with curiosity concerning me. Thus thought that magnanimous one. Thereat diminishing that person of his resembling a mountain, that self-possessed one, purged on ignorance, resumed his natural shape. And diminishing that form into the smallest compass, Hanumān remained in his native form, like that depriver of Vāli's prowess, Hari, after he had placed his three steps. Thus wearing various graceful forms, that one, acting after reflection, having come to the other shore of the ocean incapable of being reached by others, on looking over his (immensely magnified person), reduced his body (to its former size). That high-souled one resembling a cloudy pavilion, alighted on the (foremost) summit of the splendid mountain, Samva; crested with picturesque peaks; and abounding in ketakas, uddalakas and cocoanuts. And reaching the shore of the sea, and beholding Lankā on the top of that foremost of mountains, the monkeys renouncing his native form, fell on that mountain, agitating birds and beasts. Having by main force bounded over the ocean heaving with surges, and rife with Dānavas and Pannagas, he alighting on the shore of the mighty main, beheld Lankā like to Amarāvati. Having by main force bounded over the ocean heaving with surges, and rife with Dānavas and Pannagas, he alighting on the shore of the mighty main, beheld Lankā like to Amarāvati.