Hearing those unpleasant words of Rāvana, the lord of Rāksasas, Sītā, racked with sorrow on account of her husband, became terrified, like to a she-elephant, worsted by a lion on the skirt of a forest. Threatened by Rāvana and encircled by the Rākşasīs, that timid damsel bewailed like a girl cast off in a lonely forest. Truly the sages say that death in this world dose not come untimely. Or else would I have, vicious as I am, lived for a moment, being thus sorely threatened. Forsooth, my mind, divested of happiness and full of misery, is firin or else why is it not broken in sunder like to the summit of a hill clapped by a thunderbolt. Nor am I to blame for this. I am worthy of being killed by this demon of uncomely presence. As a Brāhmaṇa cannot impart instructions in Vedas to the people of other castes so I shall not confer my mind on Rāvana. If that lord of the people dose not come within the appointed time, forsooth shall that vile lord, of the Rākşasas, mince my limbs with his arrows like to a surgeon cutting off the limbs of an embryo. (This passage clearly indicates that there were proficient and skilled surgeons at the time when Rāmāyaṇa was written.) Two months shall pass away in no time and I shall have to suffer the pain of death, overwhelmed with sorrow as I am, like to a thief, confined in stocks, at the command of the sovereign to receive death the next morning. O Rama! O Laksmana! O Sumitra! O Rama's mother! O my mothers! I am worsted in this ocean of grief, like to a bark, driven hither and thither by the blast, in the midst of an ocean. Verily for me, those two powerful, lion-like sons of the king, have been killed by (this demon) effulgent like the lightning and assuming the semblance of a deer. Unfortunate as I am, forsooth I was tempted then by death wearing the shape of a deer and thus foolishly lost Rāma and Lakşmana, the sons of the worshipful sire. O Rāma, O you of truthful vows, O you of long arms, O you having the countenance of a full moon! O my life! engaged as you are in the welfare of the people, do you not perceive that I am about to be killed by the Rākşasas. Alas! this my devotedness to my husband, my forgiveness, my lying down on the bare earth, my observance of religious vows, my wife-like virtues, are lost like to service done for an ungrateful wight. In vain are my pious rites, and in vain is my devotedness to my husband since I do not behold you, am pale and feeble in your absence and have given up all hopes of seeing you. And duly satisfying your sire's command, and returning successfully from the forest, you shall fearlessly sport with many a damsel having large eyes. (But for me) O Rama, I was for my own destruction, devoted, soul and heart, to you. Oh! fruitless is my asceticism and wifely virtue! Oh fie on me! I shall renounce this my unfortunate life. I desire to do away speedily with my being by means of poison or a sharp weapon. But there is no one in this city of the Rākşasas, who bring me this poison or weapon. Bewailing thus in various accents, and remembering Rāma with all her heart, Sītā, having her countenance dried up, and trembling, got at the biggest tree enveloped with flowers. And thinking thus, Sītā, stricken with grief, took up in her hand, her braid of hair and thought—"I shall soon hang myself with this braid and reach the abode of Death." And that one of tender person reached the tree, and holding a branch, began to think of Rama, Laksmana, and the glory of her race. And on her person were perceived many auspicious marks, well-known in the world, removing grief, fostering patience and announcing the advent of future welfare.