Hearing Hanuman's speech, uttered meekly, fraught with morality, and reflecting honour upon Sugriva, Angada said, Firmness, and mental sanctity, mercy, candour, prowess, and patience, are not in Sugriva. He that, while her son is living, appropriateth the beloved queen of his elder brother, mother to him by morality, is hated (of all beings). How can he that could cover up the mouth of the cave, when he had been desired by his brother gone on martial mission, to guard the same,—(how can he) know morality? Whose good office remembereth he who could forget the renowned Räghava himself of mighty deeds, after having, in the name of truth, taken his hand? How can he reap religious merit that directed us to search Sītā here, from fear of Laksmana, and not from fear of unrighteousness? What noble person, in especial, sprung in his race, shall any longer repose confidence in that impious one of unstable soul who has run amuck of morality? Meritorious or otherwise, how can Sugriva, having installed in the kingdom me, son (of his enemy) and the enemy sprung in his race, suffer me to live? How can I, whose counsels have been revealed, who have transgressed, and who have been deprived of my power, repairing to Kiş kindhā like one forlorn and feeble, live? For the sake of his kingdom, Sugrīva, wily, cunning and cruel, shall put me in solitary confinement. For me fasting to death is better than being confined-and suffering the consequent misery. Do you grant me your permission; and go to your homes, you monkeys. I vow before you, to the palace I will never repair. At this very spot will I fast for death; as death is good for me. Bowing to the king as well as to the powerful Rāghava, you should communicate my wellbeing to Sugriva— lord of my health and peace to my mother Umā. It behoves you also to console my mother, Tārā. Naturally fond of her son, and overflowing with tenderness, that lorn one, hearing of my apes-and death at this place, shall certainly renounce her life. Having said this, Angada, saluting the elders, with a woebegone face entered the earth covered with grass. When he had entered, those foremost monkeys, stricken with sorrow, weeping shed warm tears from their eyes. And censuring Sugrīva and praising Vāli, they, surrounding Angada, determined to starve themselves to death. Taking to heart the speech of Väli's son, those prime monkeys, sipping water, sat down facing the East. And sitting on the edge of the water on grass pointing to the south, the foremost monkeys, wishing for surcease, thought within themselves,-Even this is fit for us. And as they spoke of the exile of Rāma and the demise of Daſaratha, the carnage in Janasthāna, the slaying of Jațāyu, the ravishment of Vaidehī, the slaughter of Vāli, and the ire of Rāma, the monkeys were seized with fear. When those monkeys resembling mountainsummits had entered in, they set up cries, which, like to the rumbling of clouds, making the sky resound, made that mountain with its rills reverberate.