Hearing the words of the high-souled monkey, Răvaņa, bereft of his senses by wrath, ordered that he should be put to death. On the death of that one who had proclaimed his own position of being an envoy, having been ordered by the wicked-minded Ravana, Vibhisana did not agree (with the decision). And knowing that the lord of Rākşasas was wroth and that affair (The destruction of Hanuman) was at hand, Vibhisana, resolved to act according to justice, began to reflect as to what was to be done. Having arrived at a decision, that one skilled in speech, paying homage to that conqueror of foes, his elder brother, spoke to him in words eminently good. “O lord of Rākṣasas, forgive me and renounce your wrath." (The commentator says, the passage means, ‘Give up your promise (to slay Hanumãn) and abate your anger.) Extend your favour to me, and hear these words of mine. Lords of the earth, endowed with integrity and knowing high and low, never put messengers to death, The taking the monkey's life, O king, is opposed to morality and repugnant to social usage; and it is also unworthy of yourself. You understands morality, are grateful and versed in the morality of sovereigns, and can distinguish between high and low among beings, and even you know the prime sense of things. If discerning persons like you come under the governance of passion, mere toil is the pains that are undergone to master the scriptures. Therefore, O destroyer of enemies, be pacified. O lord of Raksasas, difficult to approach, consider what is proper or otherwise, and then do you mete out punishment to the envoy. Hearing Vibhisana's speech, Ravana lord of Raksasas, overcome with a mighty wrath, answered, O slayer of foes, to slay the sinful dose not cause sin. Therefore shall I slay this monkey, worker of iniquity. Hearing these words grounded in unrighteousness, evil every way, and worthy of the base, that foremost of intelligent ones, Vibhișana, spoke words couching supreme import, O lord of Lankā, be propitious. O Sovereign of Rākṣasas, listen to speech containing the significance of virtue and profit. O king, an envoy is not to be put to death on the occasion of his discharging his proper functions. This righteous people say everywhere to all. Surely this is an overgrown enemy; and he has perpetrated immense injury (to us). But say the good, envoys are not to be slain, albeit many are the punishments that have been assigned for messengers. Disfigurement of the body, strips, shaving of the head, one of these or all combined, these are said to be the punishments that should be inflicted on envoys. But I have not heard of the punishment of death being a penalty of the envoy. as Why dose one like you, having one's intelligence rendered meek respects righteousness and profit, and capable of proceeding on certain decisions on the merits or otherwise of things, come under the sway of passion? Those possessed of power never give way to anger. Neither in religious discussion, nor in social concernis, nor in appropriating the right sense of the scriptures, is there any that can approach you, O hero-Verily you are the foremost among celestials and Asuras. Invincible to the gods and Asuras themselves gifted with prowess, high spirits and intelligence, you had in battle oftentimes put to the rout the chiefs of celestials and monarchs. Those heroes that have heretofore mentally entertained enmity against such a one as you, foe of deities and Daityas, heroic and valiant and unconquerable, have not been deprived by you of their lives. (There is a particle api, even, which stands in the way of this Sloka fitting in with the context.-'Even those heroes who have mentally etc'-is a lame reason why Hanumān, who had wronged Rāvana so outrageously in overt act, should be let off.) on Nor do I see any good that may likely accrue to us from the slaying of this monkey. Let your vengeance descend those that have despatched the monkey. Whether honest or otherwise, this one has been commissioned by others. Advocating interest not his own and identifying himself with another, an envoy dose not merit the being put to death. O king, if this one be slain, no other skyranger whatever would show himself tous. Threfore, O captor of hostile capitals, do not seek to slay this one. You should spend yourself on celestials with Indra (at their head). On his being killed, another see I not who, O you that love warfare, can move those haughty sons of a king to take up arms against you. And, O bringer-in of joy to the heart, it is not proper for you, invincible to celestials and Asuras gifted with prowess, high spirits and intelligence, to disappoint the Nairtas (as to their eagerness for encounter). They are devoted to your good, and are heroic and intent on your well-being, born in lines having high and fiery virtues, and endowed with intelligence, the flower of those bearing arms—and have been maintained by you. Therefore let a portion of the forces, having received your order, march to-day, and bring (hither) those foolish princes. It is meet that you should display your prowess before fores.” Thereat, the lord of the night-rangers, that potent enemy of the celestials and the foremost of Räkşasa monarchs, lending free play to his intellect, accepted the excellent words of his younger brother.