Seeing that foremost of men, Laksmana, exercised with wrath, as he entered in without let, Sugrīva was seized with sadness. And seeing Dasaratha's son, wroth, and breathing hard, and flaming up in energy, and burning in consequence of the calamity that had overtaken his brother, that chief of monkeys started up, leaving his golden seat, like to the mighty ornamented standard of the great Indra. And as Sugrīva rose up, Umā and the other females rose up, like to stars appearing in the sky when the full moon has risen. And with eyes reddened, and his hands folded, the graceful Sugrīva came (before Laks maņa) and stood there like a mighty Kalpa tree. And the wrathful Lakşmaņa spoke to Sugrīva stationed among women, having Umā for his second, and resembling the moon with the stars, saying. The king that is nobly endowed by heredily, and is kind, that has subdued his senses, and is grateful and truth telling, obtains renown in this world. And who is more wicked than that king who, rooted in unrighteousness, makes false promises to friends intent upon his welfare? He that speaks a falsehood with reference to a horse, becomes guilty of the deaths of an hundred horses: he committing himself to a falsehood relative to a cow, reapeth the demerit of slaying a thousand kine; while he that uttereth an untruth touching a person, destroys self as well as his kindred. That ungrateful might that having at first attained benefit at the hands of his friends, does not requite it, is, O lord of monkeys, worthy of being slain by all creatures. Seeing an ingrate wretch, the wrathful Brahmā sang the (previous) śloka, bowed down to by all the worlds. Do you understand that, O monkey. The pious provide deliverance for the cow-killer, the winebiber, the thief, and the violator of vows; but for the ungrateful person there is no deliverance whatever. You are ignoble and ungrateful and lying, O monkey, since, having been formerly benefited by Rāma, you did not requite his services. Having been benefited by Rāma, you, anxious to repay his kindness, should exert yourself in search of Sita. But, of false promises, you had been indulging in gross enjoyments,-nor does Rāma know you for a serpent, croaking like a frog*. *Crying through the voice of the frog in its mouth. Another meaning is, croaking like a frog, to allure frog to it. A sinful wretch and of wicked soul, you had obtained the kingdom of the monkeys through the agency of the eminently virtuous, kind and high-souled Rāma. You did not acknowledge the good offices rendered to you by the high-souled Rāghava; and therefore, slain by means of sharpened shafts, you shall soon see Vali. The way that has been wended by the slain Vali, is not yet narrowed. Do you, O Sugriva, desist in time: do not walk in the wake of Vāli. Do not behold the shafts resembling thunderbolts shot from the bow of that best of the Ikş wakus. Then, attaining happiness, you shall pass your days in peace. Nor do you mentally neglect Rāma's business.