Thus addressed by the magnanimous Lakşmana Sugrīva said to Hanumān, staying beside him, Those that dwell on the summits of Mahendra, Himavat, Vindhya and Kailāsa; on Mandara, the peaks of Pāndu and the five hills; on mountains wearing the hue of the infant sun, and ever bright; and those inhabiting the West, beyond the sea; On mountains in the mansions of the sun, looking like the evening sky, and those dreadful foremost of monkeys that inhabit Padmachala, those monkeys that, resembling collyrium-like clouds, and having the strength of the lord of elephants, dwell in the Añjana hill; monkeys, possessing the splendour of gold, inhabiting the caverns of Mahāsaila; those resorting to the sides of Meru, as well as those dwelling in the Dhūmra mountains; and those, having the hues of the infant sun, dwelling in the Mahāruna mountain, drinking the Maireya wine; and those dwelling in mighty fair and fragrant forests and romantic hermitages all round, lying on the skirts of woods,-do you at once bring all these-all the foremost monkeys of the world, by means of gifts and conciliation, and through the agency of more than usually fleet monkeys. I know those monkeys that I have first despatched, to be gifted with great velocity*, yet, for urging speed upon them, do you send other foremost of monkeys. *The commentator slips the sense here. According to him, the meaning is, Those monkeys whom I have first sent, are known to me. Do you directly bring up here those monkeychiefs that are given up to lust or are dilatory. Those wicked ones, that finding fault with the royal mandate, do not (come in) at my command within ten days, must be slain. Let those hundreds and thousands and kotis of leonine monkeys that abide by my mandate, hie (hence) at my behest. Let (monkey) resembling clouds or mountains, cover up the sky; and let the foremost monkeys of dreadful forms march hence at my command. Let all the monkeys on earth, acquainted with motion lying themselves and summoning speed at my command, bring all the monkeys. Hearing the words of the monkey-king, the son of the Wind-god despatched powerful monkeys in all directions. Despatched by the king, the monkeys, ranging the sphere of birds and stars, immediately went through the welkin. And on oceans and mountains, in forests and tanks, the monkeys began to send away all the apes on behalf of Rāma. Hearing the mandate of that king of kings, Sugriva, resembling the Hour of death, the monkeys, conceiving fear for Sugrīva, set out. And monkeys resembling collyrium (in hue), numbering three kotis, endued with huge might, set out from the Añjana hill for the place where Rāghava was. And ten koțis having the splendour of molten gold inhabiting the mountain where the sun sets, set out. And a thousand kotis, hued like the lion's mane, came from the peaks of Kailāsa. And of those dwelling in Himālaya, subsisting on fruits and roots, numbering a thousand and kotis, a thousand appeared. And thousands of dreadful monkeys of terrible deeds, hued like charcoal, numbering kot is, rushed suddenly from Vindhya. And there exists no record of the number of those inhabiting the shores of the ocean of milk, and the dwellers in the Tamāla forests, as well as those subsisting on coconuts. And, as if drinking up the sun, the mighty monkey host came from forests and caves and rivers. And it came to pass that those heroic monkeys that had gone away to spur others on, found a mighty tree on Himayat. On that sacred mount in days of yore there took place a pleasing Maheswara* sacrifice. *The celestial horse-sacrifice. There the monkeys found grateful fruits and roots sprung from the streams of sacrificial oblations, and resembling ambrosia. He that partakes of those excellent fruits and roots sprung from the sacrificial ingredients, does not experience hunger for a month. Those prime monkeys, feeding on fruits, gathered those sapid fruits and roots and medicinal herbs. And for compassing the good of Sugrīva, repairing thither, the monkeys brought ordorous blossoms from the sacrificial ground. And all those foremost of monkeys, taking all the monkeys of the earth, hastily set off in the van of the herds. And in a short while, those fast-fleeting apes speedily reached Kişkindhā, where the monkey Sugriva was. And taking the healing herbs and the fruits and roots, the monkeys made them over to Sugrīva, and said, Having traversed mountains, rivers and forests, all the monkeys of the earth bend their steps towards you in obedience to your command. Hearing this, Sugriva-lord of monkeys-was well pleased, and with a glad heart accepted all those present.