Then hearing that ambrosial speech of the vulture-king, the monkey-chiefs, being delighted, kept on parleying (on that topic). Then Jāmbavān-foremost of monkeystogether with all the monkeys, arising suddenly from the ground, spoke to the vulture-king, saying, Where is Sītā? By whom has she been seen? And who has carried away Mithila's daughter? Do you tell us all about this, and (thus) prove the path of these rangers of the woods. Who is there that does not take heed of the force of Dasarathi's* and Laksmana's arrows, speeding with the vehemence of thunder? *Lit. Dasaratha's son. The term is applied in especial to Rāma. Thereat, cheering up those monkeys, who had risen from their attitudes of fasting, and who were all attention to hear news concerning Sītā, he (Sampāti), well pleased, said these words, Listen as to how I came to know of the ravishment of Vaidehī, Sītā, at this place; and who it was that told me where that one of expansive eyes is. For a long time I lay here, old, and of feeble life and energy. that best of birds, my son named Supārswa, coming to me, at the proper hour maintained me with food. Gandharvas exceedingly lascivious; serpents are exceedingly wrathful; fear is excessive in deer; and we have excessive hunger. Once on a time my son, going forth about sunrise to procure food for me who was suffering from hunger and (accordingly) eager for it, came back in the evening without any flesh. are Hurt (by my speech uttered) in consequence of my non-receipt of food, that enhancer of my joy, asking my forgiveness, said these words fraught with fact, 'Father, taking to my wings at the proper time for procuring flesh, I (went) and stood, obstructing the pass of the Mahendra mountain. There stood I looking down, obstructing the way of thousands of creatures ranging the sea. There I saw somebody resembling a mass of crushed collyrium, going away, taking a female resembling the rising sun in splendour. Seeing them I had made up my mind that they should serve for your fare, when he humbly in a pacific manner begged for way. Even among the mean, there is none on earth that can slay people who assume a mild attitude. What shall I say, alas! of superior ones like myself? And summoning celerity, he went on as if pushing off the sky by his energy. Then the rangers of the air and other beings worshipped me. And the Maharsis said to me,-By luck it is that Sītā is still living' — he together with a female, having passed by you, certainly augurs good fortune to you. 1. The commentator supplies the elipsis thus,-Coming within your ken by fuck, Sītā is living. 2. The passage is obscure. The commentator has glossed over this sloka, and the meaning is lone the clear for his explanation. Then those eminently handsome Siddhas spoke thus to me.-This is Ravana, the king of the Rākşasas, said they to me. I (stood), beholding the wife of Rama, son to Dasaratha,—throwing off her ornaments and silken apparel, overwhelmed by might of sorrow, with hair dishevelled crying out the names of Rāma and Lakşmaņa. This O father, is the reason of my passing the time.' That best of those skilled in speech, Suparswa, said all this to me. Even hearing of this, I could not think of putting forth prowess. How can a bird bereft of wings, undertake any thing? But listen! I will tell you as to what I am capable of through speech, intellect and merit, and what you can exèrt your manliness in. I will do what is agreeable to you by my words and my and my intention. That which is Dasarathi's work is also mine. Of this there is no doubt. You, foremost in intelligence, strong, intellectual, and incapable of being overcome by the gods themselves, have been despatched by the monarch of monkeys. Rama's and Laksmana's shafts furnished with the feathers of the Kanka, are competent to afflict or save the three worlds. And although the Ten-necked one is endowed with strength and energy, yet to you who are competent, nothing is hard to accomplish. There is no need of delay. Make up 'yo minds. Persons like you do not give way to laziness in enterprise.