And that one endowed with strength saw that row of structures fitted up with golden windows, studded with lapis lazulis, and containing birds; like to a mass of clouds in a season of great rains, crowned with lightning, and fraught with fowls. He saw various structures close to one another to which excellent conchs, arms and bows lent lustre; as well as huge and splendid towers belonging to edifices resembling mountains. The monkey beheld mansions, treasuring various kinds of wealth, which were held in regard by both gods and Asuras, devoid of every defect; and which had been won (by Rāvana) through his own might.* Swavalenarjitam. Another meaning is: (mansions) into which Hanumān found entry through his own might. And (Hanumān) saw the mansions of the lord of Lankā, located in strict conformity with aesthetic laws, appearing as if they had been constructed by Maya himself, which had on the earth beneath every excellence. And then he saw the mansion of the lord of Rākşas himself, surpassing the best structures; like to a mass of towering clouds; captivating boasting of a beauteous golden appearance; worthy of his own power, and of incomparable loveliness; appearing as if the celestial regions had dropped down on the earth; blazing in beauty; teeming with countless gems; like to the brow of a mountain strewn with the blossoms and the dust thereof of various trees; and illumined by the foremost females, appearing like a mass of clouds containing lightning, or the witching welkin furnished with grace, afloat with excellent swans. And (Hanumān) saw the car variegated with countless gems; like unto the top of a mountain variegated with innumerable metals; or like the firmament with the moon and the planets, or like clouds of diverse hues fused into a homogeneous whole. The place in the car designed as the seat of the many, was filled with rows of hills,* Composed of gold and gems. Its hills were filled with trees; its trees were filled flowers; and (finally) its flowers were filled with leaves and filaments. And (in it), where white mansions were reared, there were tank's filed with fair flowers; and lotuses furnished with filaments; and picturesque woods; and liquid lapses. And the mighty monkey beheld there the great chariot going after the name of Pushpa, appearing beautiful, wheeling round in the splendour of the gems—which had surpassed cven the cars pertaining to the abodes of the celestials. And in that car) were birds made of lapis lazulis; and (other) birds composed of silver and coral; and variegated serpents made of various precious metals; and fair-bodied steeds resembling those of superior breeds; and there were constructed birds having graceful mouths; and fair, tapering, playful and contracted plumage, bearing blossoms made of coral and gold, like to the very plumage of Kama himself. There were elephants possessed of graceful trunks, bearing filaments; and with their trunks bearing lotus leaves, engaged in showering water on Lakshmi); as well as the goddess, made with fair arms, seated on a pool with a lotus in her hand. Thus entering that graceful mansion, like to a mountain containing charming caverns, (Hanumān) was seized with wonderment. And once again (entering that charming mansion), like to a taking and fragrant tree during spring furnished with holes, Hanumān was seized with wonderment. Then ranging by bounds that honoured city ruled by the arms of the Ten faced one, he, not finding the highly regarded and extremely distressed daughter of Janaka, who had won over her grief by contemplating the virtues of her lord, (was affected with sorrow). And, not seeing Janaka's daughter, then the heart of that high-souled one, honoured for his character by the entire world, of schooled self, ever ranging by the way chiming in with morality, and having the scriptures for his eyesight, as he ranged about, was oppressed with grief.