Hearing the tale of Rāma from that best of monkeys, Vaidehī, spoke in sweet accents, soft and low. Where didst you meet Rāma, how didst you come to know Lakşmaņa? How did the monkeys and men meet on terms of brother-hood? Do you again relate to me, O monkey, the regal signs that deck the persons of Rāma and Lakşmaņa-and I shall then relinquish all grief. Do you relate to me the form and grace of Rāma, his thighs and arms and as well as those of Laksmana. Being thus addressed by Vaidehi, Hanuman, the Wind-god's son, began to give an exact description of Rāma. If do you, by my good luck, O Vaidehi, O you having eyes like lotus-petals, knowing me (as his messenger) ask me to describe your lord's person as well as that of Lakşmaņa, I shall relate them to you. Do you hear, O large-eyed dame, what regal signs I have marked on the persons of Rama and Laksmana. O daughter of Janaka, Rāma has eyes like lotus-petals and a countenance resembling the full-moon and is gifted with great beauty and goodness. In effulgence he is like the Sun, in patience like the earth, in intellect like BỊhaspati (The god of wisdom) and in fame like Vāsava. (The lord of celestials) He is the protector of the world of creation and his own kinsmen. He follows right in all his ways and never swerves from his royal duties and is the slayer of foes. O dame, he upholds the dignity of the people of four-castes— he confers honours on the people and preserves them. He is worshipped by all like the Sun, observes ascetic vows, know well the time when the saints should be honoured and is conversant with the nature and procedure of actions. He is well acquainted with royal duties and abode by the commandments of the Brāhmaṇas is wise, gifted with a good character, humble and the slayer of foes. He is the master of Yajurvedas and is adored by those who are well-versed in Vedas—is proficient in the science of bended bow, Vedas and Vedāngas. (A sacred science considered as subordinate to and in some sense a part of the Vedas six sciences come under this denimination-Siksha (pronunciation); Kalp. (religious rite) Vyakarana (grammar) Chandas (prosody) Jyotis (astronomy) and and Nirukti explanation of difficult words.) He is broad-shouldered, large-armed, has a conch-like neck and a beautiful countenance. His throat is plump and his eyes are red-and he is famed all over the world under the name of Rāma. He has the voice of a bugle, is of a cool hue and highly powerful, has equally proportioned limbs and a green colour. His three limbs (thigh, fist and wrist) are hard and three others (brow arins and scrotum) are long; and three (tops of the hairs, scrotums and knee-joints) equal and three (navel, abdomen and breast) high. And three (the angles of the or three are cool and three (voice, navel and gait) are grave. His belly and throat have three folds of skin. The sole of the foot, the lines thereon and the nipples are equally bended. His neck, eyes and back are short. He has three locks of hair on his head. He has four lines on his thumb indicating his proficiency in the four Vedas. His body is four hands tall; arms, thighs and checks are plump; eye-brows, the hollows of the nose, eyes, ears, lips, nipples; wrists, knee-joints, scrotums, hips, hands feet are all equally proportioned. Four teeth by the side of each row, are gifted with auspicious marks of the Gästras. His gaits are like those of a lion, tiger, elephant or a bull. His lips and jaws are fleshy and elevated. His nose is long; words, countenance, nails, down and skin are all cool; his two arms, two little fingers, two thighs and two legs are long; his face, eyes, mouth tongue, lips; palate, nipples, nails and feet are like lotuses, his breast, forehead, neck, arms, navel feet, back and ears are spacious. He is gifted with grace, fame and effulgence. His paternal and maternal race are pure. His armpit, belly, breasts, nose, shoulders and forehead are high; his fingers, hairs, down, nails, skin, beard, eye-sight and intellect are thin and sharp. Rāghava, with a due division of his time is engaged in acquiring piety, wealth emancipation and desires, He is truthful and graceful, amasses wealth and thereby protects his subjects. He is cognisant of the divisions of time and country and dear to all. His step brother Saumitri is gifted with incomparable prowess and is his equal in attachment, beauty and accomplishments. The person of that graceful one is gold-hued whereas that of the highly famous Rāma is green. And those two lions among men had no other delight but seeing you. And they ransacking the whole worid in quest of you met us in the forest. And ranging the earth for you they beheld Sugriva, of comely presence, the lord of monkeys, at the foot of the mount Rsyamūka covered with trees, banished by his elder brother and resorting there in his fear. We wears serving that truthful Sugrīva, the lord of monkeys, driven from the kingdom by his elder brother. Beholding those two best of men, wearing bark and with bows in their hands, that best of monkeys, stricken with fear, leaped above and stationed himself on the crest of the hill. He then sent me to them. And thereupon by Sugrīva's decree I, approached with joined palms, those two foremost of men gifted with beauty and royal marks. They were pleased by me, being informed of the real facts. And then placing those two best of men on my back I arrived at the top of the hill and communicated the truth to the high-souled Sugriva. And conversing with each other those two lords of men and monkeys attained great delight. And they consoled each other narrating their respective misfortunes. And Rāma then consoled Sugrīva, driven away by his greatly powerful elder brother Vāli on his wife's account. Thereupon Lakşmaņa related to Sugrīva, the lord of monkeys, the grief, of Rāma of unwearied actions, in consequence of your being borne away (by Rāvana). And hearing Laksmana's words, the lord of monkeys became pale, like to the radiant Sun possessed by Rāhu. And collecting all those ornaments which were thrown off by you on the earth when you were borne away, the leaders of the monkey hosts, delighted brought them before Räma. But they could not make out your whereabouts. All those ornaments, which were handed over to Rāma, were collected by me when they fell tinkling on the ground, Rāma being beside himself with grief. And placing them on his lap, the god-like Rāma bewailed in various accents. They inflamed the more Dasarathi's (Son of Dasaratha-Rāma) grief. And being overwhelmed with grief that high-souled one laid himself low on the ground. And consoling him in various words, I raised him up again. Looking again and again with Saumitri, at those costly ornaments, Rāghava handed them over to Sugriva. Rāghava burns in grief, O worshipful dame, in your absence, like to a volcanic mountain burning with a perpetual fire. For you, sleeplessness, grief and anxiety are distressing Rāghava like to three fires, (The aggregate of the three fires maintained by the Brāhmaṇa house-holder) burning down the fire temple. Rāghava is moved by your separation like to a huge mountain shaken by a terrible earth-quake. O daughter of a king, he is ranging at large in many a beautiful forest, river and fountain-but he finds delight nowhere. O daughter of the king Janaka bringing about the destruction of Rāvaņa, with all his kith and kin, Rāghava, the foremost of men, shall soon regain you. Thus Rāma and Sugrīva entered into a friendly covenant, to encompass Vali's destruction and to institute enquiries about you. Thereupon returning to Kişkindhã with those two heroic princes, the lord of monkeys killed Vāli in battle. And destroying Vāli by his prowess in battle, Rāma made Sugrīva king over all monkeys and bears. In this way, O dame, the alliance between Rāma and Sugrīva was made. And know me as Hanumān, their messenger who has come to you. Regaining his kingdom, Sugrīva summoned all the mighty monkeys and despatched them in various quarters in quest of you. The highly powerful monkeys, resembling mountains, commanded by that lord of monkeys, proceeded to all the regions of the earth. And terrified by Sugrīva's decrees, those monkeys, since then, have been ransacking the whole earth for you. Own I am one of them And the beautiful and mighty son of Vali, by name Angada, has proceeded with three armies under him. Many were the days and nights that we spent, overwhelmed with grief and having lost our way on that best of mountains Vindhya. We gave up all our hopes for the accomplishment of our end and our appointed time was well-nigh spent. And in fear of that lord of monkeys we addressed ourselves to put au end to our live. Ranging the mountain strongholds, rivers and fountains and not finding your reverence, we were ready to do away with our existence. And on the crest of that hill we took to fasting. And beholding those foremost of monkeys engaged in fasting Angada, sunk in grief, bewailed, O Vaidehī, mentioning your rape, the destruction of Vāli in that way, our fastings and Jatayu's death. While we were thus waiting, ready for death and giving up all hopes for the fulfilment of our master's behest, there appeared, as if the cause of our success, the mighty and powerful vulture, the brother of Jațãyu, by name Sampati. Hearing of the destruction of his brother, he in wrath, said-'By whom and where has my younger brother been killed? I wish to hear this from you, the foremost of monkeys. Angada related to him verily Jațāyu's destruction at Janasthāna, for you, by that grimvisaged Rākṣasa. Hearing of Jatayu's death, Aruna's son became afflicted with sorrow and informed us, O you exquisitely fine damsel, of your stay in the abode of Rāvaņa. Hearing those words of Sampāti, enhancing our delight, we all, headed by Angada, left that place. And leaping from the crest of Vindhya mountain we reached the excellent brink of the Ocean. Being greatly anxious to behold you and delighted, those plump monkeys headed by Angada, arrived at the banks of the main. And worked up with a strong desire to see you, they again engaged in anxious thought. And beholding the ocean, the monkey hosts lost their heart. And removing their fear, I leaped a hundred leagues across the deep and entered Lankā, at night, infested with demons. I have seen Rāvana, and you stricken with grief. O you of a blameless person, I have related all to you in regular order. Do you speak to me, O worshipful dame, I am Dasarathi's messenger. Do you know me as the Wind-god's son, the counsellor of Sugrīva, who am engaged in Rāma's service and have come here for you. It is all well with your Kākuthstha, the foremost of those using weapons, as well as with Laksmana, O worshipful dame, gifted with auspicious marks, engaged in the worship of his superiors and in the well being of your lord. By Sugrīva's decree, I alone have reached here. And I, ranging alone and wearing shapes at will, have come to this southern quarter, to find out your where abouts. By my good luck I shall be able, with your news, to remove the grief of those monkey hosts who are lamenting for you. By my good fortune, my crossing over the main, has not become fruitless. I shall be praised there, O worshipful dame, for I have been able to see you. And the highly powerful Rāghava shall soon regain you, destroying, with all his sons and friends, Ravana the king of Raksasas. There is a hill, O Vaidehi, named Malyavana, the foremost of all the mountains. There lives my father, the great monkey Kesari. Being commanded by the celestial ascetics, he once repaired thence to the mount Gokarna and at the holy watering place of the lord of the rivers he brought about the destruction of (the Asura) Sammasādana. O Vaidehi, I was bom, on the field, of that monkey. And I am known all over the world as Hanumān by my own actions. To create your confidence, O Vaidehi, I have related your lord's accomplishments. And forsooth, you shall soon be taken, O worshipful dame, by Rāghava. Having her confidence formed by these reasonings and various marks, Sītā, worn with grief, took him (for Rāma's messenger). Jānakī attained an excess of delight and shed tears of joy from her eyes having curling eyelashes. The beautiful countenance of that large-eyed dame, having spacious eyes, appeared like the Moon released from the hold of Rāhu. She then took him for a real monkey and none else. Thereupon Hanumān again spoke to her, having a comely presence, I have related to you all this. Do you be consoled, O Maithili! Tell me now, what am I to do and what do you like. I shall soon repair hence. When the Asura Śambasādana was destroyed in conflict by that best of monkeys at the desire of the celestial ascetics, I was born of the Wind, O Maithili. I look like a monkey but am his equa's in prowess. When the Asura Śambasādana was destroyed in conflict by that best of monkeys at the desire of the celestial ascetics, I was born of the Wind, O Maithili. I look like a monkey but am his equa's in prowess.