Hearing those words, that foremost of monkeys, skilled in speech, was greatly delighted and again addressed Sītā in the following words, O worshipful lady, O you of an auspicious presence, what you had said, speaks well for a feminine nature and the modesty of a chaste damsel. And because you are a female, you are not capable of crossing on my back, the main extending over a thousand leagues. The second argument—I shall not touch any other person's body than Rāma's, which you have produced, O Janaki! O you gifted with modesty! truely become you, who are the spouse of that high-souled one. Who else than you, O worshipful one, can give expression to such words? Truly shall Kākutstha hear from the beginning to the end, O worshipful dame, of your actions before me, and all you had said. For many reason, I gave vent to such words, O lady, I am anxious to compass Rāma's end, and my heart is melted with affection. It is very difficult to enter this city of Lankā, it is equally hard to cross over the main—but I am capable of doing all these, and hence I gave utterance to all those words. I wish to take you even to-day to the descendant of Raghu. It is for my devotion to him and regard for you that I said so and for nothing else. If you do not wish to go with me, O you of a blameless person, do you give me such a token as might create Rāghava's confidence. Being thus accosted by Hanumān, Sītā resembling the daughter of a celestial, spoke, gently, words with their letters strung on the vapour of grief, Do you mentioned to my dear lord (in my words) what had happened to me while living in the hermitage at the foot of the mount Pratyanga, situate on the north-east of Citrakūta, abounding in roots, fruits and water. At no distance from that place frequented by the ascetics flowed the sacred stream Mandakini. While ranging in that woodland fragrant with the odour of many flowers, you, having your person wet in consequence of your sport in the water, did sit on my lap. A crow, at that time, longing to feed on my flesh, tore my breast with its beak. And I threatened it with a pebble. But it continued tearing my breast as if it sat there to feed on my flesh and therefore did not fly off. Being enraged with that bird, as I tried to tighten the cloth around my waist, it gave way a little, and you, rising up from your seat and looking at me, did laugh over it. And I was greatly enraged with your laughter and ashamed, and, being wounded by the crow, I approached you. Thereupon, tired as I was, I sat on your lap, and, exercised with ire, I was consoled by you laughing. Now I, having my countenance bathed in tears, gently rubbed my eyes. And I was seen by you, O my lord, in that wise, greatly enraged with the crow. O Rāghava, I slept for sometime, at your lap, out of exhaustion, and yourself in turn, slept at mine, O elder brother of Bharata. In the meantime, that crow again suddenly approaching, tore my breast with its beak, as I awoke and was rising up from your lap, O Rāghava. Thereupon Rāghava awoke with the shedding of blood. Beholding my breast wounded, that larged-armed hero wroth like a serpent, sighing, said. O you having thighs like the trunk of an elephant, by whom has your breast been wounded? Who wants to play with an angry five-hooded serpent? Thereupon, casting his looks around, he espied the crow, sitting in my front with its claws besmeared with blood. That crow, best of birds, was the son of the lord of the celestials in disguise. And gifted with air-like velocity, he speedily entered inside the earth. Thereupon that large-eyed hero, best of the intelligent, with his eyes whirling with ire, resolving to destroy that crow. And taking a blade of Kusa off his seat, he tied it to a Brahma weapon. And that blade, facing the bird, appeared with its flaming face, like the fire that would destroy the world. He hurled that burning blade at the crow. And it pursued the crow high up in the welkin. Being thus pursued, that crow, in order to save himself, traversed various regions. And being then renounced by his father (Indra) and the great ascetics, he, ranging the three worlds, at last resorted to his (Rāma's) shelter. And, placing himself on the earth, he sought his shelter, and Kākutstha, out of mercy, saved him, albeit worthy of being killed. And he spoke to him, greatly famished, of a pale countenance and lying on the earth, It is impossible to render this Brahma weapon fruitless. Therefore, do you speak (as to what is to be done). He then destroyed the right eye of the crow. Having given up his eye, he saved himself. Then bowing to Rāma as well as king Dasaratha, the crow, liberated by that hero, went to his own abode. You hadston my behalf discharged the Brahma weapon even at a crow. Why then, O lord of earth, do you forbear him who had carried me off from you? O foremost of men, do you dispense to me your kindness capable of inspiring hope. O lord, possessing a lord in you, I (now) appear as if I had none. That kindness in a prime virtue I have heard even from you; and I know that you are exceedingly energetic and possessed of great strength an high courage, unfettered by considerations of time and space, incapable of being agitated, you in gravity resemblest the ocean, and like to that lord of the earth furnished with seas-Vasava. O Rāghava, being thus the foremost of those acquainted with weapons, powerful, and possessed of strength, wherefore do you not direct your weapon against the Rākşasas'? Neither Nāgas, nor Gandharvas, nor the gods, nor the Maruts, are competent to resist the onset of Rāma in battle. If that puissant one still retains any regard for me, why dose he not by means of sharpened shafts make roots and branch work with the Raksasas? And why, taking the permission of his brother, that repressor of foes, the heroic Laks maņa gifted with great strength, dose not deliver me? If those foremost of men be indeed equal to Indra and the Wind, and incapable of being repressed even by the celestials, wherefore do they disregard me? Surely I must be guilty of some great crime, since although capable, those subduers of enemies do not look at me. Hearing Vaidehī's piteous words uttered with tearful eyes, that leader of monkey-bands, the exceedingly energetic Hanumān, said, O exalted one, I swear by truth, Rāma turn away he countenance (from every work) in consequence of grief for you. And Rāma being seized with sorrow, Laksmana burns in grief. Now that I have been able to obtain a sight of you, this is not season for sorrow. O auspicious one, even now you shall witness the end of this woe. Filled with hope from my sight of you, those foremost of persons, those mighty princes, shall reduce the worlds to ashes. And, O you of expansive eyes, slaying in battle the wicked Rāvana with his allies, Rághava shall take you back to his palace. Now tell me what I shall communicate to Rāghava, and the highly powerful Lakşmaņa, and the energetic Sugrīva, and all the assembled monkeys. Thus addressed, Sītā again spoke to him, saying, Do you on my behalf, bowing down the head, enquire after the welfare of that protector of men whom Kausalyā has brought forth. Do you on my behalf, and on account of my words, enquire after the welfare of him, who, renouncing wreaths and gems of all kinds, and beloved damsels possessed of transcendent beauty, and wealth such as is difficult to obtain on this spacious earth; and who, honouring and bowing to his father and mother, followed Rāma, in whom Sumitrā has an excellent son, of that righteous one, who, espousing the cause of his brother, renouncing choice happiness, follow his brother to the forest, ministering to him; who is lion-shouldered, long-armed, intelligent, and of a prepossessing presence; who bear himself towards Rāma as if he were his sire, and towards me, as if I were his mother; of that heroic Laks maņa who did not know when I was ravished away-the servant of the elders, crowned with auspiciousness, who is competent and rein in his tongue; who is the foremost of those dear to the king's son, (Rāma) and worthy of my father-inlaw; who is dearer (to Rama) than even my own self; of Laksmana, brother to Rama; that energetic one who undertak even such tasks as he is not equal to, and seeing whom Rāghava has forgotten his deceased sire, (In corsequence of the fatherly care of Lakşmaņa) him for the sake of my words, you must ask as to his welfare. Lakşmana is always mild and pure, and dear to Rāma. Do you speak to him so, that, O best of monkeys, he may remove my miseries. O leader of monkey-bands, do you bring about success on this undertaking. From this preliminary endeavour of yours, Rāghava shall take pains on my behalf. This also shall you say again and again to that hero— my lord, 'O son of Dasaratha, I shall keep on this life for another month; and this I swear to you by truth that I will not live beyond this month. O hero, even as Vişnu rescued Kausikī from the nether regions, (According to Kataka, Kausikī is Earth, who was rescued by Narāyaṇa from the subterranean regions. According to Tīrtha, Kausikī is Indra's Auspiciousness, who on the occasion of the destruction of the Asura, Vritrā, took refuge in the nether regions, and was brought back by Vişņu) it behove you to rescue me, who have ignominiously been confined by the impious Rāvana, Thereupon, saying, "Hand this to Rāghava,” Sītā gave to Hanumān a noble and excellent jewel for the head, (Cudamani. According to the commentator, the word means a gem worn in the head) which was tied up in her attire. Then taking that best of gems, the hero tried to fix it on this finger, but it did not enter into it. (Another meaning is, “But fearing discovery on account of the brilliance of the jewel, he desisted"). And taking the gem, and bowing to Sītā and going round her, that foremost of monkeys remained by her side in humble guise. And experiencing rapture in consequence of his seeing Sītä, he mentally presented himself before Rāma, and Lakşmaņa graced with auspicious marks. Taking that costly and superb gem, which by virtue of some power, king Janaka's daughter had managed to hide (from the gaze of the Raksasis), Hanumān, feeling delighted like one, shaken by the wind blowing on the top of the foremost of mountains, and then getting away from it, prepared to set out.