Hearing his words, Vali's son Angada spoke, saying, “These two monkeys, the sons of Aśvi, are very powerful and gifted with great velocity and are specially proud in consequence of the boon cornered on them by the Great Grandfather." Formerly to honour Asvi the Frand-father, of all the worlds, made these two monkeys incapable of being slain by any. And crushing the mighty host of the celestials, these two heroes gifted with great prowess, and maddened with haughtiness in consequence of the boon, drank up nectar. And these two, if worked up with ire, are capable of destroying the whole city of Lankā with her horses, chariots and elephants. What of other monkeys, I, myself, am capable of destroying soon the city along with the Rākşasa and the mighty Rāvana! And there is not the least wonder about it if I am aided by powerful monkey heroes like you, having control over themselves, well armed, capable and desirous of winning victory. I have heard, that, by Wind-god's son alone Lankā was burnt. You are all famed for your manliness, it dose not behove you to speak before Rāma. “We have seen the worshipful dame but have not been able to bring her.' You foremost of monkeys, there is none among the celestials or Asuras who can equal you either in leaping or in prowess. And therefore winning Larkā, slaying Rāvaņa along with his Rākşasa host in conflict and taking Sītā, let us go, delighted and having our ends accomplished. What else is there for us to perforin than brining the daughter of the king Janaka when the Rākşasa crew shall be slain by Hanumān? And we shall place Janaka's daughter between Rāma and Lakşmana. what is the use of putting the other residents of Kiskindha into trouble? It therefore behove us alone to go to Lankā and after slaying the best of the Rākşasas, to see Sugriva, Rāma and Laksmana." Thereupon Jāmbavāna, the foremost of the monkeys, greatly delighted spoke to Angada, who was thus resolved, the following pregnant words. O great monkey, O you of best understanding, what you had spoken, is, I think) not proper, for we have been despatched by them to ransack the southern quarter, but we have not been commanded by the king of the monkeys and the highly intelligent Rāma to bring her. And it shall not please him even if we rescue her. And mentioning his own lineage, that best of the kings, Rāghava, promised before all the leading monkeys, that he would himself rescue Sītā. How would he now falsify his own saying? What is the use of undertaking this work for nothing which shall not conduce to his pleasure? And useless shall be the display of your prowess, O you, foremost of the monkeys. Let us therefore proceed where Rāma, with Laksmana, and the highly effulgent Sugrīva is, and relate to them our proposed work. What you had judged, O prince, is liked by us. And still you should look to Rāma's resolution and bring about his end.