As if ministering to him (Hanumăn), arose the many thousand-rayed Moon in the midst of the stars, enfolding all creatures with his luminous canopy. And that highly heroic monkey beheld the Moon hued like the sheen of conch, or milk, or lotus-stalk, arisen and afloat (in the heavens), like a swan swimming in a pool. And that intelligent one from the earth beheld the Moon arrive at the mid-heavens, momentarily beaming sea, and on on out in lunar light; appearing (splendid) as if in conjunction with the Sun himself, and like a bull loitering in his stall. And he saw the mild-rayed (Moon), chasing away the remorse of all; swelling the sea; and displaying all creaturs, attain the middle of the sky. And that Lakshmi who on earth remains on Mandara, at eve in the the lotus water, looked exceedingly lovely stationed beside the charming Moon. Like a swan in a silver cage, like a lion in a cave in Mandara, like a hero on a haughty elephant, appeared the Moon in the middle of the sky. the Moon resembled a sharp-horned bull, or a mighty white-hued hill with towering summits, or an elephant with his horns plated with gold. And with (the mark of) the horn.* *The sun. It is a planet in Hindu cosmogony. And, with his dirt composed of particles of cool water removed; and the darkness dispelled in consequence of the vicinity of the mighty planet; and with his spots appearing clcar because of his shining appearance, appeared (the hare-marked worshipful Moon in full splendour. Like a lion on coming out of his cavern, or a lordly elephant on entering into the thick of a mighty encounter, or a monarch on obtaining a kingdom, appeared the Moon in full splendour. And now appeared the revered Mid-night, chasing away darkness with the Moon displayed, when flesh-eating (Raksasas) lend full liberty to their vicious appetite for flesh; and when disputes between lovers cease, and which bring down heaven itself. The sounds of strings sweet to the ear spread around; females sleep besides their husbands; and night-rangers, given to astounding and terrible acts, are, in the same way, out, indulging in their sports. The intelligent monkey saw mansions crowded with (Raksasas), some inebriate with wine and other with wealth, and abounding in cars and horses and golden seats; and fraught with the grace got of heroism. And (Raksasas) were parleying, moving about their plump arms, railing at each other; and throwing intemperate speeches at each other. (Hanumān saw) Raksasas striking at their chests (by way of challenge). sinking on the persons of their beloved, wearing diverse habiliments, or stretching their tough bows. And (he) saw debonair damsels daubing their frames with pastes; and others, again, sleeping, and fair-faced wenches smiling, and others sighing hard under the influence of anger. And with gigantic elephants roaring, (the place), honoured by pious persons, with its heroes heaving sighs looked exceedingly beautiful like a lake in which serpents are sighing forth. In that apartment (Hanumān) saw persons of commanding understandings, endowed with a tongue, instinct with the spirit of reverence-the foremost men of all this world, and bearing euphonious appellations, and clad in diverse attires. And beholding those well-formed people, whose conduct was of a piece with their many virtues, (Hanumān) rejoiced exceedingly. And he saw some having beautiful forms, and others deformed, and both possessed of splendour. And (Hanumān) saw there their wives worthy of noble ornaments and endowed with eminent beauty; of spotless character; possessing great potency; like to stars in point of excellency of conduct, displaying side-glances and other tokens of dalliance, engaged in dear driking. At dead of night Hanuman saw some females blazing in beauty affected simultaneously with bashfulness and bliss, on being embraced by their paramours, like birds embracing their mates. The sensible Hanumān saw there other females scated in stately halls, lying in happiness on the laps of their lovers, beloved of their lords-intent on virtue, married women, under the influence of Madana. Hanumān saw some without sheets, like to golden streaks, paragons among women of the hue of molten gold, and some of a moon-like complexion, endued with lovelines, bereft of their beloved. That exceedingly heroic monkey saw females in their homes experiencing the height of joy in the company of their beloved dear to their souls; charming with blossoms; filled with gladness; and enchaining the hearts of their lords with their loveiness And Hanumān saw crowds of faces like to the Moon displayed, with elegant eyes furnished with lovely lashes, and side-long looks; an multitudes of ornaments resembling beautiful lines of lighting. But Hanumān saw not Sītā, of the highest lineage, ever abiding by the way of righteousness; born in a royal line, like to a delightful and well-begot plant, of a slender frame, sprung from the mind (of Brahmä himself); Established on the eternal road (of chastity); having her gaze fixing on Rāma; always engrossed in the contemplation of Rāma, the mind itself of her lord, who had entered through and through into the heart of her graceful lord, ever superior to all other women; oppressed with the grief of separation; and having her throat afflicted with the vapour of grief; who formerly had her throat graced with that best of ornaments-the nishka; of excellent eyelashes; having a mellifluous voice; like to a peahen ranging in the woods; (not) like to an indistinct lunar lining, or a streak of gold covered with dust, or the colour of a sore-scar, or a gold-leaf broken off by the wind. And not finding, (after so long a search) the Sītā of the lord of men, the spouse of Rāma; best of those skilled in speech the monkey, deeming himself as having suddenly lost his skill in search, was over whelmed with sadness.