Sugrīva had declared his conviction that he relied particularly upon Hanumān. And convinced as to the ability of that best of monkeys to accomplish the work, Sugrīva, that lord of all the dwellers of the woods, well pleased, spoke to Hanumān, son to the windgod, saying, O foremost of monkeys, neither on the earth, nor in the sky', nor in the etherial regions, nor yet in water, find I any obstacle to your course. 1. Antariksa-regions above the earth in which the birds fly. 2. Ambara— Upper air. The entire worlds with Asuras, and Gandharvas, and Nāgas, and men, and gods, with oceans, and the earth and the regions beneath—are well known to you. And your motion, vehemence, energy and fleetness, are, O hero, O mighty ape, even like those of your sire, the powerful wind god; and there exists no creature on earth that is like to you in energy. Therefore do you bethink you how Sītā may be recovered. Even in you, O you versed in policy, are strength, and wit, and courage, and policy, and conduct in consonance with season and place. Thereat, understanding that success in the task depended upon Hanumān, and also knowing what Hanumān was, Rāghava reflected, This lord of monkeys is every way confident concerning Hanumān; and Hanumān himself is even more confident of achieving success in the work. He that has been tested by his deed, and who has been considered worthiest by his master, having veen commissioned in this business,-success in the work is certain. Then beholding that monkey who was the fittest for the task, that exceedingly energetic senses one, (Rāma), with his mind and exhilarated, considering himself as already crowned with success, felt the excess of joy. And well pleased, that subduer of enemies handed to Hanuman a ring inscribed with his name, as a sign to the king's daughter. By this sign, O foremost of monkeys, Janaka's daughter will be able to see you fearlessly, as one that has come from me. Your firmness, O hero, and sterling prowess, as well as Sugrīva's saying, tell me greatly of success. Thereupon, taking that (ring), and raising his joined palms to his head, that foremost and best of monkeys, saluting (Rāma's) feet, went away. Then taking with him that mighty host of monkeys, that hero, the son of the wind, resembled the moon of bright disc in the sky, garnished by the stars, after the clouds have departed. O you of excessive strength! I take refuge in your mighty. O you endowed with the prowess of the foremost of lions! do you, O son of the Wind, O Hanuman, exert yourself so, summoning the great strength you are master of, that we may obtain Janaka's daughter.* The commentator says that this speech is equally attributable to Rāma and Sugrīva. But I think, it would fit Rāma's lips to a nicely. The commentator says that this speech is equally attributable to Rāma and Sugrīva. But I think, it would fit Rāma's lips to a nicely.