Thereupon encompassing the destruction of Vāli, installing Sugrīva and dwelling on the summit of the Mālyabana hill, Rāma spoke to Laksmana, saying, This is the time the beginning of the rainy season-do you behold the sky enveloped with clouds resembling so many hills. The sky, drinking the liquid contents of the ocean through the rays of the Sun, and being enceinite for nine months, is giving birth to showers. Ascending the sky by the steps of clouds, one can ornameni the Sun with garlands of Kutajas and Arjunas. Like to a wound covered with a torn cloth, the sky is enveloped with cool clouds, coppery with the rays of the setting Sun, and yellow at another end. The sky, having mild breezes as its breath, sprinkled with sandal-like evening rays and covered with yellow clouds, is appearing as it were like one stricken with amour. The earth, afflicted with perspiration and filled with new water, is emitting forth vapour like to Sitā racked with sorrow. Ketaka smelling breezes may be drunk up in the cavity formed by putting the hands together, like to cold water discharged off the clouds and mixed with camphor. This hill, having blown Arjunas and Ketakas and rid of its enemies like to Sugriva, has been bathed with showers. These hillocks, having clouds for dark deerskins, heavy showers for sacred threads and having caves filled with air, are appearing like so many Brahmins who have finished their studies. The sky, being struck by thunders like to so many golden lashes, is, as if, groaning under a deep mental agony. Methinks, the lighting, shining by the violet clouds, is appearing like to the poor Vaidehi at the lap of Rävaņa. These quarters, enveloped with clouds and having therefore the Moon and stars hidden, are indeed very pleasant to those who are under the influence of Cupid Behold, O Saumitri, on the summits of the hill the flowery Kuțajas enveloped with the vapour arising out of the earth, gladdened at the approach of the rainy season and exciting my amour who am stricken with grief. (In this season) the dust is watered, the air is saturated with dews, all the evils of the summer are stopped, the kings no longer proceed on royal marches and those journeying in a foreign land return their native homes. The Cakravākas along with their mates are proceeding, being desirous to live in the Mänasa Sarovara, and in consequence of incessant rains, chariots and other conveyances cannot pass along the wayfares. Somewhere hidden, somewhere open, the sky, covered with clouds, appears like a vast ocean, being encircled here and there with hills. There speedily pass by the hill streams, being resounded with the cries of peacocks, carrying with the current Sarja and Kadamba flowers and having their coppery contents mixed with the metals of the mountain. People (in this season) live upon Inany a sweet rose-apple; and ripe mangoes, of diverse colours, being shaken by the wind, fall on the earth. The clouds, resembling the summits of a mountain, having lightnings for pennons and cranes for garlands, are muttering like to infuriated elephants in a field of battle. The forest-lands, having their green pastures emerged in water, with peacocks dancing all around with joy and clouds discharging their watery volumes incessantly, are appearing more graceful in the evening. (In this season) clouds, surrounded by cranes and heavily laden with water, are constantly moving, sometimes resting on the high summits of the mountains and emitting a muttering sound, And rows of cranes, fond of clouds, rising up in the sky, delighted and moved by the wind, are appearing like a garland of white lotuses, spread along the welkin. And the earth, covered with green grass and variegated with newly born insects, is appearing like a damsel clothed with a white blanket spotted here and there with lac. (In this part of the year) sleep is gradually overcoming the great God Nārāyaṇa, the river is flowing speedily towards the ocean, the delighted cranes are approaching the clouds and the damsels are proceeding towards their lovers. The peacocks are dancing at the forest skirts, the Kadamba trees are covered with flowers, the bulls have become attached to her and the earth has become charming with corns and forests. The rivers are flowing by; the clouds are discharging waters; the infuriated elephants are emitting terrible roars; the forest-lands are growing more charming; persons, separated from their wives, are growing more anxious; the peacocks are dancing with delight and the monkeys are greatly comforted for Sugrīva's attaining to the kingdom. By the fountains in he forests, the infuriated elephants delighted with the fragrance of the Ketaka flowers and maddened with the noise of the water falls, are emitting terrible roars along with the peacocks. The black bees, resorting to the branches of the Kadamba trees and overwhelmed with showers, are, as if, slowly discharging their temporal juice-namely the honey of flowers collected by them ere while. The branches of rose-apple trees containing enough of fruits like to a collection of char coal are so appearing as if the black bees are drinking the juice thereof. The dense clouds, ornamented with pennonlike lightnings and emitting terrible roars, are appearing like so many elephants, mad after fighting. The infuriated lord of elephants, following in the track and ranging in the hills and forests hearing the muttering of clouds and taking it for the uproar of another elephant, has turned back, with a view to enter into conflict with him. Somewhere the bees are humming, somewhere the peacocks are dancing-somewhere are raging the infuriated elephants and in this way the forest-land has assumed diverse appearances. It appears like to a drinking-place covered with Kadambas, Sarjas, Arjunas and lotuses growing on land, filled with water resembling honey and with the dance and cries of mad peacocks. The birds, having their wings discoloured, being wet with water, delighted and thirsty, are drinking the drops of clear water, falling on leaves and discharged by the Lord of celestials*. *According to Hindu mythology Indra is the god of rains. The sonorous humming of the bees, being accompanied by the guttural sound of the frogs and the mutterings of the clouds resembling the sound of Mrdangas, an organised music, as if, has began in the forest. Sometimes dancing, sometimes setting up loud cries, sometimes placing themselves against the tops of the trees, the peacocks, having beautifully ornamented exteriors, have commenced music in the forest. And rising from their perpetual sleep by the muttering of clouds, the frogs, assuming various shapes and making diverse sounds, are setting up cries being distressed with new watery showers. The rivers, carrying Cakravākas as their breast and leaving behind their old banks, are approaching, being excited, their own lord with various new presents. Clouds, big with new waters coming in, contact with violet ones are appearing as such; and sometimes, touching the hills brunt by forest-fire, are appearing like deep-rooted hills. The elephants are ranging in this charming forest-land, carrying the fragrance of Neepas and Arjunas, having its green swards filled with Indragopas* and with delighted, peacocks dancing all around. *An insect (Coccinella of various kinds). The black bees, delighted, are drinking honey, embracing the shower-distressed and filaments of the lotuses and Kadamba flowers. (In this season) the elephants are infuriated, the bulls are delighted, the lions have grown more powerful, the hills are charming-the kings are devoid of all active pursuits, are the Lord of celestials is engaged in sport with clouds. The clouds ranging in the welkin and discharging heavy showers, are roaring like to ocean; and the rivers, ponds and pools are deluging the earth with their watery contents. (In this season) heavy showers set in—the wind bloweth mightily and the rivers breaking down their banks flow quickly blockading the wayfares. The mountains are, as if, displaying their own beauty and grace being an it were bathed by the cloud like jars, conferred by the lord of celestials and brought by the wind.like to a king sprinkled by men. The sky is enveloped with clouds and neither the sun nor the stars can be seen the earth is satisfied with new showers-and the quarters being covered with darkness cannot be seen. The high summits, of the mountains, being washed by showers and beautified by farstretching waterfalls resembling pearls, are appearing more graceful. The heavy mountain waterfalls, loosening the rocks and stretching over the caves filled with the cries of peacocks, are appearing like a pearlnecklace. And the quick streaming waterfalls, of the mountains, washing the summits of the hills, and resembling the pearls, are being deposited in the cave at the foot. And watery drops resembling the pearls of the necklaces used by celestial damsels are pouring on all sides. The setting of the Sun is announced by the birds taking to their nests, lotuses growing pale and Málatis blossoming. The royal marches are all stopped, and the soldiers, who have already marched are waiting in the way-hostility and wayfares have been equally blockaded by water. This month of Bhādra is the time of studying for those Brahmins, who chant Sāma Vedas. Having roofed all his houses and stored up his food, Bharata, the king of Kosala has set upon the performance of Așara sacrifices. The river Saraju is now brimful with water. Seeing me return as if Ayodhyā herself is making a delightful noise. Clearly manifest are now all the signs of the rainy season and Sugrīva, rid of his enemies, established on the vast kingdom, and regaining his wives, has attained to best felicity. And I am, O Laksmana, waning every day like to the banks of a river, being separated from my spouse and deprived of my vast kingdom. Immense is my grief, inaccessible is this rainy season and mighty is my enemy, Ravana; methinks it is impossible for me to bring about the discomfiture of my foe. Owing to the unfitness of the season (for marching against my foe) and the wayfares being inaccessible, I cannot possibly request Sugrīva (to march) although he is prepared to abide by my mandate. Moreover after a good deal of affliction he has regained his wives, and my service is of very great difficulty; so I do not wish to request that monkey-chief now. Forsooth, shall Sugrīva think of the benefits (he has received from me) after enjoying rest for sometime, when the time for action shall arrive. Therefore I shall, O Laksmana, live here, awaiting the pleasure of Sugrīva and the clear currents of the rivers (the autumn). Heroes receiving benefits, do always return them. The ungrateful lose the good wishes of the great ones. Being thus accosted, Laksmana, with folded hands, respecting highly his words, spoke to the graceful Rāma, pointing out his own welfare. Forsooth shall that lord of monkeys carry out all your wishes. Do you therefore spend here the rainy season, awaiting the autumn.