Beholding the clear welkin, void of clouds and lightnings, filled with Sarasas and sprinkled with the charmings rays of the Moon, Hanumān, the son of Marut, versed in religious lore and political economy, and conversant with effects proper to the time or season, approaching the Lord of monkeys, addressed him with various sound, reasonable and pleasant words, wellmeaning, true and teaching the means of acquiring forgiveness, piety and wealth. Acquiring riches Sugriva has grown careless for the collection of righteousness and wealth, is following the track of the vicious, and is addicted to the satisfaction of sensual appetites having all his actions stopped and desires attained-and given to enjoyments with damsels. Having attained all his desires and wishes, his own wife and the much-desired-for Tārā, Sugrīva is sporting with them, day and night, without any affliction, like to the Lord of celestials with Gandharvas and Apsarās. Placing all the royal affairs at the hands of the counsellors, without looking to them, and confiding fully in their abilities he is living like one under the influence of passions. You have attained your kingdom, fame, and your vast ancestral wealth. It now behoveth you to perform your duties by your friends. Truly does his kingdom, fame and prowess increase who is cognizant of the seasonableness of time and does good to his friends. O king, truly does he attain to a vast kingdom, who has the same wealth, soldiery and body with his friends. It becometh you, therefore, who are crowned with a good character, and who did wend a blameless track, to work out your friend's well being (as promised by you). He, who does not engage in the service of his friends renouncing all business, becometh void of all energy and involved in unnecessary troubles. He, who engage in his friend's service after the proper season is over, does nothing to his well-being, though he performs a great thing. O slayer of foes, soon shall the time for performing your friend's service, be over; do you therefore encompass Rāghava's good, namely the searching out of Vaidehī. o king, Rāma, conversant with the scasonableness of time and wise as he is, is not inforining you of it, though the proper time is past; and though he is in hurry, he is waiting for you. Rāghava, as well as Lakşmaņa, who are the instruments of your attaining to this vast kingdom, and your friends for so long a time, are persons of incomparable prowess by virtue of their unequalled accomplishments. He has already performed your service, and it behoveth you now, O lord of monkeys, to command the foremost of monkeys to engage in his service. T To engage, out of season, in a service, uncalled for, is not blameable; but to defer the performance of an action in proper time after promising is indeed an object of censure. O lord of monkeys, you did engage even in the service of one who does you no good, then why shall you not engage in the benefit of Rāma who has favoured you by encompassing the destruction (of Vāli) and securing for you your kingdom. O lord of monkeys and bears, truly you are gifted with prowess and strength, why did you not prepare yourself for satisfying Dāśarathee's commands? Dāśarathee himself is capable of subduing the celestials, Asuras and great serpents-he is simply awaiting the fulfilment of your promise. He has performed a great service at the risk of his life-we shall therefore find out Vaidehī whether she is in this earth or in the welkin, Even the celestials, Dānavas, Gandharabas, Asuras, Mārutas, Yakşas are afraid of him in the battle-field-what of the insignificant Raksasas. O lord of monkeys, it therefore behoveth you to do good by all means to the powerful Rāma, who benefited you before. O lord of monkeys, who is there among us, who shall not at your command proceed to : water, sky or the region under the earth? O blameless one, there are more than one koți of invincible monkeys under you, do you command, who shall proceed and to what quarter? Hearing these words of Hanumān, said on a very proper occasion, the intelligent Sugrīva, made up his mind for a worthy end. Thereupon the highly intelligent Sugrīva ordered the ever active Neela, to collect soldiers from various quarters. Do you so arrange as all my hosts and soldiers with their commanders soon come here. Do you soon bring here at my behest all the energetic and quick-coursing monkeys and commanders spreading their conquests to the end of the earth. (After their arrival) do you yourself inspect and count all those monkeys. He who shall not reach here within fifteen days shall be punished with the loss of his life. There is no need of scrutinizing my orders. Abiding by my order, do you see along with Angada all the elderly monkeys. having thus arranged, that best of monkeys entered the inner apartment.