Hearing those words of Sītā stricken with grief, Hanumān, the foremost of the monkeys, replied in soothing words, O worshipful lady, by Rāma's decree I come as a messenger to these. He is sale and sound, O Vaidehi, and has asked of your welfare. O worshipful dame, Rāma, the son of Dasaratha, the master of the Vedas, and the foremost of those conversant with Vedas has enquired of your welfare. And the highly effulgent Lakşmaņa, the beloved follower of your husband, worn with grief, bows his reverential head to you. Hearing of the welfare of those two lions among men, the worshipful dame, with all her frame worked up with rapture, again spake to Hanumān, saying. Verily the wise saw of the people appears to me to be true that once in a hundred years true joy appears to a living man. Sītā, at that time, attained such a wonderful joy, as would have been acquired by her in the company (of Rama and Laksmana). And they confidingly conversed with each other. Hearing those words of $ītā, racked with sorrow, Hanumān, the son of the Wind-god drew a little nearer to her. The more Hanumān approached her the more Sītā suspected him as Rāvaņa. Alas! Alas! why have I spoken to him? It is the Rāvaņa, who has appeared again in a new disguise. And leaving off the Asoka branch, that one having a blameless person, overwhelmed with grief, sat down on the earth. In the meantime the mighty-armed monkey bowed to Janaka's daughter, but she, worked up with fear, did not cast again her looks towards him. Beholding him bow to her, Sítā, having a moon-like countenance, sighing, spoke to that monkey in sweet accents. If you are that Ravana's self, who, changing your shape by magic art, want to distress me again— this your vile deed dose not behove you. You are surely that Rāvana, whom I saw at Janasthāna, in a mendicant's guise, renouncing his own shape. O night-ranger, O you wearing shapes at will! it dose not behove you to distress me who am poorly and famished with fasts. But no, you cannot be (the fiend) whom I suspect, since I have such joy from seeing you. And may good betide you if you are Rāma's messenger. I do ask you, O foremost of monkeys, something about Rāma that is pleasant to me. O monkey, do you relate the glories of my dear Rama. You are (thus) shaking my mind O gentle one, like to water breaking down the banks of a river. Alas! this dream has afforded me immense pleasure since, I, who have been separated from my lord for so long a time, have beheld this monkey sent by Rāghava. I do not sink even if I can behold in dream the heroic Raghava. along with Laksmana-but dream even is Jealous of my well-being. Nor do I regard this as dream. To behold a monkey in a dream dose not lead to prosperity whereas I have attained it. (Here prosperity means joy-Sītā attained an immense treasure of joy on beholding Rāma's messengerHanumãn.) Or is it mental derangement? Or have I been possessed by a devil? Or have I run mad? Or is it the sultry vapour noating over sands and appearing at a distance like water? No, it is not madness-for derangement of mind is the sign of madness, I have not lost sense and I do distinctly perceive me and the monkey. Thinking thus in many a way and ascertaining the strength of the monkey and the Rākṣasa) Sītā took him for the lord of the Raksasas, wearing shapes at will. And having arrived at this decision, Janaka's daughter-Sītā, ceased from talking with that monkey. And apprised of Sītā's thought, Hanumān, the Wind-god's son, (replied) in words sweet to her and enhancing her delight. Bright as the sun that lights the sky and dear as the moon to every eye, he pleases all his subjects with bounties like to those of as Vaisravana. (Another name of Kubera, the god of gold.) He is gifted with prowess like to the greatly famed Vişnu, truthful and sweet-speeched like to Vacaspati. (The god of speech) Graceful, grateful to the eye and beautiful like to Kandarva's (Cupid or the god of love in Hindu mythology described the most beautiful of the celestials) Self, he displays his wrath in a proper quarter-the foremost of men and of a mighty car. The whole world of creation (live safe) in the shadow of the arms of that high-souled one. You shall soon see the consequences he shall reap by whom, assuming the shape of a dear, Rāghava was taken away from the hermitage and you wert stolen away from that lonely place. And soon shall that powerful (hero) destroy Ravana in the battle, with fiery arrows, discharged angrily. I have been sent by him as a messenger to you. Worn with grief in your separation he has enquired of your welfare, as well the highly effulgent Lakşmaņa, the enhancer of Sumitrā's joy, bowing reverentially to you. The king of monkey host, by name SugrīvaRama's friend, has also enquired of your welfare, O worshipful dame. Rāma, Sugrīva and Laksmana, have you always in their minds. Blessed are we, O Vaidehi, that you do still live, subject as you are to the Raksasis. You shall soon behold Rāma, and Lakşmaņa of a mighty car, and Sugrīva of unmitigated prowess in the midst of the million of monkey hosts. I am Sugrīva's minister, by name Hanumān. I have entered this city of Lankā after crossing over the great main. And by means of my prowess and placing my feet on the head of the vicious-souled Ravana. I have come here to see you I am not he (Ravana) for whom you are taking me, O worshipful dame. Do you renounce your suspicion and rely on my words.