Hearing that the five generals had been slain by Hanumān alone with their vehicles and followers, the king, gazing at prince Aksa, who was ready and eager to go to battle, commanded him to take the field. That puissant one of a bow decked with gold, on being commanded (by Rāvana) with a glance started up, like to fire on being fed by clarified butter by foremost regenerate persons on the sacrificial ground. That best of Naiſtas (Rākṣasas) possessed of prowess, ascending a car resembling the infant sun in effulgence, and surrounded all round with networks of burnished gold, sallied forth in quest of that mighty monkey. And (that warrior)in prowess resembling an immortal, sallied out ascending that car, obtained with long-continued asceticism, embellished with a network of glowing gold, furnished with pennons, having a standard studded with gems, nicely yoked with eight excellent steeds having the fleetness of thought, incapable of being overpowered either by celestials or Asuras, competent to course over uneven ground, of the lustre of lightning, sky-ranging, completely garnished, equipped with quivers, with swords fastened to the banners in eight directions, with darts and lances arranged in proper places, splendid with every object in full measure, bearing golden threads, wearing the brilliancy of the sun and moon, and possessing the effulgence of the sun. And filling the firmament and the earth containing mountains with sounds proceeding from steeds, elephants and mighty cars, he, accompanied by his forces, presented himself before the capable monkey, who was seated at the gate. Coming before the monkey, Akşa, having the gaze of a lion, with eyes betokening regard, gazed at Hanumān resembling the Fire on the occasion of the universal dissolution at the end of a Yuga, intent on destroying creatures, and who was seated and was influenced alike by surprise and regard. And seriously considering the impetuosity of the high-souled monkey as well as his prowess in relation to a foe, as also his own strength, he increased in strength) like the Sun on the expiration of a Yuga. And growing enraged, (Aksa), staying calmly in the field, with concentrated soul, challenged Hanumān difficult to resist in conflict and of prowess worthy to witness, with three whetted shafts. And finding the monkey proud and untiring, capable of vanquishing his foe, and possessed of exalted spirits, Akșa took up his bow and held his arrows in his hands. And wearing a golden corslet, Angadas, and earrings, and possessed of fiery vigour, he closed with the monkey; and their meeting was something unparalleled on this earth, and was calculated to raise the respect (Sambhramaprada according to Rāmānuja means, capable of exciting fear) even of the celestials and the Asuras. And witnessing the mighty conflict of the prince and the monkey, Earth emitted cries, and the Sun did not burn, and the Wind did not blow, and the mountains shook, and the welkin sounded, and the main was vexed. That hero, skilled in aiming, fixing and discharging arrows, shot at the monkey's head three fine-headed feathered shafts plated with gold near the feathers, and resembling venomous serpents. And with his rolling eyes washed with blood in consequence of the shafts having alighted at his head, Hanumān, resembling a new-risen Sun having arrows for its rays, looked splendid like the light-engarlanded Sun. Seeing in battle that son of the foremost of monarchs, with his excellent weapons upraised and his beautiful bow, that best of the counsellors of the lord of monkeys, rejoiced, and intent on encounter, increased himself. And with his ire heightened, that one endowed with energy and prowess, like to the ray-decorated (Sun) on the crest of Mandara,* The Sun is on Mandara in mid-day: therefore the meridian Sun is meant here, began to burn with the fiery rays of his eyes, Akşa, along with his forces and vehicles. As a mass of clouds shower rain on a high hill, the arrow-showering Rākşasa resembling clouds, having the bow for his rain-bow, discharged shafts at that foremost of monkeys, representing a mountain. Then the monkey, having sounds like those of clouds, beholding in battle Akşa of terrific prowess in conflict, and strong in energy, strength and shafts, sent up shouts from elation of spirits. As an elephant approach a deep pit covered over with grass, (Aksa) from a spirit of childishness elated in conflict with his prowess, with his ire heightened, and eyes resembling blood, drew near the monkey in the fleld. As Akşa went on hastily pouring shafts, that one uttering roars resembling the rumbling of clouds, looking terrible in consequence of his arms and thighs flung about, darted into the sky with exuberant energy. As he leapt up, that strong and powerful one-foremost of Raksasas-that car-warrior and the best of choice car warriors-rushed at (Hanuman), showering arrows on him, like a cloud showering hail-stones on a mountain. And dashing in the midst of the arrows like the wind, and thus baffling them, the heroic monkey of dreadful 'prowess in conflict, and endowed with the speed of thought, began to range the path of the air. And witness Akșa with regardful eyes, as that one intent on contest, taking his bow, was covering the sky with various excellent arrows, the Wind-god's offspring was plunged in thought. Wounded in the arm with shafts by that highsouled, noble prince, that mighty-armed one, capable of adequately appreciating the nature of actions, thought on (Aksa's) prowess in battle. This exceedingly powerful one, endowed with the splendour of the infant sun, is doing dire deeds incapable of being done by a boy; and I am loth to slay one that has shown himself equal to every martial feat. This one is high-souled, mighty in energy, of concentrated self, and capable of bearing extreme hardships in war; without doubt, by virtue of his actions, he is worthy of being honoured by Nagas, Yaksas and ascetics. With his mind braced by prowess and hope, that foremost of heroes eye me staying in the fore-front. The prowess of this light-handed (one), I were, make even the hearts of the celestials and Asuras tremble. If I disregard him, he shall certainly vanquish me, for his prowess in battle increase (fast). Therefore I must even slay him: it is not proper to suffer an increasing fire. Thus reflecting on the strength of his foe and having ascertained his line of action, that puissant one endowed with great strength, summoned energy and set his heart on slaying him (his antagonist). And remaining in the path coursed by the air, that heroic monkey, the offspring of the Windgod, with his slaps slew his eight powerful and excellent steeds, capable of bearing pressure and trained to diverse circular movements. And successfully assailed by the councillor of that lord of monkey, the car with its seat smashed, and its pole broken, and deprived of its steeds, fell to the earth from the sky. Thereat, forsaking that car, the mighty car warrior sprang up into sky with his bow and holding his sabre, and (resembled) an ascetic of fierce energy consequent on austerities, going up to heaven, renouncing his body. Then the monkey possessed of the energy and vigour of the Wind, approaching him as he was ranging the air coursed by the king of birds, the Wind and the Siddhas, at length fast caught hold of his legs. As the foremost of birds, Garuda taking a mighty serpent, whirls it, that foremost of monkeys, resembling his sire in prowess, whirling Akşa in the conflict, violently dropped him on the earth. And with his arms, thighs and chest crushed, bleeding, (having his bones and eyes smashed, his joints riven, and his tendons snapped, the Rākṣasa lay on the earth, slain by the offspring of the Wind-god. And tormenting him (Akşa) on the earth, that mighty monkey caused great fright to the ruler of the Rākşasas; and he was gazed at by the assembled Maharsis and the orbit-coursing ones and all beings with Yakşas and Pannāgas, come to see him. And on the prince being slain, that monkey was gazed at by the celestials with Indra, who had been seized with extreme wonderment. And having slain in battle prince Akşa resembling a son of the celestials and possessed of blood-red eyes, the hero (again) neared the same gate, and waited there like Kāla bent upon destroying all creatures.