Then having sent away that mighty host of monkeys, Sugriva despatched to the South others competent to perform the several tasks entrusted to them. And appointing the exceedingly mighty Angada as the leader of those heroic monkeys, that hero, the lord of monkey bands, conversant with the countries intended to be explored, despatched heroes endowed with speed and prowess, headed by Angada, Nīla the son of Fire, and the monkey Hanumān; and the exceedingly energetic Jämbavān, son to the Great-father, and Suhotra, and Sarari, and Saragulma, Gaja, Gavaksya, and Gavaya, Sus ena, Vrsabha, Mainda, Dvivida, and Gandhamādana, and Ulkāmukha and Anangasons of Fire both. And the lord of monkeys began to describe to the monkey-chiefs those tracts in those directions, that were difficult of access. You will behold Vindhya having an hundred summits, and furnished with various trees and shrubs, and the romantic river Narmada, frequented by mighty serpents; and the Godāvari', and that mighty river, the captivating Krşnaveņi, and the Mekhalās and Utkalas, and the cities of Dasarna; and Avravanti and Avanti, and the Vidarbhas and Nishtikas and the charming Māhișakas.? And you will see also the Matsyas and Kalingas and Kausikas all round, and the forest of Dandaka, with mountains, rivers and caverns; and the river Godāvarī,' and the Andhras, and Paundras, he Cholas, the Pandyas, and the Keralas. 1. The commentator says, The Godavari flowing through the countries to t'ie east of the Vindya mountains. 2. Some text read-Ristikas instead. 3. The tract, according to Rāmānuja, watered by the Godāvari in the vicinity of Dandaka. Then shall you repair to the mountain Ayomukha,* plated with ore, having taking summits, graceful, furnished with picturesque flowering woods,-the mighty mountain having groves of excellent sandal. *Another name of this hill is Malaya. At the foot of the Malaya mountain endued with exceeding energy, you will behold the noble stream Kāveri, of pleasant waters, where sport troops of Apsarās. (There) you will see that foremost of saints, Agastya, resembling the sun. Permitted by that gratified high-souled one, you will cross over the great river, Tăniraparni, abounding in alligators. Like a youthful female in relation to her lover, she (Tāmraparni), with both her waters as well as islets concealed under beautiful sandal woods, bathes in the sea. Proceeding (therefrom), the monkeys shall see the grand golden gates belonging to the walls of the capital of the Pāndyas. Then arriving at the main, you shall ascertain your ability or otherwise of crossing the same. In the bosom of the deep there, Agastya has placed that foremost of mountains-the charming Mahendra, having picturesque plateaus; golden, and beautiful,-with a portion of it sunk in the great ocean. For aye, He of a thousand eyes at Parvas visiteth this mountain embellished by various blossoming trees and creepers; beauteous with divinities, and saints, and the foremost Yaksas and Apsarās; thronged by numbers of Siddhas and Chāraṇas; and of surpassing loveliness. On its other shore is an island extending over an hundred Yojanas, inaccessible to men*, and of splendid aspect. Do you explore it all round. There, in particular, you must every way search for Sita. *Because, says the commentator,. of the profusion of gold in it. That country belongs to the impious Rāvana, worthy of being slain—the lord of Raksasas, like to the thousand-eyed (deity) in splendour. In the midst of the Southern sea belonging to him (Ravana), there is a Raksasi, named Angāraketi, who procureth her pray by casting her shadow. Having (by your search) satisfied yourselves as to those countries where you might suspect Sītā to be, do you, your doubts dispelled, proceeding beyond that, (Lankā), search for the spouse of that monarch endued with unbounded energy. In the sea extending over an hundred Yojanas, a lovely hill, named Puspitaka, the abode of Siddhas and Chăraņas; resembling the rays of the sun or the moon,-resting on the waters of the ocean, looks splendid, piercing the heavens with its giant peaks. Of this (mountain), there is a particular golden summit, which the sun approaches. It is incapable of being beheld by the ungrateful or the atheistical. Bowing your heads down to this hill, let the monkeys search on. Leaving behind that irrepressible one, (you will come upon) a mountain difficult of approach, extending over fourteen Yojanas, named Suryyavān. Passing by that also, (you will see) a mountain, named Vidyut, filled with trees, beautiful at all seasons, and bearing all desirable fruits. There, feeding upon excellent an costly fruits and roots, and drinking delicious honey, let the monkeys pass beyond it. There is the hill named Kunjara, grateful both to the eye and the mind, where Viśvakarmā had built the abode of Agastya*. There (rises) that stately golden pile, adorned with various gems, extending over one Yojana, and ten in height. *i.e. in that hill. In it also there is that palace, which is the abode of snakes; having spacious ways, i incapable of being captured, guarded around, and protected by dreadful snakes and sharptoothed serpents of virulent poison; where dwelleth Vāsuki, the exceedingly terrible king of snakes. Proceeding heedfully, you must explore that Bhogavatī palace; also whatever concealed place may lie there. Going beyond that place, (you will see) the mighty mountain named Śrinrsabha, in the form of a bull, full of all gems, and possessed of grace, where are produced excellent Gośirs aka, Padmaka, and Haricyāma sandals, and which in effulgence resembles fire. But, seeing that sandal, you must by no means ask any as questions; certain Gandharvas, named Rohitas, are on guard over that that wood—the lords of Gandharvas, in splendour like to five suns, Cailusha, Grāmani, Siksa, Suka, and Babhru. After that, (Rhisava), at the extremity of the Earth is the abode of persons of pious acts, whose bodies are composed of the Sun, the Moon and Fire. And there reside persons who have won the heavenly regions. After that are the awful regions of the ancestral manes, which you must not approach. This is the metropolis of Yama, covered by deep gloom. You heroic monkey chiefs, you can seek thus far. Further there is no course for those endued with motion. Having examined all these, as well others that may come within your ken, it behoves you, after having ascertained Vaidehi's course, to return (hither). He that, returning within a month, shall say,—I have seen Sītā,' shall pass his days in happiness, enjoying affluence like mine own and indulging all pleasures. He shall be dearer to me than life itself, and none dearer (to me) that he; and although he might commit innumerable wrongs, still should he become my friend. Possessed of immeasurable strength and prowess, and sprung from lines crowned with sterling virtues, do you strive manfully in such a glorious way that the king's daughter may be recovered. prowess, and sprung from lines crowned with sterling virtues, do you strive manfully in such a glorious way that the king's daughter may be recovered.