Hearing those words, Sītā having a moon-like countenance, again spoke to Hanuman, words, sound and pious: O monkey, what you had said that Rāma is not attached to any other thing and is worn with grief, is like nectar mixed with poison. Whether in the enjoyment of vast riches, or emerged in the abyss of miseries, Death is pulling a man, binding him roughly with a chord. O best of monkey, people cannot thwart the course of de tiny. Behold me, Rāma and Saumitri, therefore sunk in miseries. I do not know when shall Rāghava get at the other end of the ocean of grief, by displaying his prowess, like to one, swimming across the ocean when the boat is sunk. I do not know when shall my lord see me, destroying the Rākşasas, killing Rāvana and devastating the city of Lankā. Do you tell him to come before this year expires for till then I shall live. This is the tenth month and two months still remain, O monkey and that is the time appointed by the cruel Rāvaņa. He was entreated very much by his brother Vibhīşaņa to restore me but he paid no need to his requests. Rāvana dose not desire to restore me (to Rāma) for he has been brought under the influence of Death who is seeking him in battle. Vibhisana's eldest daughter, O monkey, by name Kalā, has related this to me, being appointed by her mother. There is a leading, steady, old, intelligent and educated Rākşasa, gifted with a good character, named Avindhya and highly respected of Rāvana who told him that the destruction of the Rākṣasa race would proceed from Rāma, but the vicious-souled one paid no attention to his wellmeaning words. is my I hope, O foremost of monkeys, that my husband shall soon regain me for pure soul and he is gifted with many accomplishments. Rāghava has in him, O monkeys, energy, manliness, strength, kindness, gratitude and prowess. He brought about without his brother's aid, the destruction of the fourteen thousand Rākṣasas at Janasthāna. What enemy is not troubled at this? The disaster-creating Rākşasas can never be compared with that best of men. I am cognizant of his prowess as Sacī is of Indra's. O monkey, Rāma the Sun, with his arrow-like rays, shall dry up the water-the inimical Rākşasas. Saying this she was overwhelmed with grief on Rāma's account, and Hanumān again spoke to her having her countenance bathed in tears. No sooner shall Rāghava hear from me than he shall speedily repair hither followed by a huge army of monkeys and bears. Or I shall release you even to-day from the grasp of that Räkşasa and these miseries. Do you place yourself on my back, O you of a blameless person. And having you on my back I shall leap over the main. I am capable of carrying the city of Lankā even with Rāvana. I shall restore you to-day, O Maithili, to Rāghava on the mount Prasravaņa, like to fire carrying to Indra, the sacrificial offerings. You shall behold to-day, O Vaidehi, Rama along with Lakşmaņa, making preparations (for the destruction of his enemy) like to Vişņu, engaged in the destruction of demons. (And you shall observe) that highly powerful one, anxious to behold you and seated like to Purandara on the summit of that foremost of mountains. Do you place yourself on my back, O worshipful dame, do you not neglect it, O beautiful lady, and be thus reconciled to Rāma like to Rohini restored to the Moon. By the time, that we will take in talking thus, you shall reach Rāma like Rohiņi restored to the Moon. Do you therefore place yourself on my back and I shall cross the ocean sailing by the aetherial way. O fair one, carrying you from this place, none among the inhabitants of Lankä shall be able to follow me. In the same way I have come here I shall return by the welkin, O Vaidehī placing three on my back. Hearing those surprising words from that best of monkeys, Maithilī, having her entire frame worked up with joy, again bespake Hanumān. Hanumān, how darest you take me to such a long distance? O lord of monkey hosts, this attests to your monkey-hood. O foremost of monkeys, little-bodied as you are, how do you desire, to take me hence to my husband the lord of men? Hearing the words of Sītā, the graceful son of the Wind-god Hanumān reflected aside-This is my first insult. The lotus-eyed dame is not cognizant of my prowess or strength. Vaidehi should therefore learn that I can assume shapes at will. Thinking thus, Hanumān, the foremost of the monkeys and the slayer of foes, showed himself to Sītā, in his true shape. And leaping down from the tree, that best of monkeys began to increase himself to create Sītā's confidence. His person appeared like the hill Mandara and the flaming fire. And that best of monkeys having a copper-coloured countenance, thunderlike nails and teeth and mountain-like huge body, appeared before Sītā and said. I am capable of carrying this Lankā with her lord, the mountains, forests gardens, buildings, walls and gate-ways. Do you therefore confide in me, O worshipful dame, and be not suspicious. And O Vaidehi, do you remove Rāma's grief as well as Laksmana's. Beholding the Wind-god's own begotten son, Hanumān, resembling a huge mountain, Sītā, the daughter of Janaka, having eyes resembling lotus-petals, said. O great monkey, I know your strength and bravery, they air-like motion and your wonderful fire-like energy. What ordinary man can come here crossing the incomparable ocean. O lord of monkey hosts, I understand that you are capable of returning and you shall be able to carry me. But I should consider now how the work might be accomplished. O foremost of monkeys, I should not go with you. Perhaps I might lose my sense with your air-like velocity. When moving terribly you shall proceed high up in the welkin, perhaps I shall then fall down. No sooner I shall fall down into the ocean infested with fish and other animals than I shall be an excellent food to them. O slayer of foes, I shall not be able to accompany you. For seeing you carry a woman, they shall surely suspect you. And finding me stolen, those terribly powerful Rākşasas commanded by the vicious-souled Rāvana, shall follow you. O hero, carrying me and encircled by those heroic Rākṣasas with maces and darts in their hands, you shall be beset with dangers. And on the sky the Rākşasas shall be armed with weapons and you shall be without any. How shall you be able to fight and protect me at the same time. When you shall be engaged in conflict with those Rākşasas of terrible deeds, I, O foremost of monkeys, stricken with fear, shall fall down from your back. O foremost of monkeys those terrible and powerful Rākşasas shall be able to defeat you a little. And when you shall be defeated in battle I shall fall down and those vicious Rākṣasas shall carry me away from your hands or destroy me. Victory or defeat is uncertain in a battle. I shall thus be distressed by those Rākşasas setting up terrible roars and they endeavours shall be fruitless, O best of monkeys. You are capable of destroying the Rākṣasas very easily (I admit)—but Rama's fame shall then be souled if do you bring about their destruction. Or the Rākşasas taking me away shall keep me in such a secret place, that neither the monkeys nor Rāghava shall be able to ascertain my where abouts. All your preparations for me, shall thus be useless. And mighty shall be the result of Rāma's coming with you. O large armed one, the life of Rāghava of unmitigated prowess, those of his brothers and of your royal race are all subject to me. When they shall give up their hopes of releasing me, they, worn out with grief and anxiety shall renounce their lives along with the monkeys and bears. O monkey, being guided by my love for my husband, I do not like willingly to touch any body's person but Rāma's. When Rāvaņa, by force touched my person, I had no other help, for I was then without me lord and therefore was subject to another person. If Rāma can take me away from here, destroying the Ten-necked one with all the Rākşasas-he shall then perform the worthy action. I have heard of and myself seen the prowess of the highly-souled (Rāma) unconquerable in a battle. There is none among the celestials, Gandharvas, Nāgas and the Rākşasas who can match him in a conflict. Beholding that highly powerful Rāghava, in a conflict, like to Vāsava in prowess, holding a wonderful bow and followed by Lakşmaņa, who can withstand his prowess resembling the flaming fire? O foremost of monkeys, who can withstand Rāghava in a conflict, followed by Lakşmaņa moving like infuriated an elephant and showering shafts like to the rays of the sun at the time of Dissolution? O best of monkeys do you speedily bring here my dear one along with Lakşmaņa and the lord of monkey hosts. O heroic monkey, do you soon satisfy me, who am stricken with grief in consequence of my long separation from Rāma.