Having accepted all those presents, (Sugrīva), after soothing the monkeys, dismissed them. Having dismissed the thousands of apes, who had performed their task, he deemed himself as well as the mighty Rāghava as having secured success. Then Lakşmaņa in sweet words spoke to the exceedingly strong chief of monkeysSugriva-gladdening him, If it please you, O placid one, I will go out of Kiskindhā. Hearing Laksmana's soft speech, Sugriva, highly delighted, said, Be it so. Let us go. I abide by your behest. Having said this to Lakşmaņa of auspicious marks, Sugrīva dismissed the women with Tārā at their head. Then Sugrīva in a loud voice summoned the foremost monkey, saying, Come (hither). hearing his words, those monkeys that could present themselves before the females, did so with joined hands. To them, who had presented themselves, said the king, of splendour resembling that of the Sun, Do, you monkeys, bring hither a car.8 Hearing his words, monkeys uniting vigour with celerity, brought a car lovely to behold. Seeing the car brought up, the lord of monkeys said to Sumitra's son, O Laksmana, ascend speedily. Having said this, Sugrīva in company with Lakşınana swiftly ascended the golden car resembling the sun, yoked with numerous steeds. With a pale umbrella held over his head, and white chowris waving around, with conchs and trumpets blowing, eulogized by bards, Sugrīva marched out, having obtained supreme regal auspiciousness. And surrounded by hundreds of high-spirited apes and armed people, he proceeded whither Rāma was staying. And having arrived at the excellent spot which was the home of Rāma, that highly energetic one alighted from the car along with Lakşmaņa. And having come to Rāma, Sugrīva (stood) folding his hands. And when Sugrīva has folded his hands, the monkeys also did so. And beholding the mighty host of the monkeys resembling a tank filled with lotus buds, Rāma was well-pleased with Sugriva. And raising up the monkey-king who had bent his head at Rāma's feet, Rāghava embraced him from love and regard. Having embraced Sugrīva, that righteous one said to him, Be seated. And seeing Sugrīva seated on the ground, Rāma said, He, O best of monkeys, is a king who, O hero, in season follows righteousness, pleasure and profit, always dividing the same (among all). He that, renouncing righteousness and the good, devotes himself to pleasure solely, is like a man that falling asleep on the top of a tree, wakes when he has fallen down. That king is verily virtuous that, engaged in uprooting foes and advancing friends, attends to all the three ends. O destroyer of foes, the time is come for exertion: do you, O lord of monkeys, bethink yourself along with your monkey ministers. Thus addressed, Sugrīva said to Räma, O mighty-armed one, my lost luck, and repute, and the entire monkey kingdom I have received back through your gift, owing to thine and your brother's grace, you foremost of victors. He that, having received a good office, does not requite it, reapeth obloquy among persons. These hundreds of prime monkeys, O destroyer of enemies, have come here, bringing with them all the monkeys of the world. O Rāghava, bears and monkeys, heroic Golangulas—acquainted with woods and forests and strongholds, and of terrible shapes-and monkeys who are the sons of deities, wearing forms at will-stay on the way, O Raghava, surrounded by their own armies. And, O hero, O repressor of foes, monkeys surrounded by hundreds, and hundred thousands, and kotis, and ayutas, and sankus*, and arvudas and hundreds of arvudas, and Madhyas and antyas wait (here) And samudras, and parārdhas of monkeysleaders of herds — inhabiting Meru and Vindhya resembling clouds or hills, and in might resembling the great Indra, are on their way to you, O king. *A Sanku is thousand Arvudas; a Madhya is an Arvuda ten times; an Antya is a Modhya ten times; a Samudra is a Madhya twenty times; and Parārdha, a Samudra thirty times. They will join you for battling the fiend in the field; and, slaying Ravana in fight, shall bring Mithilā's daughter. Thereat the puissant son of the Earth's lord, witnessing the preparations made by the heroic monkey, remaining under his his command, appeared like a blown blue lotus.