When the monkeys, whose lives had well nigh departed out of them, had spoken these piteous words, the vulture, in solemn accents, with tears in his eyes, said to the monkeys, You monkeys, you have said that my younger brother, named Jaţāyu, has been slain in battle by the powerful Rāvaņa. On account of my age and want of wings, I, although hearing this, bear it. Nor have I strength to-day to clear scores touching my brother's enmity. Formerly, while engaged in the destruction of Vrtra, he and I, burning for victory, soared in the sky near the flaming sun, garlanded by glory. Thence impetuously wheeling round, we went to the celestial regions along the etherial way. And it came to pass that, coming midway of the sun, Jațāyu was faint. Witnessing my brother severely struck by the solar rays and exceedingly stupefied, I from affection shadowed him with my wings. Thereat, my pinions scathed, I dropped down on Vindhya, you foremost of monkeys; and staying here, I could not know the circumstances that have befallen my brother. Thus addressed by Jatāyu's brother, Sampāti, the eminently wise prince Angada answered, 'If you are indeed the brother of Jațāyu, having heard what I have related, tell (us) if you know touching the abode of that Rākşasa. Tell us if you know anent that short-sighted worst of Raksasas, Ravana, whether staying far or near. Thereat, rejoicing the monkeys, the exceedingly energetic elder brother of Jațāyu spoke words worthy of him. You monkeys, my pinions have been burnt; and I am a vulture shorn of strength. Therefore I will help Rāma well by my words. I know the realms of Varuna, and Visnu's Trivikrama* worlds, the wars of the gods and Asuras, and the churning for ambrosia. *i.e. the worlds enveloped by his three steps during his Dwarf incarnation. And albeit age has deprived me of energy, and albeit my life hangs loosely on me, yet, if this is Rāma's work, it should be done by me first. I have seen a youthful and beautiful female, adorned with all ornaments, carried away by the wicked Rāvana, The lady (all the while) crying, 'O Rāma!' 'O Rāma!' '0 Lakşmaņa! And And taking her ornaments from her person, she was throwing them on the ground. Her silken cloth seemed like the solar splendour on the summit of a mountain; and herself beside the sable Rākşasa, looked like the lightning in the welkin (beside clouds). From your relation of Rāma, I conclude that she must be Sītā. Now listen to me as I tell you about the abode of that Rākşasa. Son to Viśravana and brother to Vaiśravaņa, the Rākşasa named Rāvana resides in the city of Lankā. The lovely city of Lankā, reared by Viśvakarmā, lieth a full hundred Yojanas hence on an island in the sea; furnished with golden gateways, filled with variegated daises, lordly gold-gleaming places; and girt round with great walls hued like sunshine. There stayeth Vaidehi, forlorn and clad in a silken cloth,—-confined in the inner apartment of Rāvana, and carefully guarded by Rākṣasīs. In Lankā protected all round by the sea, you shall behold Janaka's daughter, Maithili. As the end of the ocean after a full hundred Yojanas, arriving at its southern shore, you shall see Rāvana in Laņkā, protected by ocean from all sides. You monkeys, do you hie thither speedily with vigour. I perceive by my knowledge that having seen (that place) you shall come back. The first course belongs to forktailed shrikes and others living on grain. The second, to those that live on animals and fruits; the third is ranged by Bhāşas; the fourth by Krunchas, Kuvaras and hawks; the fifth by vultures; the sixth belongs to swans endowed with youth and beauty; and the next to the Vainateyas. We have derived or origin from Vainateya. *Aruna, son to Vinata. (By despatching you thither), I shall avenge the heinous deed perpetrated by the cannibal, as well as the wrong done by Rāvana to my brother. Resting here, I see Ravana and Janaki. We have excellent Sauparana' clairvoyance. *Clairvoyance attained by success in knowledge respecting the spiritual Golden eyes. Thus far the commentator. We leave the abstruse point to the apostles of theosophy and spiritism for illucidation. For this reason, as well as owing to the energy consequent on our feeding on certain kinds of flesh, we, you monkeys, can see a little further than an hundred Yojanas. Therefore (the Deity) has ordained such food for us as are fraught with the power of making one see from a great distance. And the abode of cocks and others being underneath trees, their sight is limited to the extent which they require to see. Do you look about for means to cross over the salt waters. Having met with Vaidehi, do you, having achieved success, come back. I wish to be taken by you to the ocean-abode of Varuna. I will offer water to (the manes of) my highsouled brother, who has gone to heaven. Thereat those heroes, the monkeys possessed of exceeding energy, carried to the destined spot on the shore of the ocean, Sampāti, whose wings had been scathed. Then carrying that lord of vultures back to the self-same place, the monkeys, furnished with information (concerning Sītā), experienced great joy.