Having made over the gem, Sītā said to Hanumān, This sign is very well known to Rāma. Seeing this gem, that hero, Rāma, shall recollect three persons, his mother, myself, and king Dasaratha, You, O foremost of monkeys, will again be commissioned on this business. Do you bethink you as to what you will do afterwards, when you had been entrusted with this task. O foremost of monkeys, you are capable of compassing this work. Therefore, think as to what course of his (Rāma's) shall remove (my) misery. O Hanumān, undergoing toils, be you instrumental in removing my misery. Saying, "So be it,” the Wind-god's offspring of terrible prowess, bowing down the head, prepared to depart. Seeing that (Hanumān) was about to set out, that exalted one, Mithila's daughter, addressed that monkey, son to the Wind-god, in words choked by the vapour of grief. O Hanumān, do you communicate good news to both Rāma and Lakşmaņa, to Sugrīva with his counsellors, and to all the aged monkeys. And, O best of monkeys, in consonance with righteousness, communicate good tidings (to Rāma). And it behove you to strive so that the mighty-armed Rāghava may rescues me from this sea of sorrow. O Hanumān, do you speak so that the illustrious Rāma may deliver me while I am still alive; and thereby do you reap righteousness. Ever breathing high spirits, Dasarathi, (Dasaratha's son) hearing my words, shall attain an access of manliness for my deliverance. Soon as Rāghava shall hear words couching tidings of me, that hero shall duly resolve on displaying his prowess. Hearing this speech of Sītā, Hanumān, son to the Wind-good, with his joined hands raised to his head, said. Soon shall Käkutstha come, surrounded by the foremost monkeys and bears; and, vanquishing the foe in fight, shall remove your grief. Find I none either among men, or Asuras, or celestials, that dares remain before him as he discharges his shafts. For you, in especial, he can stand in conflict even the Sun, Indra, nay-Yama himself, that offspring of the Sun. For you, he prepare himself to conquer the Earth bounded by the main; and victory, you daughter of Janaka, shall be Rāma's. Hearing his words excellently spoken and thoroughly true, Jānaki honoured them highly, and spoke (as follows). And gazing at him once and again as he prepared to go away, Sītā froin affection honoured the speech which had been uttered (by Hanuman) out of attachment to his master. If you wish it, O hero, do you, O subduer of enemies, stay here for one day. Having rested in some hidden nook, you will depart tomorrow. O monkey, (if you do remain), your vicinity shall for a moment remove the huge grief of me of slender luck. But even if you go (passing today here), I have, O tiger-like monkey, doubts as to your return; and, accordingly, doubt, certainly, as to my life. And the grief incident to my not seeing you shall burn me greatly, even, O monkey, as grief burn one that is already consumed by sorrow over and over again. And, O hero, O lord of monkeys, this doubt is also before me. How, alas! shall the mighty lord of monkeys, albeit backed by the monkeys and bears, cross over the mighty main hard to cross, and (how shall) those forces consisting of bears and monkeys or those sons of the best of men (cross over the same)? In all the three worlds, Vinata's offspring, your self, and the Wind-god, have talone the power of crossing over the deep. Then, for the accomplishment of this work, difficult to compass, what, O hero, O you best of those conversant with business, what way do you see as to its success? Or you alone, O destroyer of hostile heroes, are quite enough for the fulfilment of this purpose; and you shall reap, in the shape of fame, the fruit of your achievement. But if (Rāma) himself together with all his forces, conquering Ravana and (recovering me) in battle, returned victorious to his own city, this would be worthy of himself. If blocking up Lankā with his army, that afflictor of hostile hosts, Kākutstha took me (hence), that would be worthy of him. Do you, therefore, adopt such means that the high-souled heroic warrior may have an opportunity of putting forth prowess. Hearing those words fraught with sense and reason and informed with affection, Hanumān, by way of reply said mildly. O revered lady, that foremost of monkeysthe lord of bears and monkeys-Sugrīva, possessed of truth, has made up his mind on your behalf. That destroyer of Rākşasas, O daughter of Vaidehi, environed by thousands of millions of monkeys, will come hither without delay. And exceedingly powerful and mighty monkeys possessed of prowess, and speeding far with the rapidity of thought, are in his command. Nothing can impede their courses, either upward, or downward, or tending in both directions, and those ones of measureless energy never experience depression in the most arduous undertakings. Braced by their exalted spirits, these, resorting to the aerial way have many a time and oft circumambulated the Earth containing mountains and meads. There are (in that army) rangers of woods, some equal and some superior to me. And near Sugrīva there are none who are inferior to me. And since even I have reached this place, what shall I say of those ones endowed with immense might? Nor are superior (monkeys) sent on errands; it is only the inferior ones that are sent. Then, O exalted one. you need not grieve: let your sorrow depart. Those leaders of monkey herds will come to Lankā by one bound; and, like to the risen Sun and Moon, those leonine men, having large numbers to back them, will come to your side, riding my back. Those heroes and foremost of men, Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa both, coming to the city of Lankā, shall destroy her by means of their shafts. And slaying Rāvaņa together with his adherents, Raghu's son, taking you, O paragon among women, shall return to his own city. Therefore, do you take heart, good betide you! Do you remain, eagerly wishing for the time. It will not be long before you shall behold Rāma resembling flaming fire. On the lord of Rākṣasas being slain along with his counsellors and friends, you shall meet with Rāma, even as Rohinī meet with the Moon. O worshipful one, speedily shall you behold the other shore of your misery, O Maithili; and you shall see Rāvana slain by Rāma by might of arm. Having thus solaced Vaidehi's daughter, Hanumān, son to the Wind-god again spoke to Vaidehi, saying. Soon shall you behold that destroyer of foes, Rāghava of subdued soul, and the bow-bearing Laksmana also, come to the gate of Lanka. And soon shall you behold the assembled heroic monkeys, endowed with the prowess of lions and tigers, and the splendour of the monarch of monkeys, and having nails and teeth for their arms. And you shall, O noble one, behold innumerable companies of choice monkeys, resembling hills and clouds, roaring on the plateaus of Malaya in Lankā. Like an elephant tormented by a lion, Rāma afflicted in the vitals by the dreadful shafts of Manmatha, dose not attain ease. Do not weep, exalted one, in sorrow. Let not fear take possession of your heart! Even as Sacī meet with Sakra, shall you, O auspicious one, meet with your lord. Who is greater than Rāma? And who is equal to Saumitri? (i.e. Sumitra's son, Laksmana) And these brothers resembling Fire and the Wind, are your help. O revered one, you will not have to dwell long in this extremely dreadful place inhabited by the Rākşasas. The arrival of your beloved one is not distant. Just remain expecting (as best you may), during the time that elapses between this and my meeting with Rāma.