The monkey, Hanumān, in company with Tārā and Angada searcheth the caves and woods of Vindhya, caverns all around haunted by lions and tigers, and in vast inaccessible cascades in that foremost of mountains. And they came to the south-western summit of the inountain. And when they sojourned there, their (appointed) term had not expired. And that spacious country, consisting as it did, of caves and grots and woods, was difficult to search. And there the wind-god's offspring searched all over the mountain. And each apart remaining at no great distance from the others, Gaja, Gavākha and Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamādana, Mainda, Dwivida, and Hanumān, Jambavān, the youthful prince Angada, and Tārā, remaining in sight of the wood, after having searched the South-lands covered with mountain ranges, were searching (about), when they espied an unenclosed cavity, difficult of entry, named Věkşavila, guarded by a Dānava. And tried by hunger and thirst, worn out with fatigue, seeking for water, they found that cavity surrounded by trees and plants. And, with their bodies drenched and reddened with lotus dust, Kraunchas and swans and cranes and Chakravākas, came out of the cavity. And drawing nigh to that fragrant and inaccessible cave, those superior monkeys were struck with amaze, and became eager (to enter into it). And with their minds filled with doubt, those vigorous foremost of monkeys gladly approached that cave; abounding in diverse animals, resembling the residence of the lord of Daityas, dazzling, and dreadful, and impenetrable on all sides. Then Hanuman the son of the wind-god, possessed of the splendour of a mountain-summit, cognizant of woods and forests, said to the grim-visaged apes, Having explored the South, (containing) countries enveloped with mountain chains, we have all got fatigued, but we have failed to find Mithila's daughter. And from yonder cave come out swarms of and and kraunchas and chakravākas, drenched with water. For certain here is a well or a watery expanse. And at the mouth of the cave there are these cool trees.' Hanumān having said this, all the monkeys went into the cave covered with darkness; without the sun or the moon, capable of making one's down stand on end. And seeing lions, and birds and beasts (ranging around), those tigerlike monkeys entered that cave covered with swans cranes darkness. And (there) neither their ken, nor their vigour, nor yet their prowess was baffled: and their speed resembled the wind, and their sight remained unimpaired albeit in darkness. And those foremost of monkeys rushed into the cavity; and beheld displayed (before them) an excellent and charming scene. And embracing each other in that fearful cave rife with various trees, they passed over an hundred Yojanas. And deprived of their sense, and tried with thirst, and bewildered, and thirsting for water, they for a time vigilantly descended in darkness down the cave. And emaciated, with woebegone faces, and spent, those monkeys despairing of their lives, (at last) saw light. Those mild ones, coming to a spot free from darkness, saw golden trees, possessed of the brightness of flaming fire. And Sālas and palms, and Tamālas, Punnāgas, Vañjulas, and Dhavās, Campakas, Nāga trees, Karņikāras in flower, with variegated golden bunches and twigs, and crests of clusters, and plants,-embellished with golden garniture; resembling the infantine sun,-on daises composed of lapises;—golden trees with resplendent bodies, having the hues of purple lapises; and lotus-plants flocked with fowls; and (spots) surrounded by large golden trees, like to the infantine sun; and tanks with large fishes or gold and lotuses, containing pleasant waters-all these saw there. And the monkeys saw there golden as well as silvern vehicles, and elegant dwellings all round veiled with nets of pearls; having golden balconys; with their grounds paved with gold and silver; and furnished with lapis lazulis. And on all sides they saw trees bearing fruits and flowers resembling coral; and golden black bees, and honey all round, and various spacious seats and beds about dight with gold and jewels. And searching in that cave, the exceedingly effulgent heroic monkeys saw heaps of golden, silver and bell-metal vessels; and heaps of excellent aguru and sandal; and pure fruits and roots; and costly vehicles and various kinds of sapid honey; and loads of costly attire; and lots of variegated woolen cloths and deer-skins; as well as a female, from near. And they found her there, wearing a black deer-skin,-a female ascetic, with restrained fare-as if flaming in energy. Amazed, the monkeys sat them down in a body. And then Hanumān asked her,-Who are you? And to whom does this cave belong? And-Hanumān like to a hill, bowing down to the old women with joined hands, asked her, saying,-Who are you? And tell me, to whom belong this edifice and the cave as well as all these jewels.