Then seeing Jānakī seated at the foot of the Śinsapa tree, (Hanumān) saluting her said, “By luck it is that I see you unhurt." Then eying him again and again as he was on the point of departing, Sītā said to Hanumān in words informed with affection for her husband. "If, my child, it like you, do you, O stainless one, stay here today in some retired spot. Tomorrow having refreshed yourself, you shall set out." Your vicinity, O monkey, for a while beguiles me of slender luck of my measureless grief. You will go, O powerful monkey; but ere you return, it is, O foremost of monkeys, doubtful whether I shall live. O hero, the not seeing you shall try me sorely, who have fallen from one misfortune in to a grater one, and who, my mind distracted have been exercised by sorrow. O hero, this mighty doubt is (ever) present before me. How shall that exceedingly powerful one or that host of monkeys or those two sons of that man of men, albeit backed by mighty monkeys, cross over the ocean incapable of being crossed? Three beings have the power to bound over the deep; Vinata's offspring, you, and the Windgod. Then in this business at hand hard to accomplish, what means do you, versed in business, see, whereby the end may be attained? O slayer of hostile heroes, you alone are quite competent to perform this task; and you shall attain fame through your rising prowess. But if blocking up Lankā with his forces, that afflictor of enemies, Kākutstha, take me (from hence), then that shall be worthy of him. Therefore do you so order things that powerful and high-souled hero in conflict, may act as becomes himself. Hearing her reasonable, affectionate and pregnant speech, that hero, Hanumān, answered, O noble lady, that lord and foremost of monkeys, Sugrīva gifted with strength, is determined on your behalf. And that master of monkeys, Sugriva, O Vaidehī, surrounded by thousands and Koțīs of monkeys, shall speedily come here (for the purpose). And those best of men, those heroes, Rāma and Lakşmana, coming together, shall afflict Lankā with their arrows. And slaughtering the Rākṣasa with his own adherents, Raghu's son, O exceedingly fair one, shall ere long take you back to his palace. O gentle damsel, do you console yourself. Remain, expecting the hour. Soon shall you see Rāvana slain in battle by Rāma. On the lord of Rākṣasas being slain along with his sons, councillors, and friends, you shall meet with Rāma as Rohiņi meet with the Moon. At once shall Käkutstha come, accompanied by the foremost of monkeys, who, conquering (Ravana) in conflict, shall remove your grief. Having thus consoled Vaidehi's daughter, Hanumān, son to the Wind-god, setting his heart upon departure, saluted Vaidehi. And having soothed Vaidehī, and displayed his surpassing strength, having rendered the city disconsolate, and baffled Rāvana, exhibited his terrific might, and saluted Vaidehī, Hanuman became bent upon returning, crossing over the mid-sea. Then that repressor of foes, the powerful monkey, anxious to see his master, ascended Arista, foremost of mountains; (as if covered) with a sheet consisting of blue woods, of tall padmakas, and clouds lying in the intersperse between peaks, and displayed from love by the glad light of the Sun; appearing to be beholding with the minerals scattered about serving for its eyes; seeming to be reciting aloud in consequence of the solemn sound of waters, to be carolling clearly through its many fountains, and to stay with uplifted arms by means of devadarus; appearing to be crying distressfully on account of cascades sounding all round; seeming to be trembling in consequence of verdant autumnal woods waving, and to be piping on account of kīcakas vocal through the breeze; eloquent; with the foremost poisonous serpents appearing to be sighing forth ire; appearing to be sunk in contemplation on account of caverns covered with snow and looking solemn in consequence; as if moving about by means of hills looking like its cloudlegs; seeming to yewn in the sky with peaks towering haven-wards, scattered with summits, and graced with innumerable caves; surrounded with salas, palms, tamalas, Karmas, and bamboos; graced with spreading and flowering under-woods; abounding in various beasts, and decked with mineral streams, containing numerous rills, throughed with collections of crags; frequented by Maharsis, and Yaksas, and Gandharvas and Kinnaras and serpents; impracticable in consequence of plants and trees; with caverns harbouring lions; filled with tigers and other (ferocious beasts); and furnished with trees having tasteful fruits and roots. And the Wind-god's offspring-foremost of monkeys-ascended that mountain. And on the lovely level of that mountain, the crags, crushed with sounds under the tread of that one burning to behold Rāma and wrought up with excess of joy, were scattered all round. And ascending that lordly hill, the mighty monkey magnified himself, desirous of going from the southern to the northern shore of the salt waters. And getting to the top of the mountain, that hero, son to the Wind-god, cast his eyes upon the dreadful main inhabited by terrible snakes. And that foremost of monkeys, offspring of the Wind-god, (Māruta—this term is used twice in this Sloka, once for Hanumān, and next for the Wind-god. One of these is left out on the score of redundency) (mentally) went from the south to the north, as if it were the air. Then that best of mountains, sore pressed by the monkey, began to emit cries, and with various creatures (on it), entered under the Earth, with its peaks tottering and its trees toppling. And borne down by the violence of his thighs, trees bearing flowers, being shattered, as if destroyed by Sakra's weapon, fell to the ground. The dreadful yells of mighty lions in pain, inhabiting caves, entered the car, piercing the heavens. And Vidyādharis with their attires falling off and their ornaments disordered, suddenly rose from the mountain to the sky. (Dharanidharāt-at-from the holder of the Earth, the latter being supposed to rest on a mountain) And exceedingly powerful and mighty snakes of virulent venom, having flaming tongues, with their hoods and necks tortured, began to roll (on the earth). And Kinnar and serpents, Gandharvas, Yaksas and Vidyadharas, forsaking that foremost of mountains in affliction, took refuge in the sky. And that graceful mountain also, tormented by that powerful one, entered the nether regions with its tall trees and summits. That mountain, which (heretofore) had measured ten Yojanas in area and thirty in height, became level with the earth. And desirous of crossing over the salt waters, with their shores menaced by sounding (waves), the monkey rose to the sky.