Seeing that foremost of monkeys enlarge his person for bossing over an hundred Yojanas, and suddenly filled with energy, (the monkeys) at once renounced sorrow, and, filled with light, set up ululations and fell to eulogizing the mighty Hanuman. And, struck with amazement, they, (staying) all round, joyfully gazed (at him); even as creatures beheld Nārāyaṇa, then stretching forth his three steps, he prepared him (for the succeeding feat). And, eulogized by them, the odorous mighty Hanuman increased; and, flourishing his tail me joy, attained strength. As, extolled by the principal derly monkeys, he became fraught with effulgence, his beauty as great. . As a lion fills himself with vigour in an open we, so the son of the Wind-god filled himself with energy. The face of him, as that intelligent one was filling, himself has force was aflame like a frying-pan, or like to themeless fire. Rising in the midst of the monkeys, Hanumān has his down standing on end through joy, saluting the monkeys, said, Wind, the friend of Fire, shattereth summits; and, [ever blowing in the eye of the sky, he is possessed of strength, and is of immeasure (might). Begot from his loins, I am the son of fast-coursing and high-souled Wind, coursing swiftly am his equal in all these accomplishments.* *i.e. pertaining to leaping. I without once stopping, circumambulate the extensive heaven-cleaving mountain, Meru, for a thousand tin And, dashing the ocean with my arms, I can del the world with its mountains, rivers and lakes. Las by the force of my legs and thighs, that abode of Varuņa the sea, out which have sprung the ferocious aqua animals, overleaps its continents. And for once that lor birds, Vinata's offspring, living on serpents, courseth through the welkin, I can course through it a thousand times. And can touch the flaming effulgent Sun ere, beginning his jour from the Rising hill, he ascends the Setting hill. And, foremost of monkeys, I can, fiercely rushing on, come as without touching the earth. And I can bound beyound's and planets, suck up the oceans, and rive the earth. And a monkey, I can, leaping, crush mountains; and, leaping can drain the mighty ocean dry. When I shall learing the sky, flowers from various shrubs and trees shall follow me to-day. And then my course, flecked with flowers), resemble even they sky (studded with stars). And, monkeys, then all creatures shall see me now ranging through the profound firmament, now shooting up, and now descending (on the other shore). Resembling Mahāmeru, me shall behold, you monkeys, making my way, covering up sky, as if devouring up the heavens. I shall, leaping concentrating my energy, scatter the clouds, shake the I and suck up the ocean. The strength of Vinata's son the Wind-god's, or mine, (surpasses that of every creature). None save the sovereign of birds, or the exceeding mighty Wind, can follow me in flight. In the twing an eye I shall spread through the unsupported lightning darting from clouds. And at the time of leaping over the ocean, my form shall resemble that of the energizing Vişņu, when He had assumed the triune energy. I perceive through my intelligence, (and my mental motion tallies), that I shall behold Vaidehi. Therefore, you monkeys, rejoice. In vehemence like to Garura, I shall, I conceive, go an Ayuta yojanas. I can, suddenly summoning energy, bring hither ambrosia from the very grasp of Vāsava or Brahmā himself. I shall leap sheer over Lankā. Even this is my impression. Filled with delight, the monkeys there amazed see that foremost of monkeys, endued with immeasurable might, storming. And, hearing his speech capable of removing the grief of kindred, that best of monkeys Jambavān, transported with joy, said, O hero! O son of Kesari! O offspring of the Wind! the huge sorrow of your kindred has, my child, been destroyed by you. These foremost of monkeys assembled, who wish for your welfare, shall, with intent mind, perform acts tending to your weal,-so that you mayst succeed in your undertaking. By the grace of the saints, and with the permission of the aged monkeys, and by the blessing of the superiors, do you bound over the mighty main. Till you return, we shall stay on one leg. The lives of all these rangers of the forest shall go along with you. *i.e. practise austerities on your behalf. Then that tiger-like monkey said to those rangers of the woods, None in this world would be able to sustain my impetus in the act of bounding. Here are these summits, firm and spacious, of this mountain, Mahendra, thronged with crags. I shall rush forward from these summits of Mahendra, interspersed with trees and adorned with masses of ore. As I leap over a hundred Yojanas, these mighty summits shall sustain my impetus. Then he equalling the Wind, that monkey, the son of the Wind-god, pounder of enemies, ascended that best of mountains, Mahendra; covered with with various trees and flowers, furnished with swards; ranged by deer; containing plants and blossoms with trees bearing fruits and flowers daily; having tigers and lions and infuriated elephants; swarming with maddened birds; and abounding with fountains. Ascending (Mahendra), that foremost of monkeys endued with exceeding strength, and resembling Mahendra himself in prowess, began to range from one mighty summit to another. Thereat, hurt by the arms of that high-souled one, the mighty mountain began to cry,* like a mighty mad elephant tormented by a lion. *Through the voices of the animals inhabiting it. And water rushed out of masses of rocks scattered around. And that mighty mountain had its deer and elephants afflicted with affright; and its giant trees shaken; and its spacious uplands deserted by various Gandharva couples engaged in drinking and dalliance, and by birds-flying away, and by bevies of Vidyadharas; and its huge serpents distressed, and its cliffs and peaks toppling down. With its serpents hissing, with their bodies half issuing (from their holes), the mountain seemed as if it shone with pennons displayed. And the heap of crags forsaken by saints exercised with fear and agitation, looked doleful, like a wayfarer left in a vast forest by his companions. That intelligent, magnanimous and heroic monkey-destroyer of hostile heroes, endowed with speed, concentrating his soul on his energy, mentally went to Lankā.