When Tārā, bright as the moon, had spoken thus, Hanumān felt as if Angada had already deprived (Sugrīva) of his kingdom.* The sense is very obscure. One meaning is: Hanumān thought that Argada acquiescing in what Tārā had said, must remain there,-and ultimately endeavour to wrest the kingdom from Sugriva. Another meaning is: Hanumān conceived that remaining there in peace, Angada would consider his position as enviable as if he had extorted the kingdom from Sugrīva. Hanumān deemned Vāli's son as endowed with intelligence consisting of eight elements; with power of four kinds; and the four and ten virtues; as ever fraught with energy, strength and prowess; as growing in grace like the moon during the lighted fortnight; as resembling Brhaspati in intelligence; and in prowess, his own sire; and as ever listening to. Tārā's counsels, as Purandara listens to the counsels of Sukra. And Hanumān versed in all branches of learning, finding Angada backward in the affair of his master, began inspire him with fear.* *Touching Tārā. He, wealthy in words, laying under contribution the second of the four means,* had created division among those monkeys. *Referred to above. On their being divided, he (Hanuman) set about raising Angada's apprehension by various fear-fraught speech, referring to punishments. O Tārā's son, you are for certain more capable of fight than even your sire; and you are also able to hold the monkey-kingdom as firmly as he. But, O foremost of monkeys, the monkeys are always inconstant in character. Bereft of their wives and sons, they shall not bear your behest. They shall never take to you. This I tell you in presence of all. And I will tell you what. You neither by the virtues of conciliation, charity and the rest, nor by chastisement, shall succeed in drawing to your side this Jāmbavān, or Nīla, or the mighty ape Suhotra, or myself. A strong one wronging another that is weak, can live; therefore a weak person anxious for self-preservation, should never wrong (a strong individual). You considerest that this cave may serve for your protectress,* having heard of it (said by Tārā); but to rive the same is but light work for the shafts of Laksmana. *The word meaning cave is feminine in Sanskrit. Formerly this was cleft a little by Indra, with his thunderbolt hurled (against it);* but now Lakṣmaṇa would pierce it like a leaf-stalk, by means of his keen arrows. *The commentator interprets the passage differently: Formerly Indra did a little damage herein-i.e. merely slew Maya, the architect of the mansion. This is ingenuity. I give the plain sense. Lakşmaņa has many an iron arrow like Indra's thunderbolt or that of the sky,* capable of riving even mountains. 15 *Vajrasani-Vajra is the thunder-bolt in the hand of Indra, and Asani—the thunder-bolt produced by clouds. O subduer of enemies, soon as you shall set up here, the monkeys, making up their minds, shall forsake you. Remembering their wives and sons, ever anxious (on account of Sugrīva, pining for domestic happiness, ad aggrieved (at their pitiable plight), they shall turn their backs upon you. Then forsaken by the kindred as well as friends seeking your welfare, you shall be struck with affright even at a quaking blade of grass. If you make head (against Sugriva), the sharpened shafts of Laksmana, terrible, of exceeding impetuosity and mighty vehemence, and incapable of being baffled, shall be eager to slay you. On the contrary, if you in humble guise present yourself (before him) along with us, he shall-establish you in the kingdom, in consideration of your being the next heir. A righteous sovereign, steady in vow, clean, and truthful in promise, your uncle, who cherishes affection for you shall not by any mears chastise. Ju. He loves your mother, and his life is for her; and she has no other son. Therefore, O Angada, go along with us.