Thereupon the Moon, white as water-lily and of clear appearance proceeded far down the welkin like to a goose traversing the blue waters. With a view to befriend him, the Moon of clear rays, sprinkled the Wind-God's son, with cool beams. And thereupon he beheld Sītā, having a moon-like countenance, plunged in grief like to a laden boat sunk in water. While beholding Vaidehī, Hanumān, the son of Maruta, observed at some distance, a number of grim-visaged Raksasis. Some had one ear, some one eye, some had big ears some was without ears; some had formidable ears and some had a nose projecting upwards. And some had the upper part of their bodies unusually long and bulky, some had a long and slender neck, some had dishevelled hair, and some one's person was so thickly covered with hairs, that she appeared to have been cloaked in a blanket. Some had long ears some had a long forehead, some had a long belly, some had long breasts; some had long lips; some had their lips and chins stuck together, some had a long countenance and some had long knees. Some one was of-short stature, some was tall, some crooked, some grim-visaged, some dwarfish, some one was of terribly dark colour; some had a disfigured countenance; some had coppery eyes and a fearful face. Some were terrible-looking, some coppercoloured, some black, some angry and some fond of quarrelling with each other; and some had iron darts, hammers and mallets in their hands. Some had a face like that of a boar, some had a face like that of a deer, some like that of a tiger, some like that of a buffalo, some like that of a goat, and some like that of a jackal; some had legs like those of a camel, some had those of an elephant, some those of a horse and some had their heads placed on their breasts. Some one had only one hand some had only one leg. Some had ears like those of a horse, some like those of a cow, some like those of an ass, some like those of an elephant and others had ears like those of a lion. Some had very big noses, some had crooked and others were without any; some had noses like those of an elephant and others had their noses on their foreheads. Some had their legs like those of elephants some had very huge legs; some and like those of a cow, some had on their legs locks of hair like to pillars, some had a terribly huge head, some had big breasts and others had spacious bellies, Some had faces and eyes beyond ordinary proportions. Some had a long face and tongue. And some had the face of a goat, some that of an elephant some that of a cow, some that of a boar some that of a horse and some that of an ass. Some of the Rākşasīs were grim-visaged and some hot-natured, quarrelsome and had darts andmaces in their hands. And some terrible Răks asīs of disfigured countenances, had smokycoloured hairs. And they were all continually drinking wine, always fond of liquor and meat, and all their bodies were sprinkled with blood for their living on gore and flesh. And that foremost of monkeys found all these grim-visaged Rākşasīs seated around that mighty tree enveloped with branches. And the graceful Hanuman observed at the foot of that tree that worshipful and blameless daughter of the king Janaka. She was bereft of all effulgence, racked with grief and all her hairs were soiled with dirt. no She appeared like a star fallen down on the earth on the wane of virtue. And famed though she was all over the world for her chastity, it was difficult for her now to see her husband. She had excellent ornaments-her attachment to her husband was the only ornament. She was imprisoned by the lord of Rākşasas and separated from all her friends, she appeared like a she elephant separated from her band and bound and attacked by a lion, and like the rays of the Moon enveloped with clouds at the expire of the rainy season, Her beauty was greatly faded (in consequence of her husband's separation) like to a stringed instrument for want of a player. And ever engaged in her husband's welfare she was thoroughly unworthy of being brought under the control of the Rākşasas. Being sunk in the abyss of grief and encircled by those Rākşasīs she appeared in the forest of Asoka like to Rohiņi possessed by Rāhu. And Hanuman beheld her there like a creeper divested of flowers. And having her person soiled with dirt and shorn of all ornaments she appeared in her hidden grace like to a lotus covered with clay. The monkey Hanumān, beheld that damsel, having the eyes of a young antelope, clothed with a soiled and shattered cloth. And though the countenance of that worshipful one was shorn of all grace, her heart did not loose its loftiness in consequence of her husband's prowess. And Sītā, of dark-blue eyes, was protected by virtue of her own character. And beholding Sītā, having the eyes of a young antelope, and terrified and casting her looks hither and thither like a hind and burning down the trees enveloped with leaves by her breath; like to a mass of grief and an upheaval of sorrow; having well-proportioned limbs, and appearing graceful without ornaments, Maruti attained to an excess of delight. And beholding her having inebriate eyes, Hanumān shed tears of delight and bowed to Rāghava. Having offered his obeisance to Räma and Lakşmaņa the powerful Hanumān, greatly delighted in seeing Sītā, remained there hidden.