Having heard all this related to them by the vulture-king, the monkeys possessing the strength of lions, filled with delight, bounded and set up a roar. Hearing from Sampāti that Rāvana was to be slain, the monkeys growing glad, came to the ocean, with the desire of seeing Sītā. Coming to that country, these ones processing dreadful prowess, beheld (the sea) reflecting the image of this entire mighty world. Arriving at the northern side of the Southern sea, those exceedingly powerful heroic monkeys took up their quarters there. Seeing the sea, here as if asleep, there, as if playful, and at another place with surges measuring mountains; and thronged with the foremost Dānavas inhabiting the nether regions; and capable of causing one's hair to stand on end, those powerful monkeys were seized with sadness. Seeing the sea, incapable of being crossed even as the sky, all the monkeys began to lament, saying,-What is to be done? That best of monkeys-(Angada), seeing the army cast down because of the sight of the sea, began to comfort the monkeys, afflicted with fear. We should not indulge in grief. Grief is injurious.-Grief destroys a person even as a wrathful serpent does a boy. He that, when the time is come for displaying his prowess, indulges in sorrow, growing weak in energy, fails to attain his objects. That night having passed away, Angada in company with the monkeys, joined by the old ones, again took counsel with them. That monkey-host surrounding Angada, resembled the host of Maruts environing Vasava. Who save Väli's son (stationed) at one place and at another Hanumān, could be capable of stilling that force? Then saluting the elders as well as army, the-graceful Angada-repressor of foes-~-spoke words fraught with sense, What person, endued with exceeding energy, shall now leap over the main? Who shall serve that subduer of enemies, Sugrīva, ever intent on truth? What monkey can leap over an hundred Yojanas? Who shall deliver leaders of herds from a mighty fear? By whose favour shall we, crowned with success and rendered happy, returning from this place, shall behold our wives and our son, and our homes? By whose favour shall we joyfully meet Rama, and the mighty Laksmana, and that dweller in the woods, Sugrīva? If any monkey among you is competent to bound over the deep, let him at once confer on us Dakșină in the shape of deliverance from fear. Hearing Angada's speech, none said anything, And that host off monkeys wavered. Then that foremost of monkeys addressed those monkeys, saying-All of you are the foremost of strong ones, and of steady prowess. And you have sprung in blameless lines, and are ever honoured (by the king). And yet no one of you can promise to undertake this journey? You best of monkeys, unfold your respective powers in bounding.