When Sumitra's son, Laksmana, had spoken thus, flaming in energy, Tārā of face fair as the moon, said to him, O Lakşmaņa, you ought not to speak thus: and this lord of monkeys does not deserve to hear this harsh speech from your lips, in especial. Sugrīva is not ungrateful, or cunning, or heartless; nor does he, O hero, deal in falsehood; nor is he deceitful. Nor has the heroic monkey, O hero, forgotten the good, incapable of being done by others in battle, that the hero; Rāma, has done in his behalf. O afflictor of foes, through Rāma's grace, Sugriva has here attained fame and the enduring empire of the monkeys, as well as Umā and myself. Having lain down miserable before, Sugrīva, now that he has attained this supreme happiness, does not heed his urgent duties, like the ascetic Visvamitra. Attached to Ghrtāci, O Laksmana, the pious and mighty ascetic, Viśvāmitra looked upon ten years as one day; and that best of those conversant with time, Viśvāmitra of mighty energy, did not perceive that the time (for doing a certain act) had arrived. What is to be said of other people? O Lakşmaņa, it behoveth Rāma to forgive one who has all the bodily exigencies, who is fatigued, and who is not satisfied with the pleasures of Kama. Nor, O Laksmana, does it behove you, without ascertaining the exact import of things, to become suddenly subject to wrath, like any inferior person. O chief of men, persons endowed with the quality of goodness, like to you, do not suffer themselves to come under the sway of passion, without (at first) heedfully revolving matters. I crave your favour with concentrated mind, O you that know morality. Renounce the mighty grief that springs from your ire. This is my conviction that for compassing Rāma's welfare, Sugrīva can resign Umã and myself, and Angada, and the kingdom and wealth and corn and animals. Slaying that worst of Rākṣasas, Sugrīva will bring Rāghava with Sītā, like to the moon accompanied by Rohiņi. Without slaying hundreds of thousands of Kotis, and thirty-six Ayutas, thousands and hundreds of irrepressible Rākṣasas wearing shapes at will, (Rāma) can not slay Rāvana, by whom Maithili has been carried away. They are incapable, O Laksmana, of being slain (by Rāma) in battle, unless he is supported (by others). Rāvana is a wily warrior, and hence is the special need of Sugrīva. That knowing lord of monkeys, Väli, had told me all this. I do not know how Rāvana had secured this host: I say what I had heard from Vāli. For rendering you assistance, the foremost monkeys have been despatched in order to summon to the conflict numerous principal monkeys. Expecting these powerful and exceedingly strong ones, for attaining Rāghava's end, this lord of monkeys does not (yet) sally out. Things, O Saumitri, have beforehand been so satisfactorily arranged by Sugrīva, that this very day the mighty one will be joined with all those monkeys. This very day billions of bears and thousands of golangulas as well as innumerable Koțis of monkeys flaming in energy shall join you. Therefore, O subduer of enemies, banish your anger. Seeing this your face wrought up with wrath, and your eyes appearing like red sores, the wives of the best of monkeys experience no peace, and they are agitated by the fear that exercised them of late.