Assuming the quality of goodness and energy on mount Lamba furnished with elevated summits, and resembling long masses of clouds, Hanuman, son to the Wind-god capable of concluding in harmony with season, possessed of exceeding strength an elephant among monkeys-entered Lańkā by night, affluent with charming woods and waters-the city governed by Rāvaņa; beautified with edifices resembling autumnal clouds; sounding like to Vitapāvati* herself with infuriated elephants (stationed) at her graceful gateways; containing white gates with ornainented arches; arches; resembling the handsome Bhogavatī inhabited and protected by serpents. And suddenly coming to that (city) resembling Amarāvatī, scattered with clouds charged with lightning, having hosts of luminaries, and tumultuous with the roars of blustering blasts, *Alakā, the city of Kubera, King of Yaksas. Girt round by a mighty golden wall, ringing with the tinklings of tiny bells; and embellished with pennons, he growing exceedingly exhilarated, made towards the wall. And beholding the city all round, furnished with golden doors; having quadrangular courts composed of lapises; ornamented with plastered jewelled pavements studded with all gems, crystals, and pearls; with mad elephants of burnished gold and speckless white silver, with stairs of lapises, (doors) devoid of dust with their centres composed of crystal and with stately halls; elegant, and adjoining mansions seeming as if reaching up to the heavens. Resounding with Krauñca as and peacocks; frequented by swans, and everywhere resonant with the sounds of trumpets and ornaments. And then beholding the city Lankā, resembling Vasvokasāra,* and appearing to mount to the welkin, the monkey Hanumān was filled with rapture. *Alaka. And seeing the delightful, . divine and prosperous city of Lankā belonging to the lord of Rākşasas, that one endowed with prowess thought within himself, This city protected by the forces of Rãvaņa with their hands holding upraised arms, is incapable of being forcibly subdued by any other. This place can be easily entered by Kumuda, and Angada, as well as by that mighty monkey, Suşeņa; and also by Mainda and Dvivida. And there is way also for the offspring of the Sun, and that monkey, Kuśaparva, as well as of that foremost of monkeys, Rksya, and myself." Having witnessed the prowess of Rāghava, as well as the vigour of Lakşmaņa, the monkey was filled with joy. And that redoubtable monkey beheld the metropolis of the monarch of the Räkşasas; having for her cloth the sea; for her pendants, cow-stalls and stables; for her breasts, turrets mounted on the walls for discharging missils, decked out like a damsel; with her darkness dispelled by bright lights and the mighty monkey son to the Wind-god was met by the city in her native shape. Seeing that best of monkeys, Lankā, ruled by Rāvana arising of herself with her countenance rendered deformed, stood before the heroic son of the Wind and, emitting a tremendous roar, addressed the offspring of the Wind-god, saying, O you that had the woods for the home, who are you? And on what errand had you come hither? Tell me while yet you had your vital powers left in you. O monkey, for certain you are unable to obtain entry into this Laňkā, protected by the forces of Rāvaņa, and carefully guarded on all sides. Thereat, the heroic Hanumān spoke to her staying in front of him, “I shall tell you all about that anent which you questionest me. Who are you that having deformed eyes stayest at the gate of this city? And what for, O frightful one, do you rail at me in wrath?" Hearing Hanumān's speech, Lankā, capable of wearing forms at will, waxing wroth addressed the Wind-god's offspring, saying, I, who am incapable of being repressed, abiding by the mandate of the high-souled sovereign of the Rākşasas, protect this city. You are unable to enter this city, passing me by. You shall to-day, losing your life and slain by me, sleep (the sleep of death). O monkey, I am the City of Lankā myself. I every way guard (all that is here.) that I told you. Hearing Lankā's words, Hanumān, son to the Wind-god, foremost of monkeys-exerting himself (to secure victory), stood like another hill. Seeing her appear in the form of a deformed female, that foremost and best-of monkeys endued with intelligence, possessed of prowess, said. I will behold the city of Lanká, crowned with turrets, walls and ornamented arches. It is for this that I have come here, Great is my curiosity. I come forsooth to see the woods and groves and gardens of Lankā here, as well as her principle edifices. Hearing these words of his, Lankā capable of wearing forms at will, again addressed him in a speech fraught with dissonant letters: you of perverse understanding, O worst of monkeys, without in the first instance) vanquishing me, you cannot to-day behold this city ruled by the monarch of the Rākşasas. Thereat that tiger of a monkey said to that female ranger of the night. After seeing this city, O gentle one, I shall go away even a I have come. Thereupon, setting up a mighty and terrible roar, Laikā filled with vehemence, struck at Hanumān with her palm. That tiger-like monkey, the energetic offspring of the wind-god, on being lustily struck by Larkā, emitted a tremendous roars. And (Hanuman) fastened the fingers of his left hand into a box, and transported with rage, dealt it to her. Considering that she was a female he did not give way to excessive wrath. And struck at (by Hanumān), that ranger of the night, of a deformed face, her body overcome, suddenly dropped to the earth. And the energetic and heroic Hanumān, seeing her measure her length, in consideration of her being a female, was filled with compassion. Thereat, exceedingly agitated, Lanka addressed the monkey, Hanumān, in humble words, with their letters faltering, O mighty-armed one, be propitious to me! Do you save me, O best of monkeys, O placid one. Those that are gifted with strength and are endued with exceeding vigour, ever bear regard to the dignity of the sceiptures. By your prowess, O Monkey, had you, O hero, O you gifted with wondrous strength, vanquished me myself, who am the City of Lankā. Listen to this narration, which I, O foremost of monkeys, deliver to you; as to how the selfcreate Himself conferred a boon on me. When a certain monkey shall by his prowess, bring you under his sway, then shall you understand that a fear is come to me, in consequence of my meeting with you. The truth ordained by the self-create know no turning. The destruction of the unrighteous king Rāvaņa together with all the Rākşasas, has come about in consequence of Şītā (having been carried away). Therefore, O best of monkeys, do you enter the city ruled by Rāvaņa; and accomplish such tasks as you wishest to. Entering this splendid city lying under an imprecation, governed by the chief of the Rāks asas, do you at your will happily repairing everywhere, search for the chaste daughter of Janaka. .