Casting his eyes on Lankā, the monkey, his wish attained, increasing his person and bursting with spirits, considered as to how to give the coup de grace to his exertions. What recently is to done by me here to finish this business, that may afflict them the more? I have ravaged the wood, and slain the choice Rākşasas, and destroyed by main force a portion of the army. Now it remains to demolish the fortifications. On the fortifications being destroyed, my work shall nave its toils crowned with joy. By undergoing slight labour in this business, I shall have my pains furnished with fruit. That bearer of sacrificial offerings (Vide ante) who flame on my tail, it is my duty to propitiate him with these excellent edifices. Thereat that mighty monkey, with his tail aglow, and resembling a cloud (luminous) with lightning, began to range before the dwellings in Lankā. And that monkey with a calm mind, eyeing (all round), ranged one house from another, and gardens, and stately piles. And that one gifted with exceeding vehemence, and in strength resembling the Wind, bounding up set fire to the dwelling of Prahasta. Then Hanuman endowed with prowess, leaping up, set to Mahaparsva's mansion fire resembling that at the universal dissolution. And (then) the mighty monkey darting up, set fire to Vajradanştra's; and (then) that highly energetic one set fire to Suka's and to the intelligent Sārana's. And the leader of monkey bands in the same way burnt down Indrajit's mansion; and then he burnt the abodes of Sumāli and Jambumălī; and Rasmiketu's mansion and Suryasatru's, and Hrasvakarma's, and the Raksasa Romasa's; and the houses of Yuddhonmatta, and Matta, and the Rākṣasa Dhvajagrīva, and the calm Vidyujjihva, and Hastimukha; and of Karāla, and of Viśāla, and of Sonitāksa; and Kumbhakarma's mansion, and Nikumbha's, and the residence of Yajnasatru, and of Brahmasatru. And leaving alone the dwelling of Vibhişaņa, that exceedingly energetic one-foremost of monkeys-by and by burnt (all the houses there). In those costly mansions and dwellings, that famous one, that foremost of monkeys, burnt all the wealth of those affluent persons. Having passed the dwellings of all, that powerful and auspicious one approached the residence of the lord of Rākşasas, Rāvaņa. And in that foremost of mansions, adorned or with various gems, resembling Meru Mandara, graced with diverse auspicious things, he set to the same, fire flaming at the end of his tail. And the heroic Hanumān roars, resembling a cloud (appearing) at the end of a Yuga. And assisted by the wind, that highly powerful and vehement one (Fire) flaimed up, like fire at the wreck of all, and the fire attained energy. The wind spreading the flaming fire all round those dwellings, those mansions furnished with golden networks; and containing pearls and gems; enjewelled and magnificent, were shorn of their splendour. And cracked edifices began to topple down to the ground, like the mansions of Siddhās falling from the firmament of the exhaustion of their righteousness. And there arose a mighty uproar of those Rākşasas, as, bereft of their good fortune, despairing of preserving their abodes, they rushed in all directions, "Forsooth it is Fire himself that has come hither in the form of a monkey.” And females crying with babes on their breasts, suddenly plunged (into the fire). And some fair ones with hair dishevelled, and surrounded on all sides with fire, as they fell down from dwellings, looked lovely like lightning from the welkin. And he (Hanuman) saw various kinds of metals, mixed with diamonds, and coral, and lapises and pearls and silver, running down in streams from the mansions. And as Fire is not cloyed with wood and straw, Hanumān never at all felt satiety on slaying those foremost of Räkşasas. And the Earth could not contain the Rākşasas slain by Hanumăn. And as Rudra had burnt down Tripura, the vehement and high-souled monkey, Hanumān, burnt down Lankā. And rising to the brow of Lanka's mount, (Trikūţa on which Lankā rested) the fire of terrific energy kindled by the impetuous Hanumān, spread wide his tongues. With the Wind assisting him, the smokeless Fire in the dwellings, with his flames feeding on the bodies of the Rākşasas representing sacrificial offerings, spread his magnitude, touching the horizen-resembling the conflagration kindled the universal dissolution. And possessing the fierce energy of a koti suns, the nighty Fire completely encompassing the entire Lanka, increased (in volume), riving at the mundane Egg with various sounds resembling thunder-claps. And the Fire of terrific might, having his flames resembling Kinsuka blossoms, rising up to the sky, clouds caused by volumes of smoke arising from extinguished fire, in hue resembling blue lotuses, looked exceedingly beautiful. Either the thunder-bolt-bearing Indra the Great-chief of celestials, or Yama himself, or Varuna, or the Wind-god, or the Fire generated by Rudra's third eye, or the Sun, or Dhanda, or Soma. This is no monkey, this is verily Kāla (A name of Yama) himself or is this the Rākşasa annihilating Fire or Brahmä himself, the Great sire of all, the four-faced Disposer of the world's destinies, come hither, wearing the form of a monkey? Or is this Visnu's Energy, inconceivable, unutterable, infinite and sole, and of surpassing power, now come hither in its own illusory nature, assuming a monkey-form?" Seeing that city suddenly consumed, with her souls, dwellings, and trees, Raksasas of note, assembled together, thus talked to each other. And then Lankä, suddenly consumed with Raksasas, horses, cars, serpents, crowds of birds, beasts and trees, began to bewail tumultuously and loud in forlorn guise. O father! O son! O love! O friend! O lord of my life and frame! all our religious merit is abolished "Indulging in various lamentations, the Rākşas thus created a mighty and frightful uproar." And with the flames encircling her, and her foremost heroes fallen, and her warriors destroyed, Lankā, overcome by the might of Hanumān's wrath, became as if she had been blighted by an imprecation. Then the mighty-minded Hanumān beheld the Rākşasas in terror and trepidation and cast down, and Lankā marked by fire and bright flames, even as the Self-sprung eye the world destroyed by his rage. And devastating the forest filled with many excellent trees, slaying many a terrible Rākşasa in conflict, and burning down the city of Lankā filled with picturesque houses, the monkey, Hanumān, Wind-god's son, stationed himself there. And destroying many a Rākṣasa, felling many trees in the forest and setting fire to the houses of the Raksasas, the high-souled (monkey) became engaged in thoughts touching Rāma. Thereupon all the celestials praised highly the high-souled, excellent and mighty son of the Wind-god, foremost of heroic monkeys, gifted with the velocity of the of the Wind. All the celestials, the foremost ascetics, the Gandharvas, the Vidyādharas, the Pannāgas, and all other great heroes, attained excess of delight. And having devastated the forest, slain the Rākşasas in conflict and burnt the grand city of Lankā, the great monkey appeared there. And seated on the variegated top of a splendid and high mansion, the foremost of monkeys, spreading the rays of his burning tail, looked like to the sun of many rays. And having consumed ihe city of Lankä, the great monkey quenched the fire of his tail in the Ocean. Thereupon beholding Lankā burnt down, the celestials along with Gandharvas, Siddhās, and the great ascetics, were struck with wonder. And having consumed ihe city of Lankä, the great monkey quenched the fire of his tail in the Ocean. Thereupon beholding Lankā burnt down, the celestials along with Gandharvas, Siddhās, and the great ascetics, were struck with wonder.