Saying this, the daughter of the king Janaka, bathed her countenance with tears and hanging down her head began to lament. And she began to roll on the earth like to a colt as if she was mad, possessed by a devil and had lost her sense. I, the spouse of Rāma, who was drawn away at a distance by the Rākşasa (Mārīca) assuming shapes at will, was seized and borne away by Rāvana. A captive of the Rākşasis, subject to their terrible threats and taunts, sunk in grief and anxiety, I desire not to keep my life. Of what avail are wealth, ornament and life to me, who am living in the midst of the Răkşasas and separated from Ráma, of the mighty car? Forsooth my my life is is made of stone, imperishable and immortal since it is not riven asunder even by this mighty grief. Woe to me! who am unchaste and vile and my life is vicious, since breathe I still in the absence of my lord. What of fixing my fancy on that night-ranger Rāvaņa, my meaner foot even shall not touch him? That (demon) who is courting me in this terrible way, does not know himself, his own race and that I loathe him so much. What more shall I speak to you, I shall never consent to Rāvana's prayer, I might be rent from limb to limb or burnt in fire. Rāghava is grateful, true, wise and kind. I fear it is through my ill-luck that he dose not feel pity for me. Will he not take me back who alone slew the thousands of the Rākşasas in Janasthāna? I have been captured by Rāvana, a Rākşasa of feeble prowess. Forsooth my lord is capable of slaying this Rāvana in conflict. Will not that Rāma regain me, by whom was killed in the forest of Dandaka, Virādha, the foremost of the Rākṣasa crew? Although situated in the midst of the ocean, Lankā is unapproachable by others, but Raghava's arrows shall also reach here. (I am at a loss to ascertain) why Rāma of firm prowess, dose not regain me, his beloved spouse who have been borne away by the Räkşasa. Methinks Rāma dose not know that I am here, or else, powerful as he is, he would not have put up with this insult. That lord of vultures, who could have informed Rāghava, of my being born away by the Rākṣasa, was killed by Rāvana in the battle. O great was the work done by him, who, old as he was, for my sake, addressed himself to bring about Rāvana's destruction. If Rāghava could know that I was here, he, exceedingly wroth, would have cleared the earth with his arrows, of the Raksasas. He would have then burnt down the city of Lankā, dried up the deep and blotted out the name and fame of Rāvana. And from each ruined home would have risen the Rākşasa widow's groans and cries like to those of mine. Instituting enquiries, along with Lakṣmaṇa, he shall soon reduce Lankā to this plight. And observed by them the enemy shall not live for a moment. And in no time, shall Lankā, assume the appearance of a cremation ground, having all her high ways enveloped with smoke issuing out of the funeral pyres, and filled with vultures. And soon shall this desire of mine be fulfilled. All these words of mine do sound improbable now but they all indicate your misfortune. Besides from these bad omens, that are to be seen here, it appear, that Lankä shall soon be shorn of her grace. The lord of the Rākşasas, the vicious Rāvana being killed, forsooth shall Lankā, divested of wealth, appear like a widow. This Lankā, which is now full of pious ceremonies, shall, on the death of the Rākṣasas and their master, appear like a husbandless woman. For certain, shall I soon hear the cries and groans in every house, of the daughters of the Rākşasas worn with grief. If that heroic Rāma, having dark-blue eyes, comes to know that I am in the abode of the Rākşasas, the city of Lankā shall be burnt down with his arrows and shall be stricken with darkness and shorn of grace and all the foremost of the Rākşasas shall be destroyed. The time which was appointed by the vile and cruel Rāvana, has arrived. And that vicious wretch has resolved to destroy me now. There is no crime which cannot be perpetrated by those vicious demons. Mighty is the disaster that shall arise on account of this crime—the Räkşasas who live on flesh do not know what virtue is. Forsooth shall the Raksasa serve me for his morning meal. What shall I do without my lord of comely presence? Debarred from my husband's presence, stricken with grief and not beholding Rāma, having dark-blue eyes, I shall soon meet with death. Rāma, the elder brother of Bharata, dose not know that I am still alive or else he and Lakşmaņa would have ransacked the whole world for me. Or renouncing his body on this earth for my grief, the heroic elder brother of Lakşmaņa, has repaired to the celestial region. Blessed the celestials, Gandharvas, Siddhās and mighty ascetics who are beholding my heroic lotus-eyed Rāma. Or that highly intelligent royal ascetic desirous of securing piety and freed from the troubles of life, has no need of a wife like me. Or people have fancy for what they see and are which disappear as soon as the object is out of sight. The ungrateful are capable of renouncing their love, but not Rāma. Or there might be some folly in me. Or on the wane of my good luck have been separated from the excellent Rāma. Death is more preferable to me than life since. I have been separated from the high-souled heroic Rāma, of unblemished character and the slayer of foes. Or those two brothers, the foremost of men, laying aside their weapons, and living on fruits and roots, have been wandering in the forest. Or those two heroic brothers Rāma and Laksmana, have been, by treachery, put to death, by the vicious-souled Rāvana, the lord of Raksasas. At this time of distress, I do with all my heart long for death, (but alas!) even death is not approaching me is this my misery. Oh blessed are those high-souled, great ascetics abiding by truth and having their senses in control, who have no objects of love or displeasure. They are not distressed with misery for their objects of love or grief for them whom they do not love. They are freed from them and I do bow to those high-souled ones. Being forsaken by the beloved Rāma, knowing his ownself, and brought under the control of Ravana, I shall renounce my life.