The principal monkeys, having been ordered by the monkey-king, speedily went in all directions to their destinations for the purpose of seeing Vaidehi. And on all sides they explore watery expanses, and streams, and lawns, and commons, and cities, and tracts rendered impassable by torrents. And the leaders of monkey-herds search all those countries, countries, described described by Sugrīva,-containing mountains, woods and forests. Engaged during the day in search of Sītā, at night the monkeys seek the ground (for sleep). In every place, by day coming to trees aye enjoying every season, and crowned with fruits, the monkeys prepared their beds at night.* *The sense is rather obscure, it being difficult to understand the relation their beds bore to the neighbouring trees. Counting that day* as the first, the principal monkeys, after the month had run out, resigning all hope, came to the Fountain and met with the monkey-king. *i.e. the day of their departure. And having explored the Eastern regions, as directed, the exceedingly strong Vinata not having been able to see Sītā, came back, in company with his counsellors. And then that mighty ape, Satavali, daunted in spirits, arrived with his forces, after having searched all through the North. And having searched the West in company with his monkeys, Sușeņa, on the month being complete, presented himself before Sugrīva. And coming to Sugrīva seated along with Rāma behind the Fountain, and saluting the former, Susena said to Sugriva. Searched have been all the mountains, and deep woods, and streams, and islands embosomed in the ocean, and the various provinces. And also searched have been all the caves which have been described by you; and searched have been all the groves entertwined with plants; and thickets; and difficult and uneven grounds. And huge animals have been sought out and slain (by us). And all the impracticable places we have explored again and again. O lord of monkeys, possessed of great strength and nobly born, it is Hanumān who will be able to ascertain the whereabouts of Mithila's daughter. And the Wind's son, Hanumān, has followed even the has by which Sītā has gone.