Having said this to that female clad in a piece of black deer-skin, Hanumān asked that highly religious ascetic practising pious offices, Having rashly entered this cave enveloped in gloom, we have been exercised with hunger and thirst; and are extremely faint. And, having entered this mighty cave underneath the earth, we have become thirsty. And, seeing all these wonderful phenomena, we have become afflicted, and bewildered; and have lost our sense. To whom belong these golden trees resembling the infantine sun; And the pure fruits and roots, and the houses and vehicles of gold and silver,-veiled in networks of jewels, and furnished with golden windows? And by whose energy are these golden trees (here), bearing flowers, crowned with fruits, grateful to the sight, and breathing rich odour? And golden lotuses spring in in lucent water,-how golden fishes are discovered in it along with tortoises! Have these sprung from your power; or do they owe their existence to the ascetic energy of any other? It behoves you to relate all this to us who are ignorant of everything. Thus addressed by Hanumān, the female ascetic practising righteousness, and engaged in the welfare of all beings, replied to Hanumān, O foremost of monkeys, there is one, named Maya, spreader of illusions. By him has this entire golden grove been constructed through his wonderful power of construction. He that as reared this excellent golden grove, and this charming mansion, was formerly the Viśvakarmā* of the principal Dänavas. *The name of the celestial architect. Having for a thousand years thousand years practised austerities in this vast forest, he obtained a boon from the Great-father,-in virtue of which he had attained consummate mastery in his art, as well as absolute control over the materials required therein. Having accomplished everything, that powerful one, commanding every enjoyment, for a time happily dwelt in this mighty forest. Then he, happening to conceive a passion for an Apsara, Hema (by name), Purandara, vigorously wielding his thunder-bolt, struck him dead. Then Brahmä conferred on Hemā this fine forest and this golden mansion, with the perpetual privilege of enjoying every pleasure herein. I, Svayamprabhā by name,-the daughter of Merusāvarņi, guard this house of Hemā, O foremost of monkeys. Hemā, skilled in dance and song, is my dear friend. having received her blessing, I guard this vast forest. What is your errand? And why is it that you have arrived at these lone woods? And how have you managed to see this inaccessible forest? Having partaken of these fruits and roots intended for use, and drunk, do you detail all this to me.