Hearing his accents faltering through grief, the leaders of monkey-herds, alarmed by his action*, did not repose confidence in his speech. Karmaņā (instru.) by his action. The commentator explains: alarmed by his speech about eating up the monkeys. The passage is Seated for the purpose of fasting to death, the monkeys, seeing the vulture, with terror thought within themselves, he shall eat us all up. If he eat us up, who have sat down to fast to death, we shall secure success, and speedily attain our end. Then those monkey-chiefs resolved thus. And descending from the summit of the mountain, Angada spoke to the vulture, There was a lord of monkeys named Riksaraja, endowed with prowess. That king, O bird, was my grandsire. He had two virtuous sons, exceedingly powerful both-Vāli and Sugriva. My father, Vali, was famed in the world for his deeds. It came to pass that mighty monarch of all this earth, descendant of the Ikṣwākus, the great and graceful car warrior, Rāma, son to Dasaratha, intent upon the injunction of his sire, resorting to the path of righteousness, entered the woods of Dandaka in company with his brother, Lakşmaņa and his wife Vaidehī. His spouse was forcibly carried away from Janasthāna. And the friend of Rāma's father, the king of vultures, named Jatayu, saw Videha's daughter, Sītā, as she was being carried away in the sky. And after having thrown down Rāvana from his car, and placed Maithili on the ground, (that vulture) old and overcome with fatigue was (at length) slain by Ravana in battle. Thus slain by the powerful Rāvana, the vulture, having had his funereal obsequies performed by Rama. (himself), has attained excellent state. Then Rāghava made friends with my uncle, the high-souled Sugrīva; and he also slew my sire. My father had debarred Sugrīva from the kingdom along with his counsellors; but Rāma, having slain Vāli, installed him (Sugrīva). And established in the monarchy by him (Rāma), Sugriva is (now) the master of the monkeys and king of all the foremost monkeys. By him have we been sent. Despatched hither by Rāma, we have searched for Sītā all round, but Vaidehī we have not found, as one does not find the solar splendour at night. It came to pass that, having heedfully explored the Dandaka forest, we through ignorance entered a cave lying open before. That cave, you must know, was constructed by the illusive energy of Maya. And there we spent a month the term which had been fixed by the monarch. Doing the behests of the king of monkeys, we, having overstayed the terms which had been appointed, have from fear sat here down for the purpose of fasting to death. On that Kākutstha being wrought up with wrath, as well as Sugrīva together with Lakş maņa, we, repairing thither, shall lose our lives.