Thereupon coming down from the tree, Hanumān, the highly effulgent son of Wind, having a coral-red countenance and attired in a humble guise, approached Sītā and joining reverentially his palms, addressed her with the following sweet words. Who are you, O you having eyes like lotus petals and wearing a soiled silken cloth, who are waiting there holding a branch of the tree? Why are the tears of sorrow flowing from your eyes like to drops of water falling from lotus petals? Who are you, O most fair of face, among the celestials, Asuras, Nāgas, Gandharvas, Rāks asas, and Yaksas and Kinnaras? Do the Rudra's (The Rudras are manifestations of Śiva) claim your birth O you fair damsel,? Or the swift gods who ride the storm? Or the Vasus? (A kind of demi-gods of whom six are enumerated viz., Dhava, Druva. Soma or the Moon, Visnu, Anila or wind, Anala or fire, Prabhusa and Prabhava) You appear to me as of a celestial race. Are you Rohiņā, the best and most accomplished of the stars, who, left from the Moon, has fallen down from the abode of the celestials? Who are you O blessed dame, O you having blameless eyes? Are you, O lotus-eyed damsel, the blessed Arundhuti, who has fled in wrath or jealous pride form the side of her lord (Vasistha)? Or O lovely damsel, who is the son, father, brother or husband gone from this world for whom you are weeping? Yet by your tears and sighs, by the earth you are treading and by calling on a monarch's name it appears that you are not a celestial. (The celestials never shed tears nor touch the ground when they walk.) But from the marks on your person it appear that you are either the consort or the daughter of a king. Are you that Sītā, I do ask you, who had been stolen and borne away by Rāvana from Janasthāna? May good betide you! From your wretched plight, your unrivalled beauty and your ascetic garb, you are, I ween, for certain, the queen of Rāma. Hearing those words of Hanumān and greatly delighted at Rāma's name, Vaidehī spoke to him. I am the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha, knowing his own self, the foremost of the kings of the world and the slayer of the enemy's host, and the daughter of Janaka the high-souled king of Vaideha. My name is Sītā and I am the consort of the highly intelligent Rāma. I lived twelve years in Rāghava's abode, enjoying every earthly comfort and satisfying every desire. And at the beginning of the thirteenth year the king, advised by his priest, arranged for the installation of the descendant of Ikşvākus (Rāma) on the throne. And while the articles for the installation were being collected, the queen Kaikeyi addressed her lord saying. I shall not drink or eat for days and this shall be the end of my existence if Räma be installed. If you do not wish to falsify the vow (This refers to the vow which Dasaratha made to Kaikeyſ at the time of the war going on between the celestials and the Asuras) you made to me,O best of kings, let Rāma then repair to the forest. The monarch was truthful and remembering his vow and hearing the unpleasant and vile words of Kaikeyi lost himself (in grief). Thereupon the old king abiding by truth, weeping, begged of his eldest son, the kingdom. The graceful Räma killed his sire's command more than the installation, and resolving within him, promised to obey his words. Rāma, having truth for his prowess, never, for his life, takes back what her gives, never speaks an untruth and always speaks truth. Leaving aside his costly attire, the highly glorious (Rāma) renounced with all his heart the kingdom and gave me over to his mother. But myself wearing the garb of an ascetic, repaired speedily before him. Separated from him, I do not like to live even in the celestial region. The great son of Sumitrā, the enhancer of friends' joys, to follow his elder brother, dressed himself in bark and kusa. Thus abiding by our sire's behest, and taking firm vows we entered a dreary forest never seen before. While that one, of unmitigated effulgence was thus living in the forest of Dandaka, I, his consort, was stolen by the vicious-souled Rākşasa—Rāvaņa. He has kindly allowed me two months respite after which I shall be slain.