And struck with his (Indrajit's) deed, that one of dreadful vigour, Hanumān, his eyes reddened in wrath, steadily looked at the lord of Rākşas; flaming in gorgeous and precious gold, with a splendid diadem studded with pearls; (adorned with) excellent ornaments, containing diamonds and costly gems, (seeming to have been forged by the mind; apparelled in costly linen; smeared with red sandal pastc, and beautifully painted with various and variegated devices; (e.g. the there horizontal marks painted on the forehead by Saivas and Sāktas) looking splendid with his sightly yet terrible eyes; having shinny, sharp and long teeth, with hanging lips; and that hero (saw) that one of great energy, radient with ten heads; like to Mandara with its summits containing serpents; resembling a mass of blue collyrium; with his breast graced by a chain; with his countenance possessed of the lustre of the moon; looking like a cloud beside the newrisen Sun; with his dreadful arms bound with keyūras, and graced with excellent sandal paste, brilliant with Angadas, and resembling fiveheaded serpents; seated on a superb seat, upon a spacious, variegated, and gay sheet embellished with crystals, and studded with gems; ministered on all sides by gorgeously adorned damsels, bearing hair-furnished fans, the strength-elated surrounded by four Rākşasa—his counsellors versed in the mystery of counsel, viz., Durdhara, Prahasta, the Raksasa Mahāpārśva, and the minister Nikumbha, like the entire world girt round by the four seas, and encouraged by other counsellors, fair of forms One and versed in counsel, even like the sovereign of celestials by the celestials. Hanumān beheld the immensely energetic lord of Rākşasas surrounded (on all sides by his advisers), like a cloud containing water on a summit of Meru. Undergoing exceeding trouble at the hands of the Rākṣasa of dreadful prowess, (Hanumān) struck with mighty amaze, gazed at the lord of Raksasas. Seeing the sovereign of Rākşasas, appearing splendid, Hanuman, bewildered by his effulgence, mentally reflected. Ah! the form! Ah! the patience! Ah! the strength! Ah! the splendour! Ah! the entire auspiciousness of the king of Rākşasas! If the lord of Rākṣasas were not impious to the height, this one could well be the protector themselves of the celestial regions with Śakra. But in consequence of the fell and remorseless acts of this one, which are the aversion of very one, all the worlds with gods and demons hold him in fear. This one, being angered, dares to convert this earth into one entire ocean." Beholding the potency of the Rākṣasa king of immeasurable prowess, the intelligent monkey thus indulged in a variety of thought.