The highly effulgent son of the Wind-god, Hanumān, to create Sītā's confidence, again addressed her with the following words. O great dame, I am a monkey, the messenger of the highly intelligent Rāma. Behold this precious ring with Rāma's name engraven on it, given by your high-souled lord and brought as a token to create your confidence. Do you take heart and may good betide you, there will be an end of your grief soon. Taking the ring that used to deck her lord's finger and looking at it, Jānaki seemed to have actually got her lord. Her graceful countenance, having large eyes, looked, with delight, like to the Moon released from the possession of Rāhu. And greatly delighted at her husband's news that modest damsel, affectionately welcoming Hanumăn, applauded that great monkey. O foremost of monkeys, you are brave, powerful and wise, since you had alone smitten this abode of the Rākşasas. You had, with they laudable prowess, leaped, a hundred leagues, across the ocean, the abode of marine mousters, taking it for Gospada. (A measure as much as a cow's foot-step will hold.) O foremost of monkeys, I do not consider you as an ordinary monkey, since you do not care or fear Ravana. O best of monkeys, you are worthy of my welcome, since you had been despatched by Rāma, knowing self, Rāma, hard of being got at, has not sent you, specially to me, without a trial of your prowess. By my good luck, is it all well with the virtuous-souled and truthful Rāma and the highly powerful Lakşmaņa the enhancer of Sumitra's joy? And if Kākutstha lives untouched by ill, then why does he not burn the earth, encircled by the ocean with his ire like to the fire of dissolution? Or they are capable of discomfiting the celestials in a battle but me-thinks by my illluck, the end of my miseries has not arrived as yet. Is Rāma greatly pained? Does he grieve? Is that foremost of men making preparations of my rescue? Has he forgotten his work being overwhelmed with fear and poorliness of heart? Is that son of the king performing still his manly duties? Is that slayer of foes, desirous of acquiring victory, pleasing his friends still with forgiveness and gifts and dealing his enemies with punishment, sowing dassensions among them, and with other expedients? Is he still gaining friends and are friends gathering around him? Is he welcoming his friends and are they honouring him the more? Is that son of the king invoking the blessings of the celestials? Has he attained manliness and assistance from the celestials? Has Rāghava lost all his affection for me for my living at a distance from him? Will he save me from this disaster? Has not Rāma, ever used to happiness and unused to misery, been enfeebled by this disaster? Is he informed always of the welfare of Kauslyā, Sumitrā and Bharata? Is not Rāghava, worthy of honours, beside himself with grief in my absence? Will not Rāma rescue me? Will not Bharata, ever devoted to his brother, send out one Akşauhiņī of terrible soldiers under the command of his ministers for my rescue? Will not the graceful Sugrīva, the lord of the monkeys come to help ine with hosts of monkeys having huge teeth and nails? Will not the heroic Lakşmaņa, the enhancer of Sumitrā's joy, conversant with the use of weapons, burn down the Rākşasas with this shafts? Shall I not behold soon that Rāvana with his kinsmen has been destroyed in battle by Rāma with terrible weapons? Is not the gold-hued and lotus-smelling countenance (of Rāma) dried up my absence like to lotus dried up by the rays of the sun in shallow water? Does he still hold patience in his heart, who, renouncing his kingdom for virtue and repairing, on foot with me even to the forest, was not stricken with fear and grief? His love for his mother, father or any other person is not greater than or equal to his love for me. O messenger, I shall keep my life so long I do not hear anything about my dear one. Having addressed that lord of monkeys with these highly sound and sweet accents, that graceful and worshipful dame ceased, with a view to hear again from him pleasant tales regarding Rāma. Hearing the words of Sītā the terribly powerful Măruti, placing his joined palms on his head said, The lotus-eyed Rāma dose not know that you are here, and hence he has not been able to rescue you like to Purandara regaining Saci. Hearing about you from me soon shall Rāghava come assisted by a large army of monkeys and bears. Impeding the course of the unagitated deep and building by means of his terrible shafts, a bridge across it, Kākutstha, shall divest the city Lankā of all the Rākşasas. And forsooth shall Rāma destroy them, even if the celestials, or Death himself stand in his way. O worshipful dame, stricken with grief in your absence, Rāma is restless like to an elephant smitten by a lion. I can swear, O worshipful dame, by the mounts Mandara, Malaya, Vindhya, Sumeru, Dardura and all the fruits and roots, that you shall behold like to the rising of the full moon, the countenance of Rāma having beautiful eyes, graceful, Bimba-like lips and beautified with beautiful kundalas. You shall soon behold, O Vaidehī, Rāma, on the mount Prasravana, like to the performer of hundred sacrifices seated on the back of the elephant (Airăvata). Rāghava dose not take meat nor drink honeyế he takes every day in the evening boiled rice and such wild fruits as are sanctioned by the Sastras. His heart is so much attached to you, that he does not drive away even flies, insects and snakes from his body. Rāma is always engaged in meditations, overwhelmed with grief, and he has no other thought but seeing you. Rāma has no sleep and even when asleep that best of men awakes exclaiming in sweep accents, 'O Sītā!' He always welcomes you sighing and saying “O my dear love!", whenever he beholds any fruit, flower or any object liked by the ladies. O worshipful dame, he is always lamenting, exclaiming "O Sītā!, and that high-souled son of the king, to regain you, has resorted to ascetic observances." On hearing about Rāma, Sītā was greatly delighted and she was equally grieved on hearing of his sorrow. And it appeared like the rising of the moon and the appearance of the clouds at the same time in an autumnal night.