Then the eminently wise Angada, fatigued, spoke to all the monkeys, cheering them. Woods, and mountains, and rivers, and impenetrable wilds, and valleys, and mountain caverns have been thoroughly searched. But Jānakī we have failed to find anywhere,—or that wicked wight, the Rākṣasa that has ravished Sītā. We have spent a great part of the term that had been assigned by Sugrīva of stern commands. Therefore, banishing languor, sadness, and invading drowsiness, do you together search all round. Do you so search Sītā, that she may be found out (by us). High spirits, ability and forwardness in action, are said to conduce to success. Therefore it is that I speak thus to you. You dwellers of the wood, do you to day rummage this impenetrable wood; renouncing grief, do you again search through this forest. Those who act, for certain behold the fruit of their endeavours; but if people once give way to grief, they cannot again attain vigour. You monkeys, king Sugrīva is irascible; and inflicteth sharp punishments. He should be always feared, as also the magnanimous Rāma. I tell you this for your good. Act accordingly, if you list. And do you also express what else you are capable of. Hearing Angada's words Gandhamādana said in candid words faint from thirst and fatigue, What Angada has said to us is worthy of him, and is beneficial and good. Do you follow his speech. Let us afresh search hills, caves and rocks, vacant forests and mountain cascades,-in accordance with what the high-souled Sugrīva has laid down. Let all in a body rummage the wood, and the mountain caverns. There rising up, the mighty monkeys again began to range the South close with forests belonging to Vindhya. And the monkeys ascended the Silvern Hill resembling the autumnal welkin, graceful, and furnished with summits and valleys. And eager to behold Sītā, those excellent monkeys began to search the Lodhra wood, and the Saptaparņa forests. And ascending its top*, those ones endued with immense prowess, experiencing fatigue, could not find Vaidehi, the beloved spouse of Rama. *i.e. the top of the Silvern Hill. And having surveyed that hill having many a grot, so far as the eye could range, the monkeys looking all round, descended (the eminence). And having descended to the earth, the monkeys, bewildered, and losing their consciousness, rested for a while at the foot of a tree. And their fatigue having gone off a little, the monkeys, having been refreshed for a while, again prepared to explore the whole South. And the monkey chiefs, headed by Hanumān, having set out (on the search), began to range all through Vindhya.