When the vulture had offered oblations of water to the manes of his deceased brother and finished his ablutions, the monkey-chiefs sat down in that charming mountain, surrounding him. And inspired with confidence in the words of the Nisakara), Sampati, from delight, said to Angada, who was seated, surrounded by all the monkeys.' Remaining silent, do you, you monkeys, heedfully hear what I say. I will tell you truly how I came to know Maithili. My body being affected by solar heat, and my wings burnt by the rays of the sun, O sinless one, I formerly fell to this summit of Vindhya. On regaining my senses after six nights, during which I was insensible, I looked around in bewilderment, but could not recognise anything whatever. Then closely viewing oceans and mountains, rivers and tanks, and woods and countries, my thoughts came back to me. Seeing this place abounding in cheerful birds, containing woods and crested with summits, I for certain concluded it to be Vindhya on the shores of the Southern sea. And here lay a sacred asylum, honoured even by the celestials, and here dwelt a saint named Niśākara, of fierce austerities. After Niśākara cognizant of virtue had gone to heaven, I bereft of that saint, passed eight thousand years in this mountain. Descending with difficulty from the uneven top of Vindhya, I again came* to the earth covered with sharp-pointed grass. *While the saint was staying here. I was eager to see the saint; and (therefore), with much ado I came to him; and Jatāyu and myself saw that saint many a time and oft. A fragrant breeze blew about the hermitage; and no tree was found that did not bear flowers and fruits. Approaching the holy asylum, I, desirous of beholding the worshipful Niśākara, waited at the foot of a tree. Then at a distance I saw the saint, flaming in energy and irrepressible,-returning northwards. As creatures gather round a giver, bears and Srimaras, tigers lions, and various reptiles, were going along, surrounding him. And knowing that the saint had arrived (at his home), the animals went away, as go away forces together with counsellors, when the sovereign has entered (his palace). The saint was glad on seeing me. Then reentering his asylum for a short space, he came out and enquired for my mission. O mild one, in consequence of your feathers having undergone alteration, I cannot recognise you. Your two wings have been blasted by fire; and your powers in your frail frame are in the same condition). After time I saw two vultures like to wind in speed,-kings of vultures, brothers, wearing shapes at will. You are I know, elder, O Sampati; and Jatayu is younger to you. Assuming human forms, you had taken hold of my feet. Now, what ailment has attacked you? And why have your plumes fallen off? And who has dealt this punishment to you? Do you tell all this to me, who am asking you.