Seeing the Ten-necked one of mighty energy, that foremost of monkeys, endued with strength, calmly spoke to him words containing sense, I have come to you at you command of Sugriva, O lord of Raksasas. Your brother, the king of monkeys, enquires after your welfare. Listen to the desire of your brother, the highsouled Sugrīva, and his words fraught with righteous sense and capable of working one's good here and hercafter. King Dasaratha, master of cars and elephants and steeds, is the friend of all like to their father, and is furnished with the splendour of the sovereign of celestials. His eldest son, mighty-armed, and masterful, the darling (of his sire), has, in accordance with his father's order, entered the forest of Dandaka with his brother Lakşmaņa and his wife Sītā. His name is Rāma, and he is exceedingly energetic, and ever abide on the path of virtue. His spouse, the celebrated Sītā, daughter to Vaideha, the high-souled king Janaka, either died or was carried off in Janasthāna. Seeking for that exalted lady, the king's son, accompanied by this younger brother, arriving at Rşyamūka, met with Sugrīva. And Sugrīva promised that he would undertake the search for Sītă, and Rāma (on his part promised) that he would confer on Sugrīva the kingdom of the monkeys. And, thereupon, slaying Vāli in battle, the king's son established Sugrīva as the lord of the monkeys. You formerly has known that foremost of monkeys, Vāli. That monkey was slain in battle by him (Rāma) with a single shaft. And, thereupon, the lord of monkeys, Sugrīva, true to his vow, eager for searching Sītā, despatched monkeys in all directions. And thousands and hundreds and niyutas of monkeys are exploring all sides, below and above in the sky. Some are like Vinata's offspring, (Garuda) and some like the Wind; their Course is incapable of being resisted; and those heroic monkeys are endued with strength and celerity. I, Hanumān my name, am the son of the Wind-god. For Sitã, I, desirous of seeing her, have come hither, bounding over the main measuring a full hundred Yojanas. And as I was roving, I came to see Janaka's daughter in your house. You are cognisant of righteousness and interest, and had attained prosperity through your asceticism. Therefore, O eminently wise one, you ought not to confine another's wife. Actions opposed to righteousness, and bringing on countless evils, and causing extermination, ill become persons of your sort. Who is there even among celestials and Asuras that is competent to stay before the shafts shot by Lakşmaņa and Rāma in wrath? There is none, O king, in all the three worlds, that is capable of attaining ease, after inflicting injury on Rāghava. Treading the path of virtue and profit, do you pay heed to my speech fraught with good for three times; (Present, past, and future) and do you return Jānaki to that foremost of men. Seen have I this exalted lady, which was difficult to compass. As for what remain to be done, Rāma himself shall bring it about. That Sītā I have beheld overwhelmed with grief, whom, albeit resembling a five-hooded serpent in your mansion, you know not. And even as food thoroughly mixed with poison, being taken, is incapable of being digested, this one is incapable of being subdued even by the celestials and Asuras. It is not proper to destroy religious merit reaped by undergoing extreme mortification, as well as access of life attained by the same means). (By such an iniquitous act as this.) You deem yourself by virtue of your asceticism incapable of being destroyed by the celestials and Asuras; and herein your great merit (incident to they austerities) is the cause. But Sugrīva is not a god or a Yakṣa or a Rākşasa. Rāghava, O king, is a mortal and Sugrīva is the lord of monkeys. How can you, O king, save your-life from them. He that, confiding in his strength, commit himself to foul proceedings, cannot count upon his righteous deeds, but his evil ones follow him. Virtue destroy vice, (yet vice like yours destroy all virtue). (The parenthetical part is the commentator's filling in of the deficiency in the sentiment) You, without doubt, had obtained the fruit of your righteousness, and the fruit also of this iniquity you shall reap without delay. And taking to heart the carnage in Janasthāna and the slaying of Vāli as well as the friendship of Rāma with Sugrīva, do you understand yours own good. I, alone that I am, can at my will destroy Lankā with her steeds and elephants and cars; but he whose envoy I am has not yet decided on this point. Rāma has in presence of the tawny-eyed (ones) forsooth promised the annihilation of the foe by whom Sītā has been sore oppressed. On wronging Rāma, Purandara himself cannot escape scot-free, what shall I say of persons like you? Her-whom you know as Sītā staying in yours abode-know her for the Fatal Night that shall bring destruction down on all Lankā. Therefore, beware of yourself turning about your neck the fatal noose in the shape of Sītā! Do you rather study your welfare. You shall behold this city crowned with edifices and stalls, in flames fed by the wrath of Rāma, and consumed by the energy of Şītā. Do not bring to destruction yours friends and ministers, and kindred, and brethren and sons, and yours entire welfare, yours enjoyments and wives and this Lankā. O sovereign of the Rākṣasas, do you faithfully listen to these words of me, a monkey and the servant and envoy of Rāma. Abolishing all the worlds with their creatures mobile and immobile objects, the illustrious Rāma is capable of creating these anew. Neither among celestials nor Asuras, Yakşas, Raksasa, nor serpents, Vidyadharas, Nagas, Gandharvas nor beasts, Siddhas, the foremost Kinnaras, nor all birds, nowhere among any class of beings in all time breathes he who can cope with Rāma equal to Vişnu's self in prowess. Having done such a wrong to the foremost of all creatures-even to that lion of a monarch, Rāma, your life is in high peril. nor Neither deities nor Daityas, nor the foremost night-rangers, nor Gandharvas and Vidyādharas, nor Nāgas, nor Yakşas, can stay in fight against Rāma—the leader of these three worlds. And neither Brahmā, self-create, having four countenances, the three-eyed Rudra, destroyer of Tripura, nor the august Indra, the generallissimo of the celestials can stay in fight before Rāma. Hearing the distasteful yet excellent speech of the bold and matchless monkey, the ten-necked one, with his eyes whirling in wrath, ordered the destruction of that mighty monkey.