Beholding the forest filled with flowery trees and desiring to have a full view of her, he, wellnigh, spent the night. At that late hour of the night, he heard the chantings of the Vedas by the Rákşasas, conversant with the six supplementary parts of the Vedas,* engaged in the performance of sacrificial rites and knowing Brahmā. *Grammar, Prosody, astronomy, pronounciation, the meaning of the unusual terms and the ritual of the Hindu religion. And thereupon the mighty Ten-headed Rākṣasa, having huge arms, awoke with the sounds of those auspicious instruments, pleasant to ears. Awaking, that great and powerful lord of Rākşasas, having his cloth and garlands loosened, began to think of Vaidehi. That Raksasa, puffed up with pride, was passionately attached to her and so he could not restrain his amour in him. And so adorned with all ornaments, he, casting his looks on the roads containing jewelled and golden gates and appearing in grace, entered the forest of Asoka, filled with various trees containing fruits and flowers of all seasons and with ponds; beautified with various flowers, variegated with inebriete and wondrous birds; filled with various beautiful wolves; thronged with various deer and covered with fruits fallen on the earth. And one hundred damsels followed in the train of the son of Pulastya like to the damsels of the celestials and Gandharvas following mahendra. 'Refers to Rāvana, Pulastya being his father. There among those fair ones, some carried torches with gold handles, chowries and some fans. Some carrying water in golden jars headed the train while others carrying the golden throne covered with a coverlet followed it. And a favourite damsel carried in her right hand a jewelled drinking bowl filled with wine. Another carrying the white umbrella having golden ribs resembling the full moon and goose, followed in the train. And in this wise the excellent wives, of Rāvaņa, having their eyes rendered sleepy with sleep and wine, followed their heroic husband like to lightings following the cloud. Their necklaces and keyuras were displaced, paste fade, hair dishevelled and they had drops of sweat on their faces. With sleep and intoxication, were reeling those fair ones of beautiful countenances, having their hairs with garlands disbanded and their persons wet with perspiration. And in this way those beloved wives, (of Ravana) having inebriate eyes, followed, out of amour and reverence, their husband. And their might husband, brought under the control of amour and having his mind firmly attached to Şītā, proceeded slowly. And that monkey, son of Maruta, heard the sound of kāñcīs and nūpuras of those excellent damsels. And the monkey Hanumān also beheld Rāvana, of extraordinary deeds and of inconceivable prowess and strength, at the gate. His whole body was seen on all sides by the light of the lamps lighted with perfumed oil and carried by the Rākşasīs before. He was inflamed with amour, pride and haughtiness and his expansive eyes were coppery and idle. And he appeared like Cupid himself just appearing in view, leaving behind his bow and arrows. Holding his excellent robe, covered with flowers, washed, set with jewels and white as the foam of the churned nectar, he placed it in its proper place. Hanumăn, hiding himself on the tree, in the midst of many leaves and flowers, tried to recognise him as he approached. Beholding him, that foremost of monkeys saw that highly famous king Rāvana, surrounded by his excellently beautiful and youthful wives, enter that forest of enjoyment filled with birds and animals. There was a warder by name Sankukarņa in that forest—highly powerful, wearing various ornaments and addicted to drinking. And by him was seen that lord of Rākşasas—the son of Visrava. That highly energetic monkey beheld that effulgent (Rāvana) surrounded by excellent damsels like to moon encircled by stars. And beholding him the monkey reflected—“This must be Rāvana-for he is the person whom I saw sleeping in an excellent apartment in that city.” Thinking this, that highly effulgent son of Maruta-Hanuman leaped (high upon another branch). And effulgent as he was, that highly intelligent monkey hid himself on a branch covered with leaves, being unable to stand before the effulgence of that Rākșasa. Rāvana proceeded in that way, being anxious to behold the blue-eyed Sītā, having spacious breast, excellent hips and a lock of black hair.