Beholding Lankā burnt down and devastated and the demons terrified, the monkey Hanumān began to reflect. And worked up with fear and remorse, he reflected, “What a mighty iniquity have I perpetrated by burning down Lankā of my own accord. Blessed are those high-souled ones who control their wrath by dint of their own good sense, like to fire quenched by water. What iniquity is there which cannot be perpetrated by the angry? They can even slay the worshipful and vilify the pious with harsh words. The angry cannot decide what should be spoken and what not. There is no vice which cannot be committed by them, and there is nothing which cannot be spoken by them. He is the proper person who can subdue his rising ire by means of forgiveness as a serpent leaves off his worn skin. O fie on me who am vicious-minded, shameless and the perpetrator of a mighty iniquity. Not thinking of Sītā, I have slain my master with fire. Forsooth has the worshipful Jảnaki been burnt, since the whole city of Lankā has been devastated with fire. And she being burnt, foolishly have I spoilt the work of my master. I have defeated the great object for which I have laboured so much. In burning down Lankā, I have not saved Sītā. To have burnt down Lankā is assuredly a trifle, but in my ire I have lost my great object. Forsooth has Janaki been consumed, since I behold no spot in Lankā which is not made desolate with fire-in fact the whole city has been reduced to ashes. As I have committed such an injury under the influence of my perverse understanding, it behave me to relinquish my life here. I shall jump into this flame or into a submarine fire, or I shall resign my mortal frame to the animals that infest the ocean. For, living, I shall not be able to face that lord of monkeys, and how shall I, having spoilt their work utterly, show myself to those foremost of men? I have through my culpable passion furnished an illustration of the reckless monkey-nature, which is well known over the three worlds. Fie on this activity, born of (the quality of) passion, which is the source of incompetence and rashness; since although capable, I did not protect Sita. On Sītā having met with destruction, both of them (Rāma and Lakşmaņa) shall cease to exist; and on their ceasing to exist, Sugrīva shall die along with his friends. Hearing these tidings, how shall the righteous Bharata, attached to his brother (Rāma), along with Satrughna, live? And on the virtuous Ikşvāku race being extinct, without doubt, all the subjects shall be overwhelmed with grief. Therefore, I of crust luck has had my harvest of virtue and profit taken away; and being under the influence of baleful passion, I am the cause of the destruction of creatures. As he was reflecting thus, he bethought him of auspicious omens which he had witnessed since. Or it may be that one of charming limbs has been preserved by her proper energy. The blessed one may not have met with her end, for fire dose burn fire. Fire should not touch the spouse of that virtuous one of immeasurable energy, who is protected by her own character. And that bearer of sacrificial offerings has not burnt me, is owing to Rāma's power and the virtue of Vaidehi. Why should she that is a very goddess to the three brothers, Bharata and the others, and that has enchanted the mind of Rāma, meet with destruction? When that everywhere unspent Lord, having burning for his office, has not consumed my tail, why should he burn the exalted lady? Then Hanuman with wonder again thought of the sight of the golden mountain under the water. (Remembering the incident of his seeing the mountain Maināka through Sītā, Hanuman was put in mind of Sītā's superhuman power.) By virtue of her asceticism, veracity, and devotion to her lord she it is that can consume Fire, but Fire cannot burn her. And as Hanumān was thinking of the magnitude of that revered lady's religious merit, he heard the converse there of high-souled Caranas. Ah! hard is the feat that Hanumān has forsooth achieved. He has created a terrific and fierce conflagration in the abode of the Rākşasa. The females of Rākşasa accompanied by boys and old folks, are flying amain; and in consequence of the hubbub it seems as if (Lankā) is in lamentation through her mountaincaverns. Burnt is this city of Lankā with her turrets, walls and gate-ways; and we are astonished that Jānakī is not burnt. These words resembling ambrosia Hanumān heard (at that time); and his mind was filled with joy. And what through the auspicious omens that he had witnessed, and what through the speech of the saints, Hanumān was delighted (beyond measure). Then the monkey, with his end attained, knowing that the king's daughter was unhurt, became bent upon returning after seeing her once again.