When the monkeys had been seated in that mountain, with the intention of putting a period to their existence through fasting a king of vultures happened to come to that quarter. And that long-lived bird was named Sampāti, the beautiful brother of Jaţāyu, famous for his strength and prowess. Issuing from a cavern of the mighty mountain Vindhya, he, seeing the monkeys seated, well pleased, said. Verily man reapeth the fruit of his former acts; and therefore it is that this food ordained to that end, comes to me after a long time. I shall feed on these monkeys, one by one, slaying them one after another. Eyeing those apes, the bird expressed himself thus. Hearing this speech of the bird coveting his food, Argada faintly spoke to Hanumān. Behold! through Sita's simplicity* this onethe very son of the Sun, Yama-has come to this place, to exterminate the monkeys. *Another reading is Gridhra padesana— through the vultur's cunning. This the commentator consider as preferrable. Rāma's work has not been done; nor the royal mandate. And this disaster has arrived unthought of by the monkeys. You have in detail heard all that, inspired with the desire of doing what is good to Vaidehi, that king of vultures, Jatayu, did here. In this way, all creatures, even the brute species, compass the welfare of Rāma, renouncing their lives, as we do. It is because of the love and tenderness* they bear towards (Rāma), that people do good to each other. *The commentator explains in pure orthodox fashion: Because every-thing is in Rama, people serve each other from the love and tenderness, which partain to him. Therefore the righteous Jațãyu, of his own accord laying down his life, has done the pleasure of Rāma. We also, overcome with fatigue and (almost) dying, have come to this forest; but Mithila's daughter we find not. Happy is that king of vultures, having been slain by Rāvaņa in battle. He has got quit of the fear of Sugrīva, and has also attained supreme state. In consequence of the death of Jațāyu and that of king Dasaratha, as well as owing to the ravishment of Vaidehi, (the lives of) the monkeys have come into jeopardy. Rama's and Laksmana's abode in the forest with Sītā, Rāghava's slaying of Vāli with a shaft, the slaughter of innumerable Räksasas by the enraged Rama, and (finally) this mishap-all these owe their origin to the bestowal of the boon on Kaikeyi. Seeing the monkeys stretched on the earth, and hearing their piteous words describing their grief, that magnanimous king of vultures, with his mind agitated said (this). Hearing the words that issued from Angada's mouth, the sharp-beaked and high-toned vulture, said, Who is it that, making my mind tremble, speak of the death of my brother, Jațāyu, dearer to me than life. How happened in Janasthāna the fight between the Rākṣasa and the vulture? It is after a long time that to-day I hear the name of my brother. I wish to alight from this mountain-fastness. I have been well pleased by listening after a long time to the celebration of the virtues of my younger brother, cognizant of qualities and worthy of being extolled by reason of his prowess. You foremost of monkeys, I wish to hear of the destruction of Jaţāyu, who dwelt in Janasthāna. And how could Dasaratha, whose beloved eldest son is Rāma, dear to his superiors, be the friend of my brother? I can not move in consequence of my wings having been burnt by the solar rays. But I wish that you may take me down from this mountain.