Having eulogized Sītā, worthy of being praised and Rāma, endeared by accomplishments that foremost of monkeys again engaged in meditation. Having reflected for some time, the powerful Hanumān, having his eyes full of tears bewailed on Siita's account (in the following strain). No one can withstand the course of destiny since Sītā, being the spouse of the worshipful brother of Laksmana, ever obedient to his elders, has been overwhelmed with grief. The worshipful damsel is cognizant of the prowess of Rāma and the intelligent Laksmana and for this she is not entirely depressed like to the river Ganges at the approach of the rainy season, As regards their character, age, conduct, family and other auspicious marks they are equal and hence Rāghava deserve Vaidehi and this one of dark-blue eyes is his. And having scen seen her, gold-hued and conducing to the happiness of the people like to the Goddess of wealth, Hanuman approached Rāma in his mind and said. For this (damsel) was killed the mighty Vāli and Kabandha-Rāvana's equal in prowess. For her (too) was destroyed in battle, the terribly powerful Rākşasa-Viradha, by Rāma putting forth his energy, like to ſambara killed by Mahendra. (It was for her) that fourteen thousand Rākşasas of terrible deeds were destroyed at Janasthāna with arrow resembling the flame of fire. And Khara was killed in battle, and Trisirā was discomfited and the mighty Dūşaņa by Rāma, knowing his ownself. And it was on her account that Sugrīva, known all over the world, came by the wealth of the monkeys hard to acquire and amassed by Vali. And it is for this (damsel) of expansive eyes that I have crossed the effulgent lord of rivers and have seen this city. And methinks it would have been all proper had Rāma turned on her account the whole earth bounded by oceans. If the kingdom over the three worlds and the daughter of Janaka be compared together, the former is not equal to one hundredth part of Sītā. This Sītā, the daughter of the high-souled Janaka, the pious King of Mithilā, firmly attached to her husband, rose, covered with dust, out of the earth, in a field delved by a furrow. She is the well-known eldest daughter-in-law of the king Dasaratha, of an adorable character and unchecked prowess. And She is the beloved spouse of the pious and grateful Rāma, knowing his ownself, and has been brought under the control of the Raksasis. Renouncing all luxuries, and considering not the least about miseries, she actuated by her husband's love entered the solitary forest. And satisfied with fruits and roots and ever engaged in her husband's service, she lived in the forest as much delighted as she was in her house. And that one of a golden hue, never used to afflictions and who was wont to converse always with a delighted countenance, has now been suffering incomparable miseries. Like to a thirsty wight longing for an abode where he might get a drink, Rāghava pants after seeing her, gifted with an exalted character and oppressed by Rāvana. As a monarch who had lost his kingdom, is greatly delighted when he regain it, forsooth shall Rāghava, in like manner, be pleased when he shall come by her. She too has been maintaining her being in the hope of seeing Rāma again, separated as she is from her friends and deprived of all comforts and luxuries. These Rākşasīs, and these trees enveloped with fruits and flowers-forsooth she dose not behold, but is engaged with all her heart in medidations only touching Rāma. Husband enhance the beauty of a female more than the dress (and therefore Sītā) beautiful as she is, dose not appear graceful, in her husband's absence. Forsooth my master Rāma has performed a difficult act for he has been still keeping up his life in her separation without consuming himself in grief. My heart is greatly pained knowing that she, having dark-blue eyes, resembling lotus petals, worthy of happiness, has been possessed by grief. She, patient as the Earth, having eyes resembling lotuses, who was ere this protected by Rāghava and Lakşmaņa, is now being guarded by Rākşasīs having terrible eyes, under the trees. Being harassed with continued miseries, the daughter of Janaka has lost all her beauty like to a water-lily crushed with frost, and has come by a miserable plight like to a doe separated from her mate. The branches of the Asoka trees, lowered down with flowers are as if enhancing her grief as also the Moon of many thousand rays, at the expire of the winter." Having reflected thus and arrived at ine conclusion that she was Sītā, that powerful leader of monkeys gifted with velocity stationed himself on that tree.