Having slaughtered the servants, Hanumān, having reflected awhile, thought, “I have broken down the wood; but have not destroyed the edifice dedicated to the deities of the Rākşasas.” Therefore, this very day will I demolish this structure. Hanumān, son to the Wind-god, foremost of monkeys, Hanumān, son to the Wind-god, displaying his strength, bounded to the Caitya (A building designed for deities) building, elevated like a summit of Meru. And having ascended the edifice resembling a mountain, that leader of monkey-bands, possessed of wondrous energy, looked like another Sun risen (in the sky). Having broken down that superb edifice, the irrepressible Hanuman, flaming in auspiciousness, resembled (the mountain) Pāriyatra. And magnifying his dimensions through his energy, the offspring of the Wind-god fearlessly fell to striking his arms with his bands, and thus filling Lankā with the sounds. And at those sounds of striking arms, capable of striking deafness into the hearer, birds began to drop down there, as well as the warders of the religious mansion, with their senses whelmed. Victory to Rāma versed in arms! And to Laks maņa endowed with immense strength! and victory to king Sugrīva, who is protected by Raghava! Hanuman, son to the Wind-god, destroyer of hostile hosts, is the slave of Rāma of untiring deeds. And not a thousand Rāvanas can cope with me in conflict as I hurl stones and trees by thousands. Having destroyed the city of Lankā and paid my respects to Mithila's daughter, I, my object gained, shall depart in the presence of all the Rākşasas. Having spoken thus, that one of a prodigious person, seated on the Caitya, emitted tremendous roars, striking terror into the Raksasa. In consequence of that mighty cry, an hundred guards attached to the Caitya sallied out, taking various weapons-bearded darts, scimitars and axes; and they surrounded the Wind-god's offspring, as he went on increasing his body. They encountered that foremost of monkeys with various maces, and axes, and golden Angadas, and arrows resembling the Sun. Those numbers of Rākşasa, encountering that best of monkeys, resumbled an extensive and mighty whirlpool in the Gangā. Thereat, the Wind-god's son, the mighty Hanumān, (Mārutatmaja-son to the Wind-god, left out on the score of redundency) waxing enraged, violently uprooting a huge pillar of the edifice, plated with gold, and having an hundred borders, began to whirl it (in the air). (The reader is powerfully reminded of a like feat of Manoah's son-'the Herculean Samson') And the fire generated there thus, burnt down the entire edifice. Seeing that edifice in flames, the graceful monkey-leader, having slain having slain the hundred Rākṣasas, like Indra slaying Asuras with this thunderbolt, remaining in the sky, said, Thousands of strong, high-souled and foremost monkeys like myself, having been created, and remaining under the command of Sugriva, including ourselves as well as other monkeys—are ranging all over the world. Some are endowed with the strength of ten elephants, some with the strength of an hundred, some have the prowess of a thousand elephants, and some the strength of elephants numbered by herds. some are equal in strength to the Wind, and there are there some monkey-leaders who have no limit to their strength. Surrounded with monkeys of this sort, having nails and teeth for their arms, in hundreds and thousands and koțis and ayutas, come our Sugrīva, the slayer of all (foes). Neither this city of Lanka, nor you, nor yet Rāvaņa, shall exist, having created hostility with that high-souled hero of the Ikşvāku race.