On Sugrīva being installed and the monkeys entering the cave, Rāma, along with his younger brother, got at the Prasravana hill, resounded with the noise of tigers and deer, filled with terrible lions, covered with diverse trees, creepers and bowers, inhabited by bears, monkeys, Gopucyas and cats, resembling a collection of clouds and always auspicious. Rāma, along with Saumitri, selected for his habitation, a spacious cave, situated on the summit of that hill. Making the above condition with Sugrīva, Rāma, the pure-souled descendant of Raghu, spoke to his humble younger brother Lakşmaņa, the enhance of wealth, the following sound words, worthy of being spoken on that occasion. O Saumitri, O slayer of foes, in this pleasant and spacious mountain cave filled with air, we shall pass the rainy season. O son of a king, this summit of the hill is excellent and picturesque, beautified with white, black and coppery stones, filled with diverse metals and river frogs, covered with diverse trees and pleasant creepers, resounded with the musical notes of various birds and cries of peacocks and beautified with various flowery trees, such as Malati, Kundas, Sinduvara, (a) Sirsa, (b) Kadamba, Arjuna, (c) and Sarja. (d). (a) As small tree—Vitex negundo. (b) A kind of tree-Acacia Sirsa. (c)A tree-Pentaptera arjunee. (d) The Sala tree (Shorea robusta) another tree (Pentaptera Arjuna. O son of a king, this pond filled with full blown lotuses shall always be near our cave. This cave shall be worthy of our habitation, O gentle one, having its north-eastern part low and the western part high. There is, O Saumitri, at the entrance of the cave, a level beautiful, spacious stone, black like to collyrium. Behold O my brother, on the north, the summit of the hill, resembling collyrium and a rising cloud. There appears on the south a beautiful white hill resembling the Kailasa filled with various metals. Behold before the cave the mudless stream, flowing towards the east like to Jānhavi (e) in the Trkūta (f) mountain. This rivulet appears like to a damsel ornamented and clothed, being filled with various trees, such as-Sandal, Tilaka, Sāla, Tamālas, Atimuktas, (g) Padmaka, Saralas, (h) Aśokas, Vāneeras, (i) Timidas, Bakulas, Ketakas, Hintālas, Tinicas, Neepas, Vetasas, Kſtamalakas growing on her banks. (e) The river Ganges-literally-the daughter of Fanhu a saint. The Ganges is called so on account of her supposed origination from the thigh of the great saint. having three peaks. (g) A tree (Dalbergia onjeimaisis)-Mountain ebony. (h) A sort of pine, (Pinis longifolia) (1) A sort of cane or ratan, (Calamas Rotany). This rivulet resounded with various notes of hundreds of various birds, filled with Cakravākas attached to each other, crowded with geese and Sārasas, having picturesque banks, and various jewels, is as it were laughing on all sides. Here it appears covered with violet lotuses, here with red lotuses and there again with celestial white water-lilies. This pleasant and picturesque stream is filled with various water fowls and Chakravākas and served by many a saint. Behold there the rows of pleasant sandal trees and those Kukubhas which have grown up as it were like to mental emotion. Picturesque indeed is this place, O slayer of foes, and we shall happily live here, O son of Sumitra. At no distance, O son of a king, from this place is situate the pleasant city of Sugrīva-Kiş kindha, filled with forests. Hear then, O best of conquerors, the sound of music, and the clatter of monkeys mingled with the sound of Mşdangas. Forsooth is rejoicing Sugrīva—the foremost of monkeys, getting back his wife, regaining his kingdom, and attaining to regal splendour. Having said this, Rāghava, along with Laks maņa, dwelt in that Prasravana hill abounding in caves and bowers. He did not attain to a best felicity although he lived in that pleasant hill filled with many things. Pondering over the ravishment of his spouse, dearer than his life, beholding the setting of the Sun in particular, he did not go to sleep, although he laid himself on the bed in the night. His younger brother Laksmana, equally aggrieved, spoke to Kākutstha, thus bewailing being exercised with grief and almost beside himself with sorrow, consequent upon Sita's bereavement, saying. It does not behove you to lament thus, being exercised with grief—it is not unknown to you that people, thus bewailing do exhaust themselves by and by. O Rāghava, you are devoted to pious actions and the services of the Deity in this world-and pious, energetic and did believe in the existence of God. Without being persevering you shall not be able to destroy in conflict your enemy—that terrible, wily Rākşasa. Do you renounce your grief and take recourse to energy and you shall be able to slay that Rākş asa with all his family. What of the destruction of Rāvana, you are O Kākutstha. capable of uprooting the earth with oceans, forest and hills. Rains have set in and do you wait for the autumn shall encompass the destruction of Rāvana with his kingdom and kinsmen. I, too, am exciting your latent energy like to fire hidden in ashes with oblations. Welcoming the auspicious and well-meaning accents of Lakşmaņa, Raghava again spoke to him the following affectionate words. when you O Lakşmaņa, truly do your words become you, affectionate, devoted, truthful and intent in my welfare as you are. Renouncing this grief standing in the way of all business, I shail call forth, the more, this my energy on the occasion of displaying my prowess. I shall live here, awaiting the autumn and abiding by your words and awaiting as well Sugrīva's pleasure and the clear currents of the rivers. Heroes receiving favours always return them; the ungrateful lose the friendship of the welcoming them therefore, Laksmana, with folded hands, spoke to Rāma of graceful appearance, displaying his own intelligence, O lord of men, I fully approve of all you had said. The monkey-chief shall soon engage in our service. Resolved on the destruction of your enemy, do you spend here this rainy season awaiting the autumn. Subduing your wrath, and awaiting the autumn, do you with me spend these four months in this hill filled with deer, capable as you are of encompassing the destruction of your enemy.