Hearing Angada's speech, those foremost monkeys one after another began to speak, touching their respective competence in coursing. Gaja, and Gavākṣa, and Gavaya, and Sarabha, and Gandhamādana, and Mainda, and Dwivida, and Angada, and Jāmbavān. Gaja said, “I can leap over ten Yojanas," and Gavaksa said, "I shall go twenty Yojanas." There monkey Sarabha said to those monkeys, “You monkey, I shall go thirty Yojanas." And the monkey, Rhishava, said to those monkeys,-"I shall, without doubt, go forty Yojanas." And the exceedingly energetic monkey, Gandhamädana, said, I shall for certain go fifty Yojanas. And the monkey Mainda said to the monkeys there, I shall undertake to leap over sixty Yojanas. And then the highly energetic Dwivida said,-I Shall, for certain, go seventy Yojanas. And the highly powerful Suşena, possessed of strength-foremost of monkeys said—I declare that in motion I am equal to eighty Yojanas. As they were speaking thus,' the oldest of them all, Jambavān, saluting them answered. Formerly we had power of motion. But now we have waxed exceeding old. Although this is so, yet we can not overlook this, as both Rama and the monkey-king (by sending us) have become sure of success. At present do you understand the course that is ours. I shall go ninety Yojanas. There is no doubt whatever about this. Jāmbavān said this to those choice monkeys. But (formerly) my prowess in leaping was forsooth not such.* Of old in the sacrifice of Virocana's son, the external Lord Visnu, when he had covered the entire universe with three steps, was circumambulated by me. *i.e. it was greater. But I who was all this, have waxed old, and my vigour sits feebly upon me. In my youth, ever, my strength was exceeding great and incomparable. Now I can only by my own energy, course thus far. But has a bound shall not bring success on our undertaking. After this, saluting the mighty monkey, Jāmbavān, the wise Angada spoke straight sense, saying, I can go over this mighty hundred Yojanas; but there is no certainty as to my answer of returning. Thereat, Jāmbavān, cognizant of speech, said to that foremost of monkeys,-0 foremost of leonine as, we know your power of motion, you are capable of ursing a hundred thousand Yojanas, as well as of coming back. But we say that even this is what is fit. My child, ore master must on no account be commanded by his servants. foremost of monkeys, all these should be commanded your you. You are our spouse, and (at the same time) occuying the position of our husband. The master is the spouse if the army. This is the way of the world. O repressor of oes! O subduer of enemies, you are the root of this business. Therefore, my child, you should always be maintained by us like a wife. The root of any work must be preserved. This is the policy of those versed in business. The root existing, all the virtues, obtaining fruit, certainly meet with success. You, O you having truth for prowess are the instrument of this undertaking, and, O subduer of enemies, furnished with sense and vigour, you are the occasion herein. And, O foremost of monkeys, you are both our superior, and our superior's son; and resorting to you we are enabled to accomplish our object. Threat that mighty monkey, Angada, son to Vali, answered the exceedingly wise Jambavan, when he had spoken, If I go not, nor any other powerful monkey, then we should for certain again sit ourselves down to fast to death. Without doing the mandate of the intelligent lord of monkeys, we, repairing thither, shall not behold ourselves alive. He is extreme both in showing favour and in anger. Disregarding his order, we shall, going there, meet with destruction. And his ire shall, not take any other course. Therefore it behoves you, cap of seeing issues, to reflect. Thus addressed by Angada that powerful and heroic monkey Jāmbavān answered Angada in excellent words, saying, That . business, O hero, say most moult a feather. I shall despatch even him who's bring about success. Then that heroic monkey ordered foremost of monkeys, the highly heroic monkey Hanuman who stood apart, convinced (of the wisdom of Jambavān decision).