Having praised me with these and many other words, and bidden me adieu that one skilled in speech, entered his own habitation. Issuing out gently from the cave of that mountain, I, ascending Vindhya, was expecting you. The space covered by the time intervening between then and to-day is a little over an hundred years;* and laying up in my heart the speech of that ascetic I have been awaiting season and place. *The commentator says the period is one hundred and eight years. Setting out on his great journey, on Niśākara having gone to heaven, I distracted with various thoughts, have been consumed by grief. For the loss of my plumage.- My rising intention of doing away with myself I have suppressed in consideration of the words of the ascetic. The reason which he had imparted to me for preserving my life, has removed my pains even as a flaming fire (dispels darkness). And knowing the prowess of the impious Rāvana, I said in rage to my son, versed in speech,-'Hearing her lamentation, and knowing them bereft of Sītā, why didst you not deliver her?' My son did not do this good office to Daſaratha, influenced by affection for him. As he was speaking thus in the midst of the monkeys, his wings sprang up in presence of the rangers of the forest. Thereupon, seeing his person furnished with grown pinions hued like the infant sun, he experienced incomparable raptures, and addressed the monkeys, saying, By the grace of that Rājarși of immeasurable energy, my wings, which had been burnt up by the rays of the sun, have grown again. To-day I have got back) the strength and prowess which I possessed while my youth was yet present. Do you strive every way. You shall meet with Sītā. And my getting (back) my wings inspires (us) with confidence as to success. Having said this to all the monkeys, that ranger of the sky and best of birds. Sampāti, anxious to ascertain his power of flight, flew up from the mountain summits. Hearing his words, those powerful monkeys, with vigour (enhanced, seeing success before them, felt the height of joy. Then those foremost of monkeys, in vigour resembling the Wind, getting occasion for displaying their prowess, intent upon searching the Janaka's daughter, set forward towards the quarter crested by Abhijit.* * Abhijitabhimukhan (acc.) Abhijit—the name of a star. Abhijit may also mean-he who is to be conquered. Then the sense would be the region in which Rāvana was.