As Sugrīva was speaking thus with joined hands, that best of the righteous, Rāma, embraced him with his arms, and then replied, That Indra poureth down showers, is no wonder, nor that this thousand-rayed Sun dispels darkness from the sky; nor yet that, O mild one, the Moon by his rays causes the clear night. (And in a similar way), friends like you bring delight, O subduer of foes. O mild one, that 'whatever is graceful, should be harboured in you is not strange.* *The commentator in his usual way of reading between the lines, says that the sense is—That you had gathered forces for serving your friend, is not strange. O placid one, it is well. I give the sense the śloka naturally yields. I know, O Sugrīva, that you always speakst what is for my good. Assisted by you, my friend, I shall in battle vanquish all my foes. You being my friend and my ally, should assist me. That worst of Rākșasas has carried away Maithilī, to bring down destruction upon himself, even as Anuhlāda ravished Puloma's daughter, Sachi, deceiving her sire. That Rāvana I will at no distant date slay with my sharpened shafts, even as that slayer of enemies, he of an hundred sacrifices-slew the haughty father of Paulomi. Presently appeared volumes of dust, and the hot and fierce rays of the sun were hid in the sky. And darkened by the gloom, all sides became bewildered. And the entire earth with her mountains, forests, and wocds, trembled. Then the whole ground was covered with innumerable monkeys gifted with great strength, and having sharp teeth, and resembling kings of men. Then surrounded by leaders of monkey-herds, and retinues numbering hundreds of koțis, and monkey chiefs from rivers, and mountains, and seas, endowed with prodigious strength, and other apes inhabiting forests, having voices resembling clouds-and monkeys hued like the infant sun, or white like the moon, or coloured like the filaments of the lotus, or pale, having their homes in the Golden mountain-in all, numbering ten thousand koțis,-appeared the graceful and heroic monkey, named Satavali. Then, having the splendour of the Golden hill, the puissant sire of Tārā was seen at the head of many thousand kotis. Then Umā's father, that lord, the father-in-law of Sugrīva, arrived, accompanied with other thousands of kotis (of monkeys),... resembling the filaments of the lotus, of face like to the youthful sun, intelligent, the foremost of monkeys-supreme among them all. And Hanuman's father, the graceful Kasarī, appeared in company with many thousands of monkeys. And Gavaksa-sovereign of Golangulas-endowed with dreadful might, appeared, surrounded by thousand koțis of monkeys. And Dhūmra of bears endowed with terrific speed—destroyer of foes—appeared, surrounded by two thousand kotis. And the leader of herds, named Panasa, of exceeding prowess, came, accompanied with three kotis, mighty and dreadful. And the leader of herds, named Nīla, of huge body, resembling a mass of blue collyrium. appeared with ten kotis. Then the exceedingly powerful Gavayaleader of herds, having the splendour of the Golden mountain, arrived with five koțis. And that powerful leader of herdsDarimukha, came, sutrounded by thousands of kotis, and took up his post by Sugriva. And Mainda and Dvivida-sons of Asvi both-of mighty strength, appeared with kotis upon thousands of koțis of monkeys. And the powerful and heroic Gaja (came), surrounded by three kotis. And the king of bears, Jāmbavān by name, (came), surrounded by ten koțis, and enlisted himself under the command of Sugriva. And (the monkey) named Rumna, possessed of energy, and strong, came swiftly, surrounded by an hundred koțis of powerful monkeys. Then, followed at his back by hundreds and thousands of koțis, came the monkey, Gandhamādana. Then came the young prince Angada, in prowess resembling his sire, accompanied by a thousand padmas and an hundred sankhas. Then appeared at a distance, accompanied by five koțis of monkeys endowed with dreadful prowess,-Tārā, having the splendour of a star. And then appeared Indrajāni, the heroic monkey and leader of herds-lord of eleven kotis-surrounded by them. Then followed Rambha, resembling the infant sun, accompanied by an ayuta, a thousand, and an hundred. Then appeared to the view the stout monkey, named Durmukha, heroic lord of herds, surrounded by two koțis. And Hanumān showed himself, surrounded by a thousand koțis of monkeys, resembling peaks of Kailāsa, of dreadful vigour. And the exceedingly energetic Nala came, attended with an hundred kotis, a thousand, and an hundred monkeys, living in trees. Then surrounded by ten kotis (of monkeys), came the shapely Darimukha before the highsouled Sugriva, from a country bordering on a river. And Sarabha, Kumuda, Vahni, the monkey Rambha,-and many other monkeys-lords of herds-passing ennumeration-wearing shapes at will, came covering the entire earth with her mountains and forests. And all the monkeys of the world were some of them coming and others putting up. And monkeys-some of them dripping, and some leaping, and some roaring-gathered round Sugriva, like clouds gathering round the sun. And, crying in various tones, prime monkeys furnished with arms, with bent heads spoke humbly to that lord of monkeys—Sugrīva. And other foremost of monkeys, gathering together duly, came before Sugrīva with joined hands. Sugrīva standing with joined hands, expeditiously informed Rāma of the arrival of the monkey-leaders in hot haste; and then spoke (to them, saying, O chiefs of monkeys, stationing the forces duly near mountain-rills and all the woods, let him that is conversant with the army, ascertain who have come and who have not.