Having by his vigour vanquished the excellent City of Lankā capable of wearing forms at will, that exceedingly energetic foremost of monkeys, Hanumān, endued with prodigious prowess, Ieaped sheer over a wall, where doorway there was none; and that elephantine monkey gifted with great strength entered Lankā by night. Entering the city of Larkā that one (ever) compassing the welfare of the monkey-king, set his left foot on the heads of his foes. * *The literal meaning is that, leaping over the wall, Hanumān, first set his left foot on the hostile soil; and this act of his, as tending to the discomfiture of the foe, is looked upon by the author in the light of Hanumān setting his left foot on the heads of the Rāks asas. The setting of the left foot on an enemy's dominions, is considered by the scriptures as very inauspicious. Entering in by night, the offspring of the Wind-god furnished with strength, proceeded along the high-way strewn with blossoms. The monkey held his way in the charming city of Lankā, resounding with grateful sounds mixed with laughter, and ringing with trumpet blasts. And with multitudes of mansions marked with the thunderbolt and the hook, and adorned with diamond windows, the charming metropolis looked splendid, like the welkin with clouds. Then Lankā, with handsome and variegated mansions of Rākṣasas, resembling white clouds and arranged like lotus-leaves; and adorned on all sides with structures superscribed 'Vardhamāna,' shone forth in all it glory. And that graceful one serving in the interests of the king of monkeys, ranging for Rāma's behoof, beheld (Lankā) adorned with variegated wreaths; and was highly delighted. Moving from house to house, that foremost of monkeys observed on all sides various dwellings of diverse forms and colour, and heard charming songs chanted in the three octaves* by damsels maddened with amour, resembling celestial Apsaras. *The three octaves referred to are Mandra or the base tone, Madhyma or the middle tone, and Tara or the high tone. These constitute the entire diapason of Hindu Music.. He also heard the jingling of zones and the clash of bangles; and sounds of footsteps on stairs of edifices belonging to high-souled ones; and sounds proceeding from clapping hands; and the roaring of lions here and there. And (Hanumān) heard there in the mansions of the Rākṣas, Mantras recited by persons engaged therein, and those occupied in Vaidika studies. And (Hanumān) saw goblins and Rākşasas storming and eulogizing Rāvana; and mighty swarms of Rākṣas stationed, covering the highway. In the central courtyard, he found innumerable spies of the Raksasa (Ravana), some initiated, some bearing matted locks, some with their heads shaven, and some clad in cow-skins, some in cloths and some going stark naked; and (he found there persons) carrying handfuls of darbha for their weapons, and (having) the sacrificial fire-place for their arms; and those bearing in their hands clubs and concealed weapons,' or holding rods as their arms, or having a single eye or a single complexion, or having a single breast dangling down; and those looking dreadful with uneven attire; and dwarfs frightful to behold; and bowmen; and swordsmen; and (warriors) carrying sataghnís and clubs for their arms; those Searing excellent Parighas in their hands, or blazing in curious mail; person not exceedingly fat, or exceedingly lean; not unduly tall, or unduly short; not extremely fair, or extremely dark; not unduly crooked, or unduly dwarfish; and those deformed, or many-formed, endowed with beauty, or possessing splendour; standard bearers; and flag bearers. 1. Kuta. The commentator says the word stands for a particular kind of weapons. Wilson has concealed weapon for its English equivalent. 2. The same complexion gives sense. But I render the passage literally. 2. Bhugnavastrān.-Perhaps the text is corrupt. Bhugnavaktran-persons of deformed faces-would render sense. or And (Hanuman) saw also various weapons; and those having for their arms darts and vrikshas, or bearing patticas and asanis, or having Kshepanis* and nooses in their hands, saw that mighty monkey, or wearing wreaths, or having their persons daubed with pastes, or adorned with nobel ornaments, or clad in various kinds of raiment; and many a one ranging wherever he listed. *A short arrow thrown from the hand, or shot And those holding sharpened javelins; and mighty ones bearing Vajras; and hundreds and thousands of warriors garrisoned in the central courtyard and engaged in vigilantly guarding the central courtyard and engaged in vigilantly guarding the interior, having been directed by the lord of the Raksas, saw the monkey. Having seen that edifice situated in front of the inner apartment, that mighty monkey saw the famous mansion of the Rākşasa chief, pinnacled or the mountain-top, with huge golden arches over the gateway; surrounded by a moat enriched with pale lotuses; and completely guarded by a wall; resembling heaven, itself; magnificent; resonant with grateful sounds; resounding with the neighing of horses and wondrous steeds; and adorned with cars and vehicles, chariots and dainty horse: elephants, and four-tusked elephants* resembling masses of white clouds; and possessing graceful gateways. Elephants of the size of horses. The monkey entered the palace protected by the Rākṣasa chief, guarded by maddened beasts and birds, and thousands of gobbling endowed with exceeding great prowess. He (Hanumān) entered Rāvana's inner apartment girt round with a wall consisting of blazing gold and Jambúnada;* having its top decorated with costly gems and pearls; and worshipped with excellent black Aguru and sandal. * Jambunada is a kind of gold having sixteen diverse colours.