Hearing the words of Angada as well as of Laksmana's wrath, the self-controlled Sugriva along with his counsellors, left his seat. Ascertaining the weight and lightness of the present occasion, that one, expert in counsels and abiding by their advice spoke to the expert counsellors, saying. I have not done him any wrong, nor have I spoken to him any improper word. I do not know why Rāghava's brother Laksmana has become offended with me. Lakşmaņa has been falsely apprised of my imaginary weakness by my enemies, always looking to my dark sides. It behoveth you all, to ascertain now speedily according to your knowledge and right understanding (the cause of Laksmana's wrath). I do not fear Lakşmaņa or Rāghava; but friends enraged without any cause do invariable produce fear. It is easy to contract friendship but very difficult to sustain it; for owing to the fickleness of our minds, a very slight cause bring about separation. I have not done him any good proportionate to what the high-souled Rāma had done for me; and it is for this reason that I am afraid of him. Being thus addressed by Sugrīva-Hanumān, the foremost of monkey-counsellors spoke, according to his own understanding, saying. It is no wonder, O lord of monkeys, that you had not forgot the unexpected benefit, (you hadst received at the hands of Rāma). To encompass your well-being, Vali, powerful as the Lord of celestials, was fearlessly destroyed by the heroic Rāghava. There is not the least doubt, that Rāghava, out of love, is enraged with you, and has despatched his younger brother Lakşmaņa, the enhancer of prosperity. O you foremost of those conversant with time, the auspicious autumn, green with Saptchada flowers, has set in and you, given up to enjoyments, does not perceive it. The sky, having the clouds removed, is full of clear stars and planets. The quarters, the ponds and rivers are all clear. O best of monkeys, finding you forgetful, Lakṣmaṇa has come here to inform you that the proper time has arrived. Do you patiently hear all these harsh words of the high-souled Rāma, racked with sorrow and separated from his spouse, which Laksmana, shall relate to you. You have acted improperly towards him, and I do not find any thing tending to your welfare but your satisfying Lakşmana with folded hands. The kings should be addressed with auspicious words by their counsellors always ministering to them proper counsels. And it is for this reason, I am addressing you with these sound words. Rāghava, taking up his bow, while enraged, can bring under subjection the entire world, inhabited by by the celestials, Asuras and Gandharvas. Remembering his former service, it does not behove you, grateful as you are, to excite his wrath, who should be pleased again. Bowing to him, with your children and friends, do you, O king, satisfying your promise, seek his shelter like to a wife placing herself under the control of her husband. O lord of monkeys, it does not behove you, to neglect even in thought, the behests of Rāma and his younger brother; for you are fully aware of the prowess of Rāghava like to the lord of celestials, and passing human power.