Wending about at will on the roofs of sevenstoried edifices, that monkey capable of assuming any form that he chose, began Lankā with speed. And (at length) that auspicious one arrived at the mansion of the Rākṣasa chief, surrounded by a shining wall hued like the Sun; Protected by terrible Rākṣasas, like a mighty forests by lions. And as that foremost of monkeys saw the mansion, with fretted arches plated with silver and embellished with gold, beautifully abounding in splendid courts and gateways; containing elephant-drivers, and heroes knowing no fatigue; ever coursed by irresistible steeds drawing cars, and curious vehicles, covered over with skins of lions and tigers, resounding with bells hung thereon, and embosoming effigies of ivory, gold and silver, the locality of mighty cars, and the home of mighty car-warriors; filled all around with many thousand of divers beauteous and dainty birds and beasts; well protected by meek Rākṣas warders at the outskirts; thronged about with magnificent dames of the first order; containing gems of joyous damsels-the abode of the foremost Rākṣasas—sounding like the sea with the sounds of superb ornaments. That affluent with regal insignia and excellent sandals; crowded with mighty ones, like a vast forest with lions; Resonant with trumpets and drums; and ringing with the blares of conchs; where the ever adored offspring of the Parvas was always worshipped by the Rākşasas; Solemn like the sea; and resounding like the ocean itself, the mighty mansion of the highsouled (Rāvana); clad in costly jewels; scattered with precious gems-as that mighty monkey beheld (Ravana's residence), he set about searching for Sītā. That mighty monkey concluded, “This is the ornament of Larikā bodied forth beautifully to the view, covered with elephants, steeds and chariots." There in the vicinity of Rāvana's mansion, Hanumān began to range the dwellings of the Rākṣasas from one to another, as well as all the gardens (located there). And without experiencing any agitation, he observing (everything), ranged the palaces. *Rāmānuja says that Hanumān began to range the dwelling about the wall environing Rāvana's mansion. Then that one endowed with wondrous motion, with a bound entered Prahasta's palace; and then with another, that (monkey) possessed of energy entered the into of Mahaparcwa. Then that inighty monkey entered into the abode of Kumbhakarna, resembling a mass of clouds; and thereafter that of Vibhisana; And then that of Mahodara, and then that of Virupaksha; and then the abode of Vidyujjibha, and then that of Vidyunmala; And then that mighty monkey with a bound entered into the abode of Vahudanshtra. And then that leader of monkey-bands gifted with great speed leapt into the abode of Suka, and next into that of the intelligent Sarana. And thus, next into that of Indrajit, and that foremost of monkeys went to the mansion of Jambumāla, and of Sumāla, and (then) to the abode of Rashmiketu, and Suryyasachu. And (next) that powerful monkey leapt into the mansion of Vajrakaya; And (next) the Wind-god's offspring entered the house of Dhumraksa, and (next) that of Sampāti, and the grim Vidyudrūpa, and Ghana, and Vighana, and Sukanābha, and Cakra, and Satha, and Kapata, and Hrasvakarna, and Danstra, and the Rākşasa Lomasa, and Yuddhyonmatta, and Matta, and the horseman, Dhvajagrīva, and of Vidyujjihva and Vijihva, and of Hastimukha, and of Karāla, and Vicala, and of Sonitaksha. The issustrious offspring of the Wind, Hanumān, one after another, leapt into all these noble edifices. And that redoubtable monkey observed the affluence of all these (Raksasas) possessed of prosperity. Having bounded over the mansions of all situated around, that blessed with one auspiciousness, at length came to the very mansion of the monarch of the Rākşasas. That tiger-like monkey-the best of his speciesranging around, saw Rākṣasis of frightful eyes, alternately mounting sentry over the couch of Rāvana-bearing darts and maces in their hands, and equipped with javelins and clubs. And (there) in the residence of that lord of the Rākşasas, he beheld various bands of Rākṣasis, as well as Rākşasas of gigantic frames, upraising various kinds of weapons; and steeds of exceeding fleetness, red, and white, and black; and first-rate elephants, possessed of eninent grace, capable of crushing hostile elephants, and well trained in arts relative to their species-like Airāvata himself in conflict. And there in that mansion he saw (all these elephants), destroyers of hostile hosts—like to pouring clouds, or hills, sending up fountains, rumbling like to clouds, and invincible in battle by foes. That monkey, son to the Wind-god, saw in the mansion of the lord of Rākşasas, Rāvana, hosts by thousands; and cars of various forms of glittering gold, furnished all over with golden net-works, resembling the risen sun. And graceful grots; and picture galleries; and sporting saloons, mountains composed of wood, captivating structures dedicated to dalliance, and dwellings for day-dalliance,' saw he in the mansion of the Raksasa monarch. 1. Designed for sport. — 2. The conception of day-dalliance met with in Vidya Sundara of Bharata Chandra Roy, the Bengali poet, is found to have first originated with Vālimiki. He beheld that charming mansion resembling Mandara, filled with places for peacocks* thronged with pennons and flagstaffs, a very mine of countless gems, a field of treasures spread around, where persons of intrepid calmness were engaged in acts tending to the safety of the treasures, resembling the mansion herself of Kubera. *Sportive peacocks. On account of the lustre shed by the genes, as well as the energy of Rāvana himself, that mansion appeared splendid like the rayfurnished Sun in all his glory. And the chief of monkey-bands saw bedsteads and seat of gold and white vessels. Hanumān entered the mighty mansion, filled with gemmed cans; charming; free from impediments; resembling the mansion herself of Kama, like the abode of Kubera, resonant with the sounds of bangles and the tinklings of zones, as well as with the beat of mridanga hides and other eloquent musical instruments; with palaces close on each other; thronged with hundreds of females (like to) jewels; and containing capacious enclosures. 1. Spirituous liquor distilled from the blossoms of the Bassia latifolia. According to some, a spirit distilled from grapes. 2. Spirit distilled from sugar or molasses. filled with gemmed cans; charming; free from impediments; resembling the mansion herself of Kama, like the abode of Kubera, resonant with the sounds of bangles and the tinklings of zones, as well as with the beat of mridanga hides and other eloquent musical instruments; with palaces close on each other; thronged with hundreds of females (like to) jewels; and containing capacious enclosures. 1. Spirituous liquor distilled from the blossoms of the Bassia latifolia. According to some, a spirit distilled from grapes. 2. Spirit distilled from sugar or molasses.