And there Hanumán employed in looking around saw a grand dais made of crystal; and embellished with jewels; comparable to one belonging to the celestial regions; furnished with superb and costly sofas, having their parts painted and composed of ivory, gold, and lapis lazulis; with highly precious canopies. At one place thereof he saw a white umbrella, adorned with beautiful wreaths, resembling the lord of the stars himself. And Hanuman saw a splendid sofa garnished with gold, bearing garlands of aśoka blossoms, flaming like fire; Around which persons kept waving with their hands chowris furnished with hair;* rife with perfumes of various kinds; odorous with rich dhupa, spread with excellent sheets; covered with the skins of rams; and decked on all sides with chaplets of gorgeous flowers. *The commentator throws out a conjecture that artificial figures are here meant; which mechanically performed the function herein assigned to them. That excellent and mighty monkey beheld therein the heroic sovereign of the Rākṣasas, Ravana, resembling a mass of clouds; with flaming and brilliant ear-rings; having reddened eyes; of gigantic arms; wearing a cloth composed of golden threads; his person daubed with fragrant red sandal; looking like a crimson cloud at eve fraught with lightning; covered with noble ornaments; endowed with eminent grace; capable of wearing forms at will; resembling Mandara affluent with trees and woods and shrubs; sleeping, having given up sport at night; adorned with elegant ornaments; dear to the daughters of the Rākşasas, the source of happiness to Rākṣasas; who had ceased from drinking, asleep on a shining bedstead. Respiring like a (hissing) serpent.* And reaching there, Hanumān, waxing wondrous agitated, shrank back, as if in fear. And then arriving at the staircase, the mighty monkey, stationing himself on a dais in the middle of the stairs, gazed at the inebriate, Raksasa, resembling a tiger. 'The commentator, however, interprets: like an elephant. Serpent is, I fancy, a happy rendering of Nāga. As the sovereign of the Rākșasas was sleeping, his graceful bed resembled a grand cascade, beside which stands an elephant breathing odour. Hanuman saw the arms of the huge-bodied lord of Raksasas, fastened with bracelets, stretched (there), like to the banners of Indra; Which had been wounded by the tusk-ends of Airāvata, whose plump parts had been riven by vajra; and which had been torn by the discus of Visnu; Well developed; having equal and elegant parts; with hard joints; fraught with strength; with thumbs having nails bearing auspicious marks; having rings (on the fingers); covered; formed like bludgeons; round; resembling the trunks of elephants; cast on the white bed like to five-hooded serpents; Smeared and adorned with cool, fragrant, and excellent sandal resembling the blood of hares; pressed by paragons; odorous with incense; resisting (in battle) Yaksas, and Pannagas, Gandharvas, gods and Dānavas. That monkey saw his arms resting on the bed, like to two beautiful and mighty serpents sleeping in the entrails of Mandara. With both those well developed arms of his, the lord of Rākṣasas resembling a hill, looked handsome like Mandara with its summits. And breath bearing the aroma of the mango, and the Punnāga, the sweet scent of the Bakula, the savour of viands fraught with the six kinds of tastes, and the perfume of wines, came out of the mighty mouth of the sovereign of the Rākşasas, filling as it were, that entire chamber. He (Hanuman) be held (Rāvana), with his countenance, aglow with ear-rings and decked with a golden diadem embellished with pearls and jewels; daubed with red sandal; and adorned with; and elegant chain; having a large, broad, and full-developed breast; with a white silken cloth on, falling off his person; furnished with blood-red eyes; covered with costly yellow sheets; appearing like a mass of unrighteousness; breathing like a serpent, or an elephant asleep in the mighty Ganga during the rains; four lamps set on the golden pillars illumining four sides; even as lightnings display the entire surface of a mass of clouds. He (Hanumān) also saw in the mansion of the Rākşas chief, the wives of that huge bodied one dear to his wives, lying at his feet. That protector of monkey-bands saw them, having countenances resembling the Moon displayed; decked out with elegant ear-rings; bearing unfading garlands* by way of ornamentation; lying on the arms and lap of the lord of the Räksasa. *i.e. celestial females. The monkey saw women bearing noble ornaments, lying down. And he saw golden bracelets and ear-rings at the nether ends of the women's ears, set with diamonds and lapises. With their fair countenances resembling the Moon, graced with comely ear-rings, that terrace looked beautiful, like the welking embellished with stars. The slender-waisted wives of the sovereign of the Rākşasas, overcome with languor consequent on drink and amorous encounter, were fast asleep at the very places where they were seated. And another transcendentally beautiful damsel possessed of lovely limbs, skilled in dance, was fast asleep, betraying comely movement (during sleep). Another was seen asleep, embracing a Vīņā, like a lotus with spreading petals, resting by the side of a raft. And another dark-eyed which was asleep with her mudduka* on her lap, like a loving mother having a boy. *A kind of musical instrument. Another damsel possessed of graceful limbs and a shapely bust, was lying down, hugging her kettle-drum, like a woman embracing her lover obtained after a long time. One lotus-eyed female was asleep, embracing her Vīņā; like an amorous dainsel hugging her fair paramour. And another girl of restrained self, given to dancing, had come under the sway of sleep embracing her vipanci* like a female sleeping with her lover. *A kind of Vina. Another having inebriate eyes, was fast asleep, embracing her mridanga with her charming, plump, and tender limbs, resembling gold. Another female of faultless features, endued with a slender frame, having been overcome by lassitude consequent on drink, was asleep, with her panava on the ends of her lower garment, held fast with her hands. Another woman was sleeping soundly, embracing her dindima,* with another, bound at her back; like a female taking both her lover and her child. *A kind of musical instrument. Another damsel having eyes resembling lotuspetals, having come under the influence of liquor, was asleep, firmly holding her aramvara' with her hands. A kind of musical instrument. Another woman, intoxicated by wine, was discovered asleep, with her water-vessel upset; and, in consequence, appearing like a wellwashed variegated wreath in spring. Another, coming under the masterdom of slumber, was sleeping, holding with her hands her twin breasts resembling golden jars. And another lotus-eyed and moon-faced fair one, coming under the governance of slumber, (was asleep), embracing another furnished with shapely hips. And eminently beautiful dames were asleep, embracing musical instruments; like wenches pressing lustful (lovers), with their breasts. That monkey saw that lady, endued with beauty, lying down apart in an excellent bed; adorned with ornaments containing pearls and jewels; and as if decorating that charming mansion with her grace. The monkey saw there the yellow-hued Mandodarī, having the splendour of gold; the object of (Rāvana's) desire; beautiful exceedingly, the mistress of the inner apartment, lying down. And seeing (Mandodarī) adorned with ornaments, the offspring of the Wind-god guessed. This one endowed with the wealth of youth and beauty mighty be Sītā. And demonstrating great joy, that leader of monkeybands rejoiced exceedingly. Thereat, (Hanumăn) struck at his arms with his hands, kissed his tail, exhibited signs of glee, frolicked, sang, darted towards the pillars, shoot up to the top thereof, and jumbed down to the earth, manifesting his monkey-nature.