Sugrīva having entered his palace, and the sky being cleared of the clouds, Rāma, racked with grief, passing the rainy season and beholding the yellow welkin, the clear disc of the Moon, the autumnal right sprinkled with the rays of the Moon, the amour-stricken lord of monkeys, the ravishment of the daughter of Janaka, and the season well-nigh expired, became overwhelmed with sorrow and senseless. And regaining his sense after sometime, the highly intelligent king-Räghava began to think of Vaidehĩ although always present in his mind. And beholding the clear sky void of lightnings and clouds and filled with the noise of Sārasas, Rāghava began to lament piteously, stationing himself on the summit of the hill ornamented with metals of golden hue. And beholding the autumnal sky he engaged in the meditation of his beloved spouse. How shall that Sarasa-voiced damsel be pleased to-day, who, while sporting in the hermitage, used to warble like Sārasas, to invite them. Beholding Asana trees, as if covered with golden flowers and not beholding me how shall that damsel be pleased? How that exquisitely fine damsel having a sweet voice shall be pleased to-day, who used formerly to awake at the sounds of the drakes.? Hearing the noise of her companionsCakravākas, how shali that one, of expansive eyes resembling lotuses, live? Without her having the eyes of a fawn, I do not attain to felicity to-day, ranging at large by ponds, streams, pools and in forests and woods. Forsooth shall Cupid excited by the approach of the autumn, distress her the more on account of my separation and her personal charms. Thus bewailed that best son of a king like to the bird Sāranga soliciting water from the lord of celestials. And the graceful Lakşmaņa, returning from the picturesque mountain-summits where he had sojourned in quest of fruits, beheld his elder brother. And beholding in that lonely forest his brother, racked with anxious thoughts hard to bear and almost beside himself (with grief) the high-minded Saumitri, prompted by his brother's grief, spoke to him very poorly, saying. O worshipful one, what have you perpetrated by placing yourself under the control of passions and defeating your manliness? Your deep and devout meditation has been purloined by your grief; and it is by religious contemplation that your grief shall be terminated now. O brother, after going through the ceremonies of bathing and so forth, and acquiring peace, do you bring all your time under your control by virtue of the concentration of soul; and being of unmitigated strength do you resort to power and help, the key-notes for the accomplishment of your great object. O lord of men, Jānakī, husbanded by you, is not capable of being easily possessed by others. O hero who getting at a flame of fire, does not burn himself? Thereupon Rāma spoke to Lakşmaņa, gifted with royal marks, addressing him with natural and resolute words and saying:—What you had said, is sound, well-meaning, sanctioned by polity and speaks of piety, wealth and forgiveness. It should therefore, without the least doubt, be performed by me. It behoveth me to engage in contemplation about the eternal truth regarding the Deity and in ascetic observances. Oh else O Prince, it is not proper to think of the fruits of a difficult, highly developed and energetic action. Thereupon thinking of Maithelee, having eyes resembling lotus-petals, Rāma spoke to Laks mana with dried countenance. Having satisfied the earth with a profuse discharge of water, produced crops and thus finished his work, the thousand eyed Deity is sitting silent. O son of a king, the clouds, muttering a long and deep sound and approaching the hills and frees, are calmed having discharged their liquid contents. Having made the ten quarters dark blue, the clouds, resembling blue lotuses, have become calm, like to elephants without temporal juice. O gentle one, high gales accompanied with rains, big with water and fragrant with Kutaja and Arjuna flowers being driven before hither and thither, have now become silent. O innocent Laksmana, the sounds of clouds, elephants, peacocks, and fountains, have been all stopped. Hills, having variegated summits, being washed by dense clouds and thus free from dirt and impurities, do appear elegant being sprinkled by the rays of the Moon. Forsooth has the autumn set in, dividing its grace in the branches of Saptacada trees, in the rays of the Sun and Moon with stars and in the gaits of the excellent elephants. Surely has the autumnal grace resorted to many things. And it has appeared more profusely in the lotuses blossomed by the first rays of the Sun. Scented sweet with the flower of Saptacada trees, borrowing the musical notes of bees, following the wind and subduing the pride of infuriated elephants, the autumn is appearing very elegant. The swans are playing with Cakravākas having splendidly spacious wings, fond of cupid, crusted with the filaments of lotuses, and arriving at the banks of the rivers. The antumnal grace is appearing more elegant being divided in infuriated elephants, in proud kine, and in streams of clear currents. Beholding the sky divested of clouds, without manifesting the beauty of their tails and renouncing their attachment to their beloved mates, amusements and beauty, the peacocks are as if all engaged in mediation in the forest. The forest-lands are as if a-blaze with many a sweet-scented picturesque Priyaka trees, having a golden hue and their tops lowered down with the weight of flowers. The gaits, of the elephants rendered idle with a profuse discharge of temporal juice, fond of forests and water lilies, smelling the fragrance of the flowers of Saptachada trees and accompanied by their mates, have become slow. The sky is clear like to a sword—the streams have become of feeble currents—the wind, cool and scented with the fragrance of while esculent waterlilies, is blowing—and quarters have become devoid of darkness. The mud has been dried up by the rays of the Sun and the earth is filled with dust-this is the time for preparation for inimical kings (to enter into conflict). The bulls, having their beauty enhanced by the autumn, and their body covered with dust, delighted, infuriated and hence desirous of entering into skirmish, have been setting up terrible roars in the midst of kine. The she-elephants, moving slowly, fond, passionate and accompanied by other members, have been following their passionate mates, in the forest, embracing them. Leaving behind their excellent ornamentsthe tails, the peacocks, getting at the banks of the rivers, have been going away poorly and with depressed hearts as if being remonstrated with by the Sārasas. Having terrified the Kāraņdavas and Cakravākas with their mighty roars, the elephants, having cleft trunks and being agitated again and again, have been drinking water in the ponds filled with full blown lotuses. The drakes have been jumping delightedly into the rivers mudless, covered with sands, full of clear water, filled with kine and resounded with the notes of Sārasas. Now has stopped the noise of rivers, clouds, fountains, water, the. high winds, the peacocks and the mirthless frogs. And venomous snakes of variegated colours, having lived for a pretty long time during the rains without food, have on the approach of the autumn, come out of their dens, hungry, in quest of their prey. The red-dyed evening has renounced the welkin, being delighted at the touch of the rays of the Moon and opening a little her eyes—the stars. Having the rising Moon for her elegant countenance, the stars for her excellent open eyes and the rays for a piece of white garment, the night appeareth like a damsel wearing a white cloth. Having fed on ripe white rice, the excellent rows of delighted Sārasas are flying quickly up to the sky like to a well-strung garland shaken by he wind. The water, of the lake filled with sleeping drakes and water lilies, is appearing like the sky in the night devoid of clouds and filled with the Full Moon and stars. The ponds, having the drakes scattering hither and thither for their girdles and engarlanded with full blown lotuses and water lilies, are appearing like so many damsels ornamented with diverse ornaments. The sound set up by the wind in the dawn like to that of a pipe accompanied by the music of a trumpet, being mixed with the noise of the caves and bulls are as if multiplying each other. The banks of the rivers are being dressed by the newly blossomed flowers shaken by the mild breezes and Kāśas like to clean, washed silken clothes. The black bees, bold, given to drinking honey, rendered yellow with the filaments of lotuses and Asana flowers, delighted and accompanied by their mates are following the wind in the forest. The clear water, the blossoming flowers, the noise of Crauncas, the ripe white rice, the mild breezes, the clear Moon announce the approach of the Autumn-the removers of the rains. The rivers, having fishes for their girdles, have become of slackened course like to damsels moving slowly in the dawn being enjoyed by their husbands. The mouths of the rivers, filled with Cakravākas, covered with aquatic plants and clothed with Kāśas are appearing like to the countenances of damsels pasted with yellow pigments. The most powerful Cupid has taken up his terrible bow in this forest filled with Asana flowers appearing like to arrows and the hum of delighted bees. Having satisfied the people with a profuse discharge of water, filled the rivers and pools and covered the earth with crops the clouds have disappeared renouncing the sky. The rivers in this season of autumn have been gradually showing their banks. O you of excellent looks, the ponds in this season) appear exquisitely fine, being filled with Kurara birds and Cakravākas. O son of king, this is the time of preparation for inimical kings, desirous of defeating one another. O son of king, this is the best time for royal marches, but I do not find Sugrīva preparing himself for that end. There appear on the summits of the hills flowers Asanas, Saptaparanas, Kavidaras, Bandhugivas, and Tamālās. Behold, O Laksmana, the banks of the rivers filled with swans, Sarasas, Cakravakas and Kuraras. Stricken as I am with grief, these four months, the season of rains, appeared to me like a hundred year, not beholding Sītā. Like to Cakravākas following their inates, Sītā taking the terrible forest of Daņďaka for a picturesque garden, used to follow me there. O Laksmana, Sugriva, is not inclined to show any commiseration towards me, who am separated from my beloved spouse, deprived of my kingdom, banished and stricken with sorrow. Regarding me as one without any to back him, deprived of his kingdom, insulted my Rāvaņa, wretched, of a distant land, under the influence of amour and therefore seeking his help, (Sugrīva has not felt pity for me). O subduer of foes, O you of excellent looks, for these reasons, I have been insulted by that vicious-souled king of monkeys-Sugriva. Having appointed the time time to institute enquiries about Sītā, that wicked-minded one has now forgot it on the accession of his new dignity. Do you therefore repair to Kişkindhā and speak of me to that stupid lord of monkeys Sugriva, addicted to rural enjoyments. And do you tell him-'He, who breaks his promise made to a powerful benefactor who solicits his favour, is regarded by people as vile. He is a true hero and an excellent person who verifies his words whether good or bad. Ungrateful they are who do not, after attaining their ends, engage in the service of those of their friends who have not accomplished their objects; even those living on raw flesh do not feed on their gore after their death. And ask him if he wishes to behold in battlefield the golden bow resembling a lightning. And ask him more, if he wishes to hear the terrible twang of my bow resembling the noise of thunder, when I am enraged in battle. O hero, O son of a king, when apprised of my prowess assisted by you, will he not recapitulate in his mind (that he may be destroyed by us like to Vali)? O conqueror of enemies' cities, does not that lord of monkeys, after accomplishing his object, think of the conditions under which our friendship was contracted? Does not that lord of monkeys think that he has spent four months in enjoyments, having promised and appointed the season, after rains, (for making) enquiries about Sītā? Does not Sugrīva feel pity for us, who are racked with sorrow, being addicted to drinking with friends and counsellors? Do you go, O hero, O you of mighty strength and relate to Sugrīva these my angry words. 'O Sugriva, do not neglect your promise and wend your way trodden by Vāli. I killed Vāli only with my shaft in the battlefield; but if you did deviate from the path of truth I shall destroy you along with your kinsmen and relatives. O you best of men, do you speedily relate to him all those benefits which we shall reap by his actions, for the proper season is well-nigh past. O best of monkeys, do you carry out your promise remembering the eternal existence of virtue. Do you not behold the spirit of Väli in the abode of Death, being killed by the shaft discharged by me. Beholding his elder brother thus enraged and bewailing, the fiery-spirited Laksmana, the best of men, became enraged with Sugrīva.