Then on the summit of the mountain, Mahendra, those powerful monkeys, headed by Hanumān, rejoiced exceedingly. And when the high-souled delighted monkeys has sat them down, Jamvaban, glad at heart, asked that offspring of the Wind; the happy Hanumān, all about his proceeding: "How had you seen the worshipful one? How dose she fare there? And how dose the cruel Ten-necked one bear himself towards her? Do you truthfully relate all this to us, O mighty monkey." How could you track the exalted lady? And what did she say in reply (to your querries)?, Having learnt the real state of things, we shall decide what is to be done. And do you also tell us what we, repairing there, shall unfold to that one of controlled self and what we shall keep to ourselves. Thus directed by him, that one (Hanumān) with his down standing on end, bowing down the head to that revered one, Sītā, replied. In your sight, I bounded up with concentrated mind, eager to reach the southern shore of the ocean. As I voyaged on, a great impediment occurred in the way. I saw a goodly and noble golden peak, standing, obstructing my way. I found the mountain as an obstacle to my course. Nearing the grand and splendid golden mount, I thought within myself, 'I will rive this.' And the sun-like summit of that mighty mountain, Prahasta, was cleft in a thousand fragments by my tail. Seeing his own condition, that mighty mountain, gladdening my heart, addressed me with the sweet speech, 'O son, know me for your uncle. I am a friend to the Wind, famed as Maināka, and living in the great deep. Formerly all the foremost mountains were furnished with wings. And (once on a time) they began to range the earth at will, committing devastations. Hearing of the conduct of the mountains, that possessor of the six kinds of riches, Indra the Great, the swayer of Pāka, with his thunderbolt cut off by thousands the pinions of the mountains. At that time, my son, I, having been delivered by your sire, high-souled Wind-god, was cast into the abode of Varuna. O repressor of foes, I shall have to assist Rāghava. Rāma is the foremost of the righteous, and possessed of prowess like that of Mahendra himself. Having heard this from the magnanimous Maināka, I apprised the mountain of my mission, and my thought held their course. Having given me his permission, the magnanimous Maināka, the mountain that had put on the forın of a man, vanished, and, assuming his mountain-form, went into the vast sea. I, summoning my best celerity, began to journey the remainder of my way. And having swiftly proceeded long in the path, I saw the exalted lady, Surasā, mother of the serpents. And that worshipful one stationed in the sea, said, 'By the celestials had you, O best of monkeys, been assigned as my food. Therefore shall I eat you up. You had been ordained as mine by the gods.' Thus addressed by Surasā, I, remaining in humble guise with joined hands, and with my countenance turned pale, I uttered these words, “Rāma, the graceful son of Dasaratha, repressor of foes—has entered the woods of Dandaka, in company with his brother Lakşmaņa and Sītā. His wife Sītā has been carried off by the wicked Rāvana. At Rāma's mandate I go to her as an envoy. In this business, you, O chaste one, should help Rāma. Or having seen Mithila's daughter, as well as Rāma of untiring deeds, I shall come to your mouth, this I promise to you truly.' Thus accosted by me, Surasā, wearing forms at her will, said, 'None is able to escape me. Even this is the boon that I have received.' Having been thus addressed by Surasa, attained the magnitude of ten Yoyanas; and then anon I dilated to another ten. But she opened her mouth wider than my magnitude. Seeing her stretched mouth, I again diminished myself, and on the instant again reduced myself to the measure of a thumb. And speedily entering her mouth, I immediately came out. Then the exalted Surasă again spoke to me in her native shape. Your end having been attained, go, O mild one, O foremost of monkeys, according to your pleasure. Bring about the meeting of Vaidehī with the high-souled Rāghava. Be you blessed, O mighty-armed one. I am well pleased with you, O monkey.' Then I was praised by all beings, with, 'Excellent!' 'Excellent!' Then like to Garuda I again sprang up into the air. But now my shadow was overtaken by somebody, though I saw no one. And my velocity being deprived, I looked at the ten cardinal points; but I found there naught which could deprive me of my speed. Then I thought, 'What is this obstacle that has suddenly arisen in respect of my course? No form find I here?' And as I stood aggrieved, my glance fell downwards. Then I saw there a dreadful Räksasī supine on the flood. And laughing (scornfully), that grim one said these inauspicious words to me, who was inert, although undaunted, Whither are you bound, O you of a gigantic body? Desired by me, who am hungry, do you becoming my food, gratify this body deprived of diet for a long time. Saying, Well,' I accepted her speech, increasing my body at will more than the capacity or her mouth; And her huge and dreadful mouth extended wide to eat me up. She did not understand me, (Understand that I was able to assume any shape at pleasure) nor that I had altered my shape. Then in the twinkling of an eye contracting my vasty shape, I, extracting her heart, darted into the sky. Thereat, throwing about her arms, that terrific one dropped into the salt waters. On that chaste one, resembling a hill, having her heart torn, I heard the meet speech of magnanimous persons, who had come there of themselves, 'This dreadful Rākşasi, Sinhikā, has been swiftly slain by Hanumān. Having slain her, I again remembering the delay that had occurred touching my work, set out on the great road, and at length saw the southern shore of the sea, covered with mountains, where is situated the city of Lankā. On the sun having set, I entered the city of the Raksasas-their home-unnoticed by the Rākṣasas of terrific vigour. I had entered in when a certain female casting forth violent laughter, and wearing the splendour of clouds at the end of a Kalpa, presented herself before me. And striking with my left clenched fist that exceedingly dreadful (form), having flames for her hair, who had sought to take my life, and vanquishing her (thus), I entered (Lankā) at dusk. Then that one affrighted addressed me, saying, I, O hero, am, the city of Lanka. Vanquished have I been by your prowess. You shall everywhere conquer all the Rākşasas. There I wandered all the night (seeking for Janaka's daughter) and (at length) entered Rāvana's inner apartment; but that one of a Deity waist I found not. And not finding Sītā in Ravana's abode, I was cast in a sea of sorrow; nor found I how to cross over it. As I was sorrowing, I saw as mansion with a charming grove encircled by a wall of excellent gold. And leaping over the wall, I saw a grove rife with trees; and (at last) saw in the midst of an aśoka wood a great ſinsapā. Ascending the tree, I saw a golden tract of plantains; and hard by from the Sinsapā tree I espied that transcendentally beautiful one, darkblue, having eyes resembling lotus-petals, with her face faded in consequence of fasting, clad in the same single piece of cloth, her hair covered with dust, her limbs emaciated by the heat of sorrow and grief, Sita, ever engaged in the welfare of her lord; surrounded by cruel and deformed Rākṣasī living upon blood and flesh, like to deer environed by tigresses. I managed too swiftly to present myself before that one, menaced momentarily in the midst of the Raksasi, wearing a single braid of hair; woebegone, ever thinking of her lord; her limbs discoloured by lying down on the ground, like to a lotus on the approach of winter, having eyes resembling those of a young deer, who had turned her face away from all the enjoyments offered by Rāvaņa, and who had resolved to put a period to her existence. Seeing that lady the illustrious wife of Rāma in that condition, I seeing her remained even on that Sinsapa tree. Then I heard in Ravana's mansion loud and solemn sounds mixed with the tinklings of zones and bangles. Thereat exceedingly agitated, I changed my proper shape; and remained like a bird in a dark part of the Sinsapā tree. Then the wives of Rāvana along with Rāvana himself of exceeding strength came to that place where Sītā was. And seeing the lord of Rākşasas the exceedingly beauteous Sītā contracted her thighs and covered her full breasts with her arms. Seeing Sītā flurried and extremely excited and casting about her gladness up and down, not finding any relief and trembling forlorn, the Tennecked one said to her undergoing extreme anguish, “Without saying anything, I fall down (here). O fair one, do you regard me.” If, O haughty one, you do not honour me from pride of heart, I shall, O Sītā, two months hence, see your blood. Hearing these words of the wicked Rāvana, Sītā, growing exceeding wroth, spoke these excellent words. O worst of Rākşasas, having used improper speech towards the wife of Rāma of measureless prowess, and the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha, lord of the Ikşvāku line, why had you not your tongue fallen off? Fie upon the prowess of you that, O wretch, had carried me off while my husband was away; and not being seen of that high-souled one. You are never like Rama, you are not even fit to be his slave. Rāghava is invincible, truthful, heroic and (even) hungering for warfare. Thus addressed in harsh speech by Jānakī, the Ten-necked one flamed up in wrath, like Fire in a funeral pyre. And with his wicked eyes whirling in rage, he raised the clenched fist of his right hand to slay Mithilā's daughter; but then the females set up a cry of "Oh" and "Alas.” And rising up in the midst of the females, the wife of the wicked-minded one, the excellent one, named Mandodarī, prevented him. And she spoke soft words to him influenced by lust. O you that resemblest Indra the Great in prowess. Do you to-day sport with me. Janaki is not superior to me. And, O lord, do you sport with the daughters of celestials and Gandharvas, and with the daughters themselves of Yakşas. What will you do with Sītā? Then that exceedingly powerful ranger of the night was speedily raised up and taken (back) to his residence. On the Ten-necked one having departed, the Rákşasis of fearful faces fell to railing at Sītā in cruel and rough words. But Jänakī heeded their speech as a straw; and their fury was lost upon Sītā. Desisting from their unavailing railing, the flesh-feasting Rākṣasi imparted to Rivaņa the mighty intent of Sītā. Then, they all failing in their hope and deprived of energy, and tired, caine under the sway of sleep. And on their sleeping, Sītā intent on the welfare of her lord, lamenting piteously, in forlorn guise, and stricken with extreme sorrow, mourned profusely. Then sitting up in their midst, Trijatā spoke, “Do you without delay fall to your own selves; but never (eat up) the dark-eyed Sītā, the chaste daughter to Janaka and the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha." In truth I have seen a dismal dream capable of making one's hair stand on end; (presaging) destruction to Rākşasas and victory to the husband of this one. For protecting us, Rākşasīs from Rāghava, let us solicit Vaidehi. Even this is relished by me. If we relate such a dream to the aggrieved one, she being freed from her diverse woes, shall attain the height of joy. Propitiated by our bowing down, Janaka's daughter, Maithili, shall rescue the Raksasis from a mighty fear." Thereat, that bashful maiden, rejoiced at the prospect of her husband's victory, said, If all this prove true, then for certain, (you shall) meet with succour at my hands. Witnessing such a hard condition of Sītā I began to reflect; nor did my mind attain ease or freedom from thought. And I cast about for finding means of addressing Jānaki. I began by extolling the Ikşvāku race. Hearing the words that I uttered, embellished with descriptions of the virtues of Rajarşis, that exalted lady replied with her eyes covered with tears. Who are you? And how had you, O foremost of monkeys, found they way here? And what is your delight in Rāma? This it behove you to relate to me. Hearing her speech, I too said, O revered one, your husband, Rāma, has found a helpmate in a one endowed with terrific strength, named Sugrīva— redoubtable, the highly powerful lord of the monkeys. Do you know me as Hanumăn his servant despatched here by your spouse-Räma of unwearied actions. O famed damsel, that highly effulgent son of Dasaratha-the foremost of men, has sent as a token this ring. I desire to know, O worshipful dame, what behest of yours may I obey now. Shall I carry you to Rāma and Lakşmaņa on the northern shore of the Ocean?” Hearing this and revolving within herself Sītā, Janaka's daughter, replied.-Discomfiting Rāvaņa, may Rāghava himself carry me hence,' And bowing my head to that worshipful and blameless dame, I wanted of her a token as might conduce to Rāghava's pleasure. Whereto replied Sita-'o you of mightyarms do you take this excellent jewel for which you shall be highly regarded by Rāma.' Having said this, that best of fair ones gave me the excellent jewel, and wrought up with anxiety, related to me the story of crow (for Rāma's information). Thereupon bent on returning here I, with a fixed mind, circumambulated and bowed to that worshipful dame. And revolving within herself she again replied 'Hanumān, do you relate this to Rāghava in such a wise that the heroes Rāma and Lakşmaņa, along with Sugrīva might instantly come here. Or else there remain two months more of my me. Rāghava shall not see me and I shall quit my life like one having no husband. Hearing those piteous accents I was worked up with ire and at once resolved upon destroying the city of Lankā. Thereupon my body increased like to a mountain and desirous of entering into conflict I began to lay waste the forest. The whole forest was devastated the birds and deer strayed away in fear and the Rākşasīs, having terrible faces, awaking, beheld all that. And beholding me in the forest, they all, gathering, instantly conveyed the message to Ravana. O king, O you of mighty prowess, this your forest and castle has been broken down by the vicious-souled monkey not knowing your strength. O king, he has been impelled by his vicious sense, to do they mischief. Do you order for his head so that he might not return. Hearing this the lord of the Rākşasas despatched a chosen band of demons named Kinkaras. (Literally it means servants—hero it means his own personal attendants who were brave and heroic.) I despatched with my inace in no time eighty thousand of them no sooner than they entered the forest with darts and maces. And the few, who were saved, proceeded very quickly to Rāvana and related to him the destruction of the soldiers by me. Thereupon I thought of destroying the Caitya (A place of sacrifice or religious worship) palace and destroyed with the pillar, all the Rākşasas stationed there. Excited with wrath I destroyed that palace the best in the whole city of Lanka. Thereupon (Rāvana) despatched Jambumāli, the son of Prahasta. With my fierce mace I destroyed that mighty Rākşasa, versed in the art of war, along with his retinue and surrounded by a band of terrible and grim-visaged demons. Hearing this, Ravana, the lord of Raksasas sent the highly powerful sons of the ministers followed by a regiment of infantry. But I despatched them to the abode of Death by means of my dart. Hearing of the destruction in battle of the ministers' sons of feeble prowess Rāvana sent five heroic commanders, But I slew all of them along with their hosts. Thereupon the Ten necked demon sent his highly powerful son Aksa in the battle followed by a number of Rākşasas. No sooner the princely son of Mandodarī, versed in the art of war, rose high up in the welkin than I got hold of his legs and whirling him for hundred times ground him to the dust. Hearing of the discomfiture of Aksa, Ravana, exercised with ire sent his second son, the highly a rope and powerful Indrajit incapable of being repressed in battle. And discomfiting that best of Rākşasas, with his host I attained to an excess of delight. That hero of great prowess and mighty-arms with a number of other proud heroes was despatched by Rāvana in great confidence. Beholding my unbearable prowess and his own soldiers slain, speedily he went away fettering me with his Brahma weapon. Thereat the other Rākşasas bound me up with carried me to Rāvana. Thereupon I was welcomed by the vicioussouled Rāvana and was asked why I did come to Lankă and slay the Rākşasas. Whereto I replied, "I have done all this for Sītā." To behold her I have come here, O hero. I am the monkey Hanumān, the own begotten son of Māruta. Do you know me as Rāma's ambassador and the minister of Sugrīva. And on Rāma's embassy have I come here before you. Do you hear of my mission-I do relate to you, O lord of Räkşasas, the message which the monkey chief has commanded me to communicate to you. O great hero, Sugrīva has asked of your welfare and has desired me to communicate to you these well meaning words, conducing to the acquirement of piety, wealth and desires. While I lived on the mount Rşyamūka covered with huge trees I made friends with Rāghava dreadful in conflict. He has spoken to me, O king, ‘My spouse has been taken away by a Rākşasa. It behove you to promise me your help in this.' And in the presence of fire, Rāma, along wi Lakşmaņa, contracted friendship with me who had been deprived of his kingdom by Vāli. And he has made me lord over all the monkeys after slaying Vāli in conflict with a single shaft. It therefore behove us to assist him by all means. And by virtue of this contract I have despatched Hanumān to you as an envoy. Do you therefore speedily bring back Sīta and return her to Rāghava before the heroic monkeys discomfit you. Who know not the prowess of the monkeys who in the days of yore used to visit the celestials invited? With these words the king of the monkeys has despatched me to you. And thereupon he eyed me as if burning me with the looks of his angry eyes. And the vicious-souled demon-Rāvana, of terrible deeds, ordered for my destruction, not knowing my prowess. thereupon Vibhīşaņa, the high-souled brother of that lord of the Räkşasas interceded on my behalf in the following strain O you foremost of the Rākṣasas, do you alter your resolution. The way, you are following, is beyond the pale of royal policy. The destruction of an envoy is not sanctioned by the royal morality, O Raksasa. They communicate simply the mandate of their masters. O you of incomparable prowess, there is no sanction for the destruction of a messenger albeit he prepare a mighty iniquity Sometimes they have however been disfigured. Being thus accosted by Vibhīșana, Rāvana ordered all the demons, saying "Burn down this monkey's tail.” Hearing his mandate, the Raksasas, of wellprotected armour and terrible prowess, enveloped my tail with the fibres of cotton, silk and jute. And then striking me with their clenched fists they put fire to my tail. Although bound and fettered with many ropes I did not feel the least anguish for I was very much anxious to behold the city during the day. Thereupon fettering me and putting fire to my tail and announcing me in the public streets those heroic Rākșasas got at the city gate. Thereupon contracting again my huge person and relieving myself of the fetters I stood again in my pristine state. Taking up iron darts I slew all the Rāks asas there. And leaping over with great velocity the city gate, I, with my burning tail, burnt down the whole city from the palace to its outer gate like to the fire of dissolution devastating the entire creation. I was not the least flurried at it. Forsooth has Jānaki been destroyed for behold I nothing in Lankā which has not been burnt down— indeed the whole city has been reduced to ashes. For certain have I burnt down Sītă while burning the city Lankā-and I have thus baffled the great work of Rāma. While I reflecting thus, being overwhelmed with grief, I heard the auspicious was accents of the Caranas, exciting my wonder, Jänaki has not been burnt down. Hearing those wonderful words I regained my sense. I was then convinced by an auspicious sign that Jänaki was not burnt down, for I was not reduced to ashes albeit my tail was burning. My heart was excited with joy and the wind spread its delicious fragrance. By virtue of those manifest omens, by my confidence in the prowess of Rāma, and Sītā, and the voice of ascetics, I was greatly delighted at heart. And beholding Vaidehi again, I left her. And thereupon ascending the mount Arista I began to leap, desirous of beholding you. And following the track of the Wind, the son, the Moon, Gandharvas, and Siddhas I have beheld you all. By virtue of Rāma's grace and your prowess I have satisfied the charge of Sugrīva. I have thus related to you, what I had performed in Lankā, and it now remains with you to fulfill the rest.