Hearing those words of that terrible Rākşasa, Sītā, stricken with grief and of feeble voice, slowly replied. Racked with grief, engaged in asceticism and weeping, Sita began. to tremble. And that excellent damsel, devoted to her husband, began to think of him. Placing a twig before, that one, of beautiful smile, said-"Do you take back your mind from me and place it in your own wives." Like to a sinner unworthy of praying for final emancipation, it dose not behove you to expect to come by me. Devoted to one husband I shall never perpetrate such an iniquitous act. I am born in a high and have been married in a pious family. Having accosted Rāvana thus, the well-known Vaidehi, turning her back, again spake to him, saying. "I should not live with you since I am another's wife and chaste." Have your eyes always on religion and do you follow in the track of piety. Like to yours own wives, others are worthy of being protected by you, O ranger of the night. Making an example of you, do you enjoy with your own wives. Forsooth those vicious-minded, those of agitated senses, who are not satisfied with their own wives, are brought to misery by others' wives. (Methinks) there are no pious men here and even if there be any you do not follow him since you had such an adverse understanding, against human practice and usage. Or the considerate people have spoken the truth, but you, for the destruction of the race of the Raksasas, considering that false, had not followed it. Wealth, kingdom and cities-all are brought to naught when they are placed at the hands of a vicious and illiterate king. Obtaining you, (therefore) as her king and for your folly only, this city of Lankā, abounding in jewels, shall soon be ruined. O Rāvana, every one delight in the destruction of that inconsiderate being, who bring about his own destruction and is engaged in the perpetration of evil deeds. In this way, yourself, the perpetrator of vicious acts, meeting with your end, those persons who had been tyrannised by you, shall, delightedly, say, “Oh! blessed are we since this terrible (Raksasa) has met with his end." With wealth or riches you shall not be able to tempt me. As the rays of the sun belong to him, so I am Rāghava's only. Having laid my head on the beautiful arms of that lord of men, how shall I place it again on another's? Like the knowledge of one God monopolized by the Brāhmaṇas only, I am the spouse of that lord of earth only, cognisant of higher truths and marrying me according to the pious ceremonials. to May good betide you, O Rāvaņa. Do you take me to Rāma, stricken with grief as I am, like to a she-elephant anxiously waiting in the forest brought to the lord of elephants. It behove you to make friends with Rāma, that best of men, if do you desire to maintain your empire and do not wish to bring about your own destruction. It is known to the world, that Rāma know well the sanctions of religion and is kind to them who seek his shelter. Do you seek his friendship, if do you wish to maintain your life. Do you propitiate him therefore who is kind to his dependents and it become you to take me respectfully to him. You shall meet with your well-being if do you in this wise confer me on that best of Raghus. And mighty is the disaster that shall befall you, if do you follow any other procedure. Thunderbolt, even, when hurled, may leave you, Death himself may overlook you-but there is no safety for you, if Rāghava, the lord of men is enraged. You shall hear the terrible sound of the twang of Rāma's bow, like to the sound of the thunderbolt hurled by Indra. Soon shall arrows, bearing the names of Rāma and Lakşmaņa and having fiery heads like those of snakes, alight here. And covered with Kanka leaves they shall undoubtedly cover the whole city and devastate it by destroying all the Rākṣasas. Like to Garuda pulling up the snakes, the Garuda like Rāma shall pull up your snake-like Raksasas. Like to Vişņu recovering the effulgent Śrī (the Goddess of wealth) from the Asuras, by crossing over the three worlds with three foot-steps, my husband, the conqueror of foes, shall recover me from you. Janasthāna has been devastated, the host of Rākṣasas has been killed, and you had been disabled. Truly you had perpetrated an impious deed. O Rākṣasa, those two lions among men going out to enquire about the illusive deer, I was ravished by you, entering the empty hermitage O vile wight. And like to a dog incapable of standing before a tiger, it would have been impossible for you, to wait there in the presence of Rāma and Laksmana. If do you engage in conflict with them, your wealth and friends shall be of no avail to you (and you shall be discomfited) like to onehanded Asura Vſtra by the two handed Indra.* *The allusion is-the mighty Asura Vrtra fought with Indra for a long time even after he had his one hand chopped off. Soon shall my husband, with the assistance of Lakşmaņa, draw out your life with arrows, like to the sun drying up, by his rays, shallow water. Whether do you repair to the abode of Kubera, or whether do you, terrified, take refuge to the assembly of Varuna, you shall, for certain, be destroyed by the son of Dasaratha, like to a mighty tree broken down by thunderbolt.