Having stationed himself on the tree, casting his looks all around in quest of Sītā and looking down on the carth he surveyed the entire forest of (Asoka). It was beautified with Santdaka creepers and various trees, fragrant with celestial odours and was embellished on all sides. It resembled Nandana or the celestial garden, and was filled with various animals and birds, palaces and mansions; resounded with the notes of Kokilas; adorned with the ponds abounding in silvern water-lilies and lotuses; filled with many seats and coverlets and various houses having spacious courtyards; adorned with beautiful flowers of all seasons and trees bearing fruits. And the beauty of the blossoming Aśokas resembled the effulgence of the Sun. And stationed there Maruti beheld trees as if devoid of leaves on account of the hundreds of birds, adorned with various flowers, resorting there. He saw there the earth touched by Asoka trees, the removers of grief, having flowers growing from the roots and lowered down with their weight. And the entire quarter was as if ablaze with the beauty of the flowery Karrikaras and Kingsukas. There appeared in beauty many-flowery Punnāgas, Saptaparņas, Champakas, and Udalakas having deeply expanded roots. And there was a thousand of Asoka trees, some of whom were like gold, some were like the flame of fire and some were like dark-blue collyrium. It was like the garden of Nandana or like that of Kubera or perhaps it surpassed the both in excellence. Enveloped in charming, celestial grace beyond conception and having flowers for stars that forest appeared like a second sky, And covered with hundreds of pearl-like flowers the forest looked like the fifth ocean. And that garden was embellished with flowers of all seasons and honey-smelling trees, and filled with diverse notes and various animals and birds. And that fragrant garden was rendered more charming with various other fragrances. And that foremost of monkeys beheld in that garden of Asoka, a round palace, situated at a distance, fragrantas the Gandhamādana mountain and high as the lord of mountains. (The palace) was white as the Kailāsa hill and built on thousand pillars. All its stairs were made of coral and its pavements made of burning gold. Its beauty was as if burning all along and stealing the vision of the lookers-on. It was spotless and on account of its height touched the welkin. Thereupon he beheld there (Sītā) wearing a soiled cloth, poorly, greatly reduced by fast, sighing again and again and encircled by a band of Räkşasīs. She was (however) spotless like to the rays of the moon on the first lunar day. Her graceful beauty could with great difficulty be perceived lie to the flame of fire enveloped with smoke. And wearing a shattered and soiled yellow cloth and divested of all ornaments she appeared like a lotus stalk without lotuses.* *This passage has another meaning-Padmini has two meanings— (i) lotus (ii) Lakşmi or the goddess of wealth. The goddess of wealth is generally described as sitting on a lotus. Oppressed, racked with grief, weakened and chaste as she was, she appeared like Rohini possessed by Ketu. She was greatly reduced by fast, stricken with grief and anxious thoughts, disturbed with sorrow and was poorly and her eyes were always full of tears. Separated from her kith and kin and not beholding Rāma and Lakşmaņa* but the Rāks asīs, she appeared like a hind surrounded by dogs. *Priyājanam-literally means dear ones—but here it refers to Rāma and Lakşmana. Her braid of long hair resembling a black serpent falling on her back it appeared as if the Earth was filled with dark-blue forests on the disappearance of the rains. She was worthy of happiness only and never knew of misery and therefore she was (now) greatly oppressed with sorrow. And beholding that one of expansive eyes rendered pale and feeble, Hanuman, Hanumān, by various conclusive arguments reflected within himself. She must be Sītā for this damsel looks just like her, whom I saw, when she was ravished by Rāvana, assuming shapes at will. Having the countenance of the full-moon, beautiful eye brows, round breast, she is as if dispelling the darkness from all quarters by virtue of her grace. Her throat was yellow, and her lips were like Bimbas.* She was of middle stature and her limbs were all well built. *A circubituceous plant with red fruits. She had eyes resembling lotus petals and was like the beloved wife of Manmatha-Rati and was adorable to the whole creation like the rays of the full-moon. That one having a graceful person was seated on the earth like a female ascetic having her senses restrained. And she was sighing again and again like the timid daughterin-law of the lord of serpents.* *The epithet has a special significance because through her the destruction of the race of Raksasas was brought about. Entangled by a mighty web of grief her grace was greatly lessened and she appeared like the flame of fire enveloped in smoke. She was like to Smrti of doubtful meanings, fallen wealth, lost respect, hope without any desire for gain, Siddhis of many troubles, sullied understanding and fame soiled with false rumours. That innocent one was greatly distressed for not being able to attend upon Rāma and she having the eyes of a young hind, being oppressed by the Rākṣasis was casting her looks hither and thither. With a displeased countenance, having darkblue and curling eye lashes, and eyes full of tears, she was sighing again and again. Worthy of Wearing ornaments but now without any, poorly, crusted with execrations, she appeared like the rays of the stars enveloped by dark-blue clouds. And beholding Sītã in that pitiable plight like to learning for want of practice, (Hanumān) was Puzzled with doubts. Seeing her without ornaments he could with great difficulty make her out like to words having different meanings without the knowledge of grammar. And beholding that blameless daughter of the king, having expansive eyes, Hanumān, by various reasonings, reflected-“Forsooth she must be Sītā." I see at her person all these ornaments, of which Rāma mentioned to me at the time of my departure. I behold on her ears excellent ear-rings and nicely placed Svadangstras and on her arms jewelled ornaments rendered dark-blue by dirt for constant use. Verily these are the ornaments Rāma mentioned to me. I do not perceive them which had been cast off by her. But these are the rest there is not the least doubt about it. The monkeys had seen, her excellent yellow cloth made of golden fibres, on the hill. They had seen also her excellent ornaments, which cast off by her, fell on the earth with a sound. Her cloth has been shattered by constant use but her grace has not been rendered worse than its colour. This one having a golden countenance must be the beloved queen of Rāma who, albeit separated from him, has not disappeared from his mind. This is that damsel on whose account Rāma being simultaneously burnt by affection, pity, grief and amour, affection in consequence of his beloved spouse being ravished, pity for his inability to protect one dependent on him, grief for the loss of his beloved wife and amour for his dear one. Verily it appear from the grace of her person, from her well developed limbs and from Rāma's beauty that this worshipful damsel having darkblue eyes must be his spouse. She has her mind fixed in him, and he in her and it is for this that she and the virtuous-souled (Rāma) have been still maintaining their being. Indeed my master Rāma has performed a mighty task for breathes he still in her separation, without consuming himself in grief.” Having beheld Sītā in this plight, that son of the wind-god approached Rāma in mind and showered praises on his master.