Having been honoured by her (Sītā) in excellent words, the monkey proceeding, left that place, thinking. A small work it is that remains. Beheld have I this dark-eyed lady. Passing by three means, I see that I shali have to resort to the fourth. No treaty with Rākşasa can answer the end. Neither can gifts prevail with the wealthy. Nor is it possible to sow dissensions among persons proud of their strength. Then, display of prowess appear to me applicable in this case. Without resorting to prowess, way find I none for ensuring success in this matter. If the Rākşasa find their foremost heroes fallen in battle, they may temper their (martial ardour). He that, having compassed his (principal) purpose, accomplishes many more without marring the prime one, is entitled to act. He that dose a small work, is certainly not a worker, he it is that know to bring about success in diverse ways, is along capable of securing the same. (The commentator explains this passage thus:"He that by great pains accomplishes a small work, cannot be a great actor; but he that bring about his end in a variety of ways through the minimum of effort, in the actor.") Although my sole commission was to effect this much, (i.e. see Sita) yet if I repair to the abode of the lord of monkeys after having ascertained the strength of our ownselves and that of the foe in the field, then I shall have done the mandate of my master. How can my arrival (at this place) be made to bring forth good fruit? How can I forcibly bring on engagement with the Rākşasas? And how can the Ten-necked one in battle be made to form a just estimate of the respective strength of myself and his forces? Coming in contact with the Ten-necked one, with his three orders, forces and charioteers, I shall, reading the intention that is in his heart, as well as his strength, happily return from hence. This grove of the fell (fiend) resembling Nandana itself, containing various trees and plants, and captivating to eye and heart, will i destroy; even as fire destroy a dry wood. This grove being ravaged, Rāvana shall get into a fury. Then the Raksasa monarch shall summon up an army consisting of herse, elephants, and mighty cars, equipped with tridents, iron axes and other arms, and mighty shall be the encounter that shall take place. And I with unpaired prowess battling with those terrific Rākşasa, and annihilating that host despatched by Rāvana, shall merrily journey to the abode of the monkey king. Then furious like the Wind, the offspring of the Wind-god possessed of dreadful prowess set about knocking down the trees with impetuous violence. Then that hero, Hanumān, devastated that garden of the damsels, resounding with the roars of mad elephants, and filled with diverse trees and shrubs. And with its trees crushed and its tanks damaged, with its fair peaks shattered in fragments and its pools eloquent with the notes of birds, riven all over, with coppery and withered sprays cast about (in all directions), and with its trees and plants shorn of their liveliness, that wood was no longer beautiful, as if it had been burnt up by a forest-fire; and its plants resembled damsels with their apparel falling off. And that magnificent wood, with its arbours and its picture-galleries destroyed, and its ferocious animals, beasts and birds crying in distressful accents, and its rocky structures and other mansions broken down, was bereft of its loveliness. And that grove of the inner apartment belonging to the damsels (Pramadāvanasyagen. occurs twice in this passage. the commentator, as usual, refines on the word, to one he assigns a literal sense; another he explains of the grove belonging to the protector of the females, i.e. the wood, which, by arousing their desire for Rāvana, assured their stay there!) of the Ten-necked one, with its numbers of Asoka trees and plants cast about disorderly, was, in very sooth, through the might of the monkey rendered a sight composed of plants, etc. tending to awaken the regret of the spectator. (There is a pun on the word soka-occuring twice. One of these originally aśoka, but entering into a vowel combination with the preceding word, is the name of a tree; and Soka means sorrow. The aśoka trees being shattered, inspired the onlooker with soka-sorrow) Then having done what was wondrous disagreeable to the mind of the magnanimous lord of the world, that monkey desirous of coping alone with a vast host, stood by the main entrance, flaming in effulgence.