On the monkey-chiefs having departed, Rāma said to Sugrīva, How is it that you know all the quarters of this earth?' Thereupon, the self-controlled Sugrīva, bowing low, said to Rāma, Do you listen to my words. I shall relate everything. When Vāli pursued the Dānava Dundubhi, wearing the form of a buffalo towards the Malaya mountain, Mahișa entered a cave of that mountain. And Vali also, desirous of slaying the Asura, entered Malaya. And I was made to stand at the mouth in humble guise; nor did Väli issue out, although a good year rolled away. Then the cave became filled with blood gushing out vehemently. Seeing this, I became amazed, and exercised with the poison of grief of accountri my brother. And I, losing my sense, thought that my superior had for certain been slain. And I placed 7 crag huge as a hill at the mouth of the cave. took to my (And thought I), 'Mahisa, unable to issue out, needs must meet his end.' And despairing of his (Vali's) life, I retraced my steps to Kiskindha. And obtaining the spacious kingdom along with Tãrã and Umā, I began to pass my days in peace in company with his counsellors. Then came that foremost of monkeys, having slain him (Mahisa). Thereupon I, influenced by fear, in consideration of his dignity, made over to him his monarchy. But Vali, his senses exercised with sorrow, anxious to slay me, in company with his counsellors, pursued me, who heels. Hotly pursued and chased by Vāli, I surveyed various streams and woods and cities. And I surveyed the earth like the hoof-print of a cow, or the image reflected from a mirror, or a firebrand whirled (in the air).* *The commentator remarks that like the hoof-print of a cow expresses the case with which Sugrīva travelled the earth; like a fire brand whirled conveys his vehement speed; and like the image reflected on a mirror signifies the lucidity of his perception. Then repairing to the East, I see various trees, and mountains, and charming caves, and diverse tanks. And there I behold the Ascending mountain decked with gold,—and that daily abode of Apsarās-the sea of milk. And chased by Vāli, and flying on, I suddenly veered round, and then again, O master, off I went. And changing that direction, I again made for the South crowded with trees belonging to Vindhya, and embellished with sandal woods. Then seeing Văli in the mountain among trees, from the south I, pursued by Vāli, betook myself to the western quarter. And beholding various countries, and arriving at that foremost and best of mountains Asta* I turned to the north; and (passed) Himavat, and Meru, and the Northern sea. But pursued by Vāli, refuge find I none. Then out spoke Hanumān endued with understanding, *The Setting hill. 'O king, now, I remember me how that lord of monkeys, Vāli, was cursed by Matanga in this very hermitage. If Vāli enters (into this asylum), his head becomes cleft in hundred. There shall dwell happily without anxiety.' O king's son, thereupon, we went to the Rișyamuka mountain, nor did then Vāli enter we there from fear of Matanga. Thus, O king, did I actually see all the world. And from that place I came to this cave.