Then on account of the cries of birds and the sounds of breaking trees, all the denizons of Lankā were seized with trepidation in consequence of fright. And agitated with fear, birds and beasts hurried (on all sides); and omens boding evil to the, Raksasas, began to appear (everywhere). And grim-visaged Rākṣasīs, awaking from their sleep, saw that wood devastated, and that heroic mighty monkey. And observing them, that mighty-armed and powerful monkey endowed with immense strength, magnified his dimension, capable of striking terror into the Rākşasas. Beholding that exceedingly strong monkey resembling a mountain, the Räkşasīs asked Janaka's daughter, saying. Who is this? And whence, and wherefore has he come here? And why did he carry on converse with you? Tell us this, you of expansive eyes. O lucky one, entertain no fear. And, O you having eyes with dark outer corners, what is the talk that this one has held with you? Thereat, the chaste Sītā, having all her parts perfect, answered, “What is my power to read Rākṣasas capable of wearing forms at will? ” You know who he is and what he does. Serpents, without doubt, know the way of serpents. And, furthermore, I am very much frightened, nor know I who that one is. I take him to be a Rākşasa, who has come here through his capacity to put on any shape. Hearing Vaidehi's words, the Raksasis swiftly took to their heels. Some remained, and some departed to inform Rāvana of the matter. And before Rāvana, the Rākṣasīs of deformed visage informed him of the hideous and dreadful monkey. O king, in the heart of the aśoka wood there is a monkey of a terrific body, who, possessed of immeasurable might, stay, after having carried on a conversation with Jānakī. Nor, albeit questioned by us many a time and oft, dose Janaka's daughter, Sītā, having the eyes of a deer, intend to tell us who the monkey is. He may be the emissary of Vāsava, or of Vaiśravaņa; or he may have been sent by Rāma himself from eagerness to get at the whereabouts of Sita. And he it is that, wearing a wonderful form, has destroyed your charming arbour of the interior, filled with beasts of various kinds-And quarter there is none which has not been destroyer by him; and only that place where the exalted Jänakī is, remain uninjured by him. Whether for preserving Jānakī, or from fatigue—it dose not appear. But what is his fatigue? She it is that has been preserved by him. And that overgrown Sinsapă tree, affluent with elegant foliage, under which Sītā herself has (always rested), has been spared by him. It behove you to order sharp chastisement to be inflicted on that one of a fierce form, who, having carried on converse with Sītā, has laid your wood waste. Who, O Sovereign of the Rākşasas, that has not his life served from him, converse with Sītā, who has captivated your heart?" Hearing the speeches of the Rākṣasīs, Rāvaņa, lord of Raksasas, with his eyes rolling in rage, flamed up like the fire of a funeral pyre. As fall drops of lighted oil from a flaming lamp, fell drops of tears from the eyes of the enraged Ravana. And that highly energetic one ordered his heroic servants, resembling himself, to punish Hanuman. And from that mansion speedily issued eighty thousand of those retainers, carrying in their hands maces and mallets. (Kūța-hammer. The commentator, however, says that it means a weapon resembling a hammer.) Having huge bellies, and large teeth, of dreadful form, and possessed of unwieldy strength, all eager to engage in the conflict and take Hanuman. Having come near that monkey staying at the main entrance, those swelling spirits rushed on, even as insects rush into a flame. And equipped with variegated maces, and bludgeons, and golden Angadas, (A bracelet worn on the upper arm) and arrows resembling the Sun, they approached that foremost of monkeys. And accoutred in maces, axes, and javelins, and bearing bearded darts and lances in their hands, they suddenly surrounded Hanuman and remained before him. And the graceful and energetic Hanumān also, resembling a hill, flourishing his tail over the ground, sent up tremendous roars. And attaining mighty proportions, Hanumān, son to the Wind-god, brandished his tail, filling Lankā with sounds. At the sounds of his flourishing, as well as with those resounding ones set up by himself, birds began to drop down from the sky. He loudly proclaimed, “Victory to the exceedingly strong Rāma and to the mighty Lakşmaņa! And victory to king Sugrīva, protected of Rāghava! I am the servant of the Sovereign of Kosala, Rāma of untiring deeds, (I am) Hanuman, the destroyer of hostile hosts, offspring of the Wind-god. And a thousand Rāvana's cannot cope with me in conflict, when I shall hurl crags and trees by thousands. In the very presence of all the Rākşasa, shall I, having desolated the city of Lankā and paid my reverence to Maithli, go away, my end being compassed." They were struck with affright at his roars; and they beheld Hanumān elevated as an evening cloud. And now knowing for certain that the monkey had been despatched by his master, the Rākṣasas commenced assailing him with various kinds of dire arms. Environed on all sides by those heroes, that exceedingly powerful one, staying by the main entrance, look up a terrific bolt. And taking that bolt, like Vinatā's offspring handing a darting serpent, he slew those rangers of the night. And grasping (the bolt), the Wind-god' son began to range the welkin and destroy (the Rākşasas) like the thousand-eyed (deity) slaughtering Daityas with his thunder-bold. And having slain those Rākṣasas, who where the retainers of Rāvaņa, the heroic offspring of the Wind-god-foremost of heroes-desirous of fight, stood at the gate. Then certain Räkşasas, getting off from the field in fear, informed Rāvana of the destruction of all his servants. Hearing that a mighty host of the Rākṣasas had been slain, the king, with his eyes whirling in ire, ordered Prahasta's son of incomparable prowess, and invincible in battle.