Humbly addressed in these words informed with morality, Sumitra's son, resuming his native mildness, accepted them. On his accepting the speech, the lord of monkeys like a wet cloth cast off from him the fear he had conceived on account of Lakşmaņa. Then Sugriva-lord of monkeys-tore away the gaudy and variegated garland on his neck-potent with many a virtue, and become deprived of energy. And that master of all the monkeys, Sugrīva, gladdening Lakşmaņa of dreadful prowess, humbly observed to him, You son to Sumitrā, by the favour of Rāma have I received back my lost luck, my fame, and this eternal monarchy of the monkeys. O king's son, who is capable of repaying even in part an action like that of the divine (Rāma) renowned by means of his own acts? By virtue of native energy, and merely with my help, the righteous Rāghava shall recover Sītā and slay Rāvana to boot. What need of assistance to him who with a single shaft rived seven giant trees, a mountain, and the Earth. O Lakşmaņa, what is the use of help to him the sounds of whose stretching bow made the Earth tremble with her mountains? O best of men, when that foremost of men shall set out for slaying his enemy, Rāvaņa along with those going before him, I will follow him. I through my confidence, or presuming upon our amity. I have transgressed in any way, (Rāma) ought to excuse his servant,—for there is no servant that does not transgress. When the high-souled Sugrīva had said this, Lakşmaņa became well pleased and he spoke from love, Having in especial, you endued with humility, my brother, O monarch of monkeys, is every way strong, O Sugriva. Such is your strength, O Sugriva, and such your self-denial, that you are fully worthy to enjoy the good fortune of the king of monkeys. O Sugrīva, by your help, the puissant Rāma shall speedily slay his foe. Of this there is not the least doubt. O Sugrīva, what you virtuous, grateful and never turning away from fight, have said is fit and proper. What knowing person, excepting, O foremost of monkeys, yourself and my elder brother, can speak so. Resembling Rāma himself in strength and prowess, you, O chief of monkeys, have been ordained his help by the gods. But, O hero, do you speedily go out with me and soothe your friend aggrieved for the ravishment of his wife. And do you, my frie forgive what rough speech, on hearing the utterances of Rāma sunk in grief, I have given you. But, O hero, do you speedily go out with me and soothe your friend aggrieved for the ravishment of his wife. And do you, my frie forgive what rough speech, on hearing the utterances of Rāma sunk in grief, I have given you.