Having crossed over the ocean incapable of being repressed, that one endowed with great strength, staying at the plateau of Chitrakūta, and having refreshed himself, cast his eyes on Laukā. And covered with showers of blossoms poured down by the trees, that monkey possessed of prowess then appeared there like Puspamaya.* *A monkey so named. Having cleared an hundred Yoyanas, that monkey gifted with first-rate prowess, did not heave sighs or feel any fatigue. I am competent to bound over many hundreds of Yojanas. What then is this end of the ocean measuring an hundred Yojanas only? That foremost of those endowed with energy and the prime of monkeys, gifted with speed, went to Laikā,* having crossed over the mighty main. *Descending, remarks the commentator, from the mountain-summit. Seeing blue lawns, and perfumed woods, replete with honey and filled with mountains, he held his way by the central thoroughfare. That foremost of monkeys, the energetic Hanumān, went by hills filled with trees, and ranges of blossoming woods. And stationing himself in that mountain, the offspring of the Wind-god beheld woods and groves and Lankā established at the brow of the mountain. That elephant of a monkey surveyed Saralas, and Karņikāras, and dates in full flower, priyalas, Muculindas, Kutajas and Ketakas, Priyangus warm with aroma, and Nipas, and Saptachchhadas; Asanas, Kovidaras, and flowering Karavīras, and trees bearing blossoms, filled with swans and Kārandavas, and covered with lotuses and lilies; and charming sporting hills* and various watery expanses; and extensive tracts covered with diverse trees bearing flowers and furies at all seasons, and gardens exceedingly beautiful to behold. *Sporting hills according to Kataka. According to others, akrira means a grove in general. Drawing near to Lankā embellished with lilies and environed by a moat filled with lotuses, that one graced with auspiciousness, that graceful monkey, Hanumān, beheld Lankā vigilantly guarded by Rāvaņa, in consequence of Sītā having been carried away, with Rākṣasas bearing fierce bows ranging all around, that mighty and captivating capital surrounded by a golden wall, filled with edifices resembling cliffs and looking like autumnal clouds, and elevated yellowish highways; abounding in hundreds of banners mounted on the walls, and beautified with pennons an streamers; with noble golden gateways painted with plants; and resembling the metropolis of the very sovereign of the celestials. And that graceful monkey saw Lankā situated on the top of the mountain, filled with splendid yellow-white palaces, like to a city stationed in the sky ruled by the lord of Rākşasas and reared by Viśvakarmā himself. And the monkey, Hanumān, beheld Lankā, as if moving in the sky: with her walls furnished with daises for her hips, the immense waters and woods for her cloth, Śataghnīs and darts for her hair ends: and pennons on her walls for earrings, built as if by the agency of the Mind; and constructed by Viśvakarmā himself. And arriving at the Northern gate resembling the mansion of Kailāsa, and cleaving, as it were, the welkin, and as if holding the firmament with lofty and glorious edifices, and observing the sea; his dreadful enemy, Ravana; the city teeming with poisonous snakes, as well as the method of defence (displayed in it)-the monkeys reflected, Even if the monkeys came here, they should fail to achieve success; for Lankā is incapable of being taken in battle by the celestials themselves. Even if the mighty-armed Rāghava should reach this terrible-looking and impregnable Lankā reared by Rāvana, what could he do? Opportunity find I none either for conciliation with the Raksasas, or for (winning them over) by gifts, or for sowing dissensions among them, or for conquering them in fight. Of all the monkeys, four only endowed with (exceptional) celerity, viz., Vāli's son, Nīla, the intelligent king, and myself, heave the power to come over here. When I have ascertained whether Vaidehī is alive or not, I shall, after interviewing Janaka's daughter, think about this. Then that elephantine monkey, stationed on the summit of that mountain, for a while bethought himself as the success of Rāma.* *About rescuing his wife. I cannot in this form succeed in entering the city of the Rākşasas, guarded by wily and powerful Rākṣasas. I should, while engaged in searching for Jānaki, deceive all the strong and highly energetic Rākşasas gifted with prowess. For attaining this mighty object, it behove me to enter Lankā at night in a shape invisible yet well suited to the end in view. Beholding the city in that state, difficult of being subdued by the celestials and Asuras (combined), Hanumān, sighing moment arily, thought within himself, How can I, without being discovered by the impious lord of Rākşasas, Rāvana, succeed in seeing Janaka's daughter, Maithili? How can the work of Rāma cognizant of self (be so managed that it) may not be brought to naught? How can I see Janaka's daughter singly in secret? Action on the very eve of success, on being obstructed by adverse season and place, and through the agency of unreflecting envoys come to nought, even as darkness is dispelled on sunrise. In respect of what should he undertaken and what not, even the certain decision (of a master assisted by his counsellors), because of a heedless messenger, dose not appear in all its beauty: messengers (foolish) yet proud of their knowledge, bring every business to nought. How can I so manage that my business may not suffer? How can I avoid recklessness? How can my bounding over the deep bear fruit? On my being seen by the Rākşasas, the work of Rāma cognizant of self, desirous of the destruction of Ravana, shall be marred. Even if I wear a Rākşasa form, I cannot anywhere remain undiscovered by the Rākṣasas. What shall I say of any other form? Even the wind, I conceive dose not stray here, unperceived. Nothing whatever is here that is unknown to the Räkşasas of redoubtable deeds. Should I stay here embodied in my native form, I shall come by destruction; and the interest also of my master shall suffer. Therefore, diminishing myself, I shall at night, for compassing the welfare of Rāghava, enter Lankā is my own form. Entering at night Råvaņa's capital difficult of access, I shall, obtaining entry into every dwelling seek Janaka's daughter.' Having made up his mind thus, the heroic Hanumān, extremely eager to see Vaidehi, wished for the setting of the sun. On the sun having set, at night the Windgod's son, contracting his person, reducing himself to the dimensions of a cat, became wonderful to behold. At dusk, the powerful Hanumān, springing up, entered the charming city of Lankā with its well divided highways; furnished with rows of edifices having golden pillars, and net-works, resembling the metropolis of the Gandharvas. He saw that splendid city containing sevenstoried and eight-storied edifices, studded with crystal and adorned with gold. And the dwellings of the Rākṣasas were embellished with these (ornaments). And graceful golden gateways belonging to the Rākṣasas everywhere lent splendour to Lankā adorned all over. Beholding Lankā, wonderful and of inconceivable loveliness, the mighty monkey, desirous of beholding Vaidehī, became depressed and delighted at the same time. And he (entered Lankā) engarlanded with yellow edifices joined together, with the ornamented arches of her gateways furnished with nets of precious gold; famed (all over the world); ruled by the arm of Ravana, and vigilantly guarded by night-rangers of dreadful strength. As if ministering to him,* the Moon furnished with many thousands of rays arose with the stars in the midst of the sky, spreading lunar light over all creatures. * Hanuman. And that heroic monkey behold the Moon possessing the sheen of a conch, and hued like milk or the lotus-stalk, arisen and afloat (in the welkin), like a swan swimming in a tank.