On prince Akşa having been slain by Hanumān, the magnanimous monarch of the Rākṣasas, wrought up by wrath, repressing his feelings, ordered Indrajit resembling a celestial, (to take the against the foe.) You are the foremost of those bearing arms; and you had afflicted even the gods and Asuras (in bat .s); your deeds have been witnessed by the celestials with Indra; and you had procured a weapon (viz. the Brahma weapon) even from the Great-father. And coping (in conflict) with your might of arms, all the celestials with the Maruts, headed by the lord of celestials himself, could not stay in the field. There is none in these three worlds (save yourself), who dose not come under the influence of fatigue in battle. And you are preserved by the prowess of your arms, and protected also by your ascetic merit; and being skilled in the knowledge of season and place, you, methinks, are the foremost of them all in intelligence. There is no deed which you cannot perform in the field; and there is nothing in counsel capable of being arrived at by arguing on the lines prescribed by the scriptures, which you are not equal to; and there is none in all the three worlds who dose not know your strength and prowess in arms. And your ascetic energy is like to mine, as well as your prowess and mighty in arms in battle. And having you in the conflict, my mind assured (of victory), dose not experience sorrow. Slain have been all the servants, as also Jambumālī, and those five generals, the heroic sons of my councillors, and the swelling forces including steeds, elephants and cars. And low Leith Sahodara, and prince Akşa has also been slain. O destroyer of foes, my mind did not feel the same confidence in them that I do in you. (According to another reading, the meaning would be:-"O best of warriors, do you, considering your own strength and that of the enemy, so exert yourself that he may no longer inflict terrible losses on our army.” (Tirtha)) And seeing this mighty host slain, as well as the prowess and energy of the monkey, and the taking into consideration your own strength, do you put forth your energy according to your strength. On nearing the scene (of conflict), do you, O foremost of those bearing arms, seeing yours own strength and that of the foe, so exert yourself that the latter, (now) resting quietly in consequence of having created a carnage-(on the hostile hosts), may wax enfeebled. (Another meaning is: Looking on yourself, and (not on my forces), as constituting my main stay, put forth your prowess.) O hero, army can serve no purpose here; for hosts fly (before) Hanumān or are reduced to nothing. Neither can it avail to use arms of terrific power and resembling the thunderbolt. Nothing can resist the rush of the Wind-god's offspring, and this one like to fire is incapable of being slain with weapons. Revolving well in your mind what I have remarked), do you in order to the attainment of success, with an intent mind remember the divine virtue of this bow, and repairing (to battle) strive to vanquish the foe, baffling his attacks. (One should know in what branches of knowledge one's enemy is proficient, and, understanding this, one should strive for victory.) O foremost of intelligent ones, (that I send you to battle) is certainly not proper; yet this course of action is endorsed by Kșatriyas and those following the morality of kings. O subduer of enemies, one should be versed in various branches of learning as well as be masterful in war. (According to a different reading, the meaning would be, “You are competent to fight agreeably to the rules.") He that craves victory in fight, should be acquainted with various branches of knowledge. (The śloka is very difficult and incapable of interpretation without at places meanings being read into it.) Hearing the words of his father, (Indrajit) gifted with celestial prowess, determined to fight, instantly circumambulated him. Excited with desire for fight and worked up with energy, Indrajit, eulogised by the friendly Rākşasas, set out for battle. And that highly effulgent and graceful son of the lord of the Rākşasas, having expansive eyes resembling lotus-petals, issued out like to the rising of the ocean during a parva. (A name given to certain days in the lunar month at the full and change at the moon, and the 8th and 11th of each hall month.) Thereupon Indrajit of unbearable prowess, equal to the lord of the celestials, ascended a car drawn by four horses, having sharpened teeth and resembling Garuda in velocity. And that master of a car and foremost of bowmen, conversant with the use of all weapons-the best of those using swords proceeded soon in his car where Hanumān was. And hearing the sound of his car and the twang of his bow, that heroic monkey attained an excess of delight. And taking up a bow and sharpened darts, Indrajit, versed in the rules of war, proceeded towards Hanumān. And as he issued out for battle, greatly delighted, with arrows in his hands, all the quar'ers becai.e dark, and jackals began to set up terrible cries. There arrived the Nāgas, the Yakşas, the Maharsis, the planets, and the Siddhās, and the birds, covering the the welkin, and, greatly delighted, began to make a noise. Beholding that car having a flag like that of Indra, approach very quickly, the monkey began to emit terrible roars and increase himself. And Indrajit too, seated on the celestial car and having a painted bow, began to stretch it, emitting a sound resembling that of thunder. Thereupon closed in conflict those two greatly powerful (heroes)gifted with swift movements and fearless in battle—the monkey, and the son of the lord of Rākṣasas, like to the lords of celestials and Asuras. And baffling the shafts of that hero of a mighty car, an accomplished bowman and a finished warrior, the immeasurably powerful monkey increasing himself began to range in the welkin. Thereupon the heroic (Indrajit)-slayer of foes-began to discharge incessantly shafts, large, sharp, well-feathered, painted in gold and swift-coursing like to thunder. And hearing again the noise of his car, the sounds of drums, bugles, and war-drums, and the twangs of the bow, he again leaped up in the sky). And baffling the aim of (Indrajit), who had always an eye on it, that great monkey ranged at a distance from those shafts. And again facing the arrows and stretching his hands, the Wind-god's son again leaped up. And those two heroes, gifted with swift movements and versed in the art of war, engaged in a combat, admired by all beings. And Hanuman could not find out the shortcomings of the Rākşasa, nor could that highsouled one detect the weak points of the son of the Wind-god. And these two gifted with celestial prowess, engaged in conflict, became unbearable to each other. And seeing him unhurt though aimed at with infallible arrows, the high-souled (Indrajit), controlling his senses, engaged in deep and devout meditation (According Hindu philosophy, one by virtue of yoga and selfcontrol can realise many great things which are beyond ordinary human conception. Beholding to Human unhurt though assailed incessantly with terrible shafts, Indrajit at once jumped at the conclusion that he must be a great spirit in a monkey-form. To realise who he in reality was, he gagged in yoga or devout meditation) (to realise the true identity of Hanumān). Thereupon, that son of the lord of Rākşasas pinned his thoughts upon that foremost of monkeys, and finding him incapable of being slain, he began to devise plans how he could be bound. And that hero, foremost of those versed in the use of weapons, discharged at that best of monkeys the highly powerful weapon conferred on him by Brahmă, the Great-father of the celestials. And knowing him incapable of being slain, Indrajit conversant with the use of weapons, bound that large-armed son of the Wind-god with that weapon. And being bound up by that Rākşasa with the weapon, the monkey became motionless and fell down on the earth. And thinking that he was bound up with a Brahma weapon, he did not feel the least pain in consequence of Brahmā's blessing. And that heroic monkey began to think of the boons conferred on him by the Great-father of the celestials. And thinking that the weapon was conferred by the Self-create and consecrated by sacred Mantras, Hanuman began to think of boons conferred by the Great-father. “In consequence of the power of the Lord of creation I am incapable of extricating myself from these bonds." (Knowing this by means of devout mediation, he reflected again)-“This has been ordained by Him, and I must put up with this pain for sometime.” Revolving well the power of the weapon, the boon of the Great-father, and his own prowess to extricate himself from bonds, the monkey followed the Great-father's behest. I do not fear though bound by this weapon, since I am being protected by Brahmā, Indra and the Wind-god. It will be better if I am carried off by the Rākşasas, for I shall reap very great benefit by my conversation with the lord of Rākşasas. "Therefore let the enemies carry me." Having resolved this, the considerate (monkey)-slayer of foes—remained motionless. And being ruthlessly bound by the foes and remonstrated with by them, he began to moan piteously. And beholding that slayer of foes motionless, the Rakşasas bound him up with cotton and bark. And he gladly allowed himself to be tied up and rebuked by his enemies, thinking that he might converse with the lord of the Rākşasas, if he, out of curiosity, should like to see him. Being bound with bark, that powerful (monkey) got himself freed from the binding of the weapon, for the binding force of a Brahma weapon becomes null when there is any other binding. Beholding that best of monkeys tied up with bark and liberated from the binding of the weapon Indrajit reflected that the binding force of the Brahma weapon became powerless when there was any other binding. “Alas, (those Räkşas) have rendered my mighty deed fruitless. They know not the action of Mantras. (That the action of a Brahma mantra upon one is multified if one is bound physically) And on the Brahma weapon being baffled, any other weapon cannot effect anything; and thus we thus we have all been placed in a critical predicament." On being released from the weapon, Hanumān did not betray any signs of his liberation, albeit he was pulled by the Rākşasas and pained by the bonds they had bound him with. And the monkey, Hanumān, was pulled by those cruel Rākṣasas having fatal boxes, in the direction of the lord of Rākşasas. Seeing (Hanuman) freed from the (Brahma) weapon yet bound by the bark of trees, he (Indrajit) showed the exceedingly powerful and highly heroic monkey to the king along with his adherents. And the Rākṣasas related to the ruler of Rākșas everything touching that foremost of choice monkeys, resembling a mad elephant who was in bonds. “Who is he? And whose son? And where from? And what's his errand? And by whom is he backed?” Thus did the heroic Rākşasas converse on beholding Hanumān. And others said, "Kill him," "Burn him," "Eat him up". The Raksasas, growing enraged, thus said to each other. Having passed some way, that magnanimous one saw there old servants sitting at the feet of the lord of Rākşasas, as well as a mansion embellished with countless jewels. And the exceedingly energetic Rāvana saw that foremost of monkeys dragged hither and thither by Rākṣasas of frightful forms. And that best of monkeys too saw that lord of Rākşasas, endowed with strength and energy and resembling the resplendent sun. And with his reddened eyes rolling, the tennecked one, gazing at that monkey, ordered his principal counsellors, boasting of high pedigree and noble character, (to interrogate the incomer). And by turns questioned by them as to his mission and purpose, as well as the fundamental occasion (of his in road), that foremost of monkeys replied, “A messenger, I come (from Sugriva.)"