Having spoken thus Maithili and commanded the host of the Räksasīs, Rāvana, a terror to his enemies, went away. And after that lord of Rākşasas had gone away and entered his inner apartment, the hideous Rākşasīs drew near Sitä. And approaching Sītā that terrible host, almost faint with ire, addressed Vaidehī with the following harsh words. You do not regard it highly, Sītā, that you shall become the chosen wife of that highsouled, and great Ravana, the Ten-necked son of Paulastya. Thereupon another Rākṣasī named Ekjatä, with eyes rendered coppery with ire, addressing Sītā, having a small navel, said. Pulastya is the fourth of the six Prajāpatīs, (Prajāpatis are the lords of the created being first created by Brahmā.) a mind-born son of Brahmā and celebrated in the world. The glorious ascetic, by name Vishravā was the mind-born son to Pulastya, effulgent like to Prajāpatis. O large-eyed damsel! Of Visravā came Rāvana terrible to his enemies. And it behove you to become the consort of that lord of Raksasas. Scorn not the words I say to you, O you of comely presence.” Thereupon another Rākşasī named Harijatā, having the eyes of a cat, and whirling them with ire, said It become you to be the wife of that lord of Rākşasas who smote the thirty three celestials and their lord in battle. Do you not desire to be his wife, who is heroic, of indomitable prowess and who dose not turn back in battle? And turning away in scorn from his beloved wife, highly esteemed, the mighty king Ravana, desire for you. And leaving his inner apartment enriched with thousand of females and adorned with various jewels, Rāvana shall adore you. And then followed another Rākşasī by name Vikatā, “The king, who by his terrible prowess subdued the Gandharvas (Heavenly singers and musicians who belong to the heaven of Indra.) and Nāgas, (Serpent-gods who dwell in the regions under the carth.) in battle, has stood by you. O foolish damsel, why do you not wish to be the consort of that high-souled lord of Rākşasas-Rāvana, gifted with wealth and riches." Then followed another Rākşaşī named Durmukhi. “Why dose you not approach him, O you having expansive eyes, by whose fear, the sun dose not shine, and the wind dose not blow." O dame, why do you not wish to be the consort of Rāvana, the lord of Rākṣasas, at whose command the trees shower blossoms and the hills and clouds pour down water. Why do you not make up your mind to be the wife of Rāvana? O damsel, O worshipful dame, we have spoken thus for your welfare. Do you comply with our request or you shall surely die. CECTION 24 Thereupon all those Rākşasīs, having terrible faces again and again pursued Sitä with reproaches rough and rude. Why do you not desire, O Sītā, to live in his inner apartment, liked by all and abounding in costly bed-steads. O woman, you regardest highly to be the wife of a man. Do you turn back from Rāma-your desire shall never be satisfied. Do you spend happily your days with our lord-Rāvaņa, the Rākşasa chief, who makes his own the treasures of the three worlds. You are a woman, O you of comely presence, and therefore dose your fancy cling to Rāma, O you of a blameless countenance, who is a man, deprived of his kingdom, overwhelmed with disasters and has his desires frustrated. Hearing the words of those Rākşasīs, the lotus-eyed Sītā, with her eyes full of tears said. What you have all said and which is against human usage and vicious, dose not find place in my mind. A woman cannot be the wife of a Rākşasa. Eat me up if you will, I will never follow your words. Poor or deprived of kingdom, he who is my husband, is my preceptor. I am ever devoted to him, like Suvarcalā (The wife of the sun) to the Sun. Like to the great ſacī standing by Sakra, Arundhati by Vasista, Rohini by the Moon, Lopamudrā by Agastya, Sukanyā by Cyavana, Sāvitrī by Satyavana, Śrīmatī by Kapila, Madayanti by Saudāsa, Kešinī by Sagara and Damayantī the daughter of the king Bhaimnī by her husband Nala, I shall ever remain devoted to my husband Rāma, the foremost of the descendants of lksvaku. Hearing the words of Sītā, all those Rākşasīs despatched by Rāvana, almost beside themselves with ire, again covered her with reproaches rough and rude. Hanumān remained all along speechless and hidden on the ſinsapā tree. And that monkey heard all those demons remonstrate with Sītā in this way. Those, influenced with ire, approached the trembling Sītā and encircling her, licked again and again their long a burning lips. Taking up instantly spears, they exceedingly wroth, menaced her, saying— "she is not worthy of having Rāvana, the lord of the Rākşasas, as her lord." Being thus remonstrated with by those terrible Raksasis, that excellent damsel, shedding tears, neared the ſinsapa tree. The large eyed Sītā, encircled by the Rākşasīs, remained there sunk in grief. And all those hideous demons, showered reproaches, from all sides, on her, greatly reduced, of a poorly countenance, and wearing a soiled cloth. Thereupon a grim-visaged demon, angry, having hideous teeth and a huge belly extending downwards, by name Vinatā, spoke, saying: O Sītā, you had shown enough of attachment towards your husband. But, O gentle dame, excess of any thing tends to evil. We are satisfied. And may good betide you! You had acted worthily like a woman. do you hear, O Maithili, what I say for your welfare. Do you accept, Rāvana, the lord of the Rākşasa host, as your husband. He withstands powerfully his enemies like to Vāsava, the lord of the celestials, charitable, kind to all, and sweet-speeched. And forsaking Rāma, a poor wight, do you take Rāvana (as your husband) Having your person sprinkled with celestial paste and adorned with excellent ornaments, do you from today O Vaidehī, O you of comely presence, become the queen of all the worlds, like to Sachee of the lord of the celestials and svāhā (An exclamation used in making an oblation to the Gods. A personification of the preceding as the wife of fire and Goddess presiding over burnt offerings.) of the fire. What shall you do with Rama, O Vaidehi, poor and of limited life? This is what I say and if do you not follow it we shall all instantly banquet on you. Thereupon another Rākşasi named Vikață. having her breast hanging long, exercised with ire, and clinching her fist, addressed, roaring, Sita. O foolish daughter of the king of Mithilā, we have put up with all your foolish words only out of compassion, and because you are a feeble being. It will not lead to your well-being if you do not hear our words. You had been brought here, the other side of the ocean, difficult of being approached by others. You had come within the terrible abode of Rāvana O Maithili, and had been shut up in his room guarded by us all. And even, Purandara's (Another name of Indra-the lord of the celestials.) self cannot save yoll. Do you therefore hear, O Maithili, my well-mcaning words. Why do you shed tears? Renounce your useless grief. Do you become happy and delighted, renouncing your continued melancholy. Do you sport, O Sītā, at your pleasure, with the lord of the Rākşasas. We know, for certain, O timid damsel, that the youth of the females, is very transient. And so long as your youth dose not fade, do you pass your days happily, O you having inebriate eyes, with the lord of Rākşasas, in picturesque gardens, and mountain forests. Do you take, O fair damsel, Ravana, the lord of the Rākşasas, for your husband, and thousands of females shall be placed at your service. If do you not follow, what I say, O Maithili, I shall taking out your heart, banquet on it. Thereupon another grim-visaged Rākşasī, named, Candodarī, shaking her terrible spear, said-“Beholding this Sitā having the eyes of a young antelope and her breast trembling with fear, my earnest desire, as I am enciente, has been to banquet on her large eyes, lever, spleen, her plump hands, heart, other limbs and head." Thereupon another Rākşasī named Praghasă and-"I shall grind the throat of this cruel woman. What are you doing, sitting here? You shall then relate to the king that the woman is dead. And undoubtedly he shall say 'Do you eat her up." And thereupon another Räkşasi named Ajāmukhi said, “I do not like quarrels. Let us all divide her into equal portions. Bring soon our favourite drink and various garlands." Then followed another Rākşasí by name Śūrpanakha, I do fully concur with what Ajāmukhi has said. Bring soon wine, the remover of all griefs. Banqueting on human flesh I shall dance before the queen Nikumbhilă. Being thus threatened by those grim-visaged Rākṣasīs Sītā, resembling the daughter of a celestial, renouncing patience, began to weep.