Thereat Sampāti related to the ascetic all about his fearful, arduous, and rash act of following up the sun. O reverend sire, in consequence of my body suffering from sores, I, my senses bewildered from shame, and myself fatigued, cannot utter words. From pride for power of flight, I and Jatayu, being intoxicated by conceit, began to voyage the sky afar off, with the view of testing each other's prowess, binding ourselves by the vow that we would follow the Sun so long as he did not enter that mighty Setting mountain,-and appear before the ascetics on the summit of Kailāsa. And simultaneously plunging into the serial deep) we saw on the earth beneath separate cities resembling car-wheels; and here the sound of musical instruments, and there the tinklings of ornaments. And (at places) we beheld many a damsel clad in red attire, engaged in singing. And swiftly darting up into the sky and approaching the path of the Sun, we saw a wood interspersed with swards. We saw the earth covered with crags and masses of rocks, and intersected by streams resembling threads. Himavān, and Vindhya, and that mighty mountain, Meru, appeared on the earth like elephants in a tank. Then we began to sweat, and to be filled with regret; and fear seized us both. And we became bewildered; and fainted away frightfully.* *Consequent on Jațāyu having dropped down. We knew not the south, or the west, or the quarter presided over by Fire;' and the world that was still burning at the end of a Yuga, appeared (to us) as if it had been consumed quite.? 1. South-east. 2. The passage is obscure. This is however, all the explanation that the commentator has to give. My mind, combined with my eyes waxed feebler. And then fixing with might and main my eyes as well as my mind (on the sun), I could by a violent exercise of my energy behold the sun. And the sun shining, appeared to us like the earth in extent. Then, without asking me Jațāyu dropped to the earth. Seeing him, I at once descended form the sky and Jațāyu and not burnt in consequence of having been shielded by my wings. And scathed through the agitation* I fell through the serial way. I guessed that Jațāyu fell in Janasthāna. And I myself, my wings blasted, and rendered inert, fell on Vindhya. *Rāmanuya comments: the confusion seized them as the sun was midway. They lost all ense of direction. The faint succeeded. Deprived of my kingdom, and my brother, and my wings, and my prowess, I wishing to put a period to my existence, will hurl myself headlong from this summit of the mountain.