Then ordered by the lord of Rākşasas, the sons of his counsellors, seven (in number) in splendour reseinbling fire, issued forth that mansion. And surrounded by a mighty army, furnished with bows, endowed with wondrous strength, and accomplished in arms— the foremost of those acquainted with weapons-each burning for victory, with mighty cars yoked with steeds, covered with golden net-works, bearing pennons and standards, and having sounds like those proceeding from clouds, exultingly stretching with immeasurable prowess bows decked with gold, resembling clouds surcharged with lightning, those warriors sallied out. Learning that the servants had been slain, their (i.e. the mothers of the sons of the councillors) mothers, along with their friends and kindred, were overpowered with grief. And vieing with each other in eagerness, those (warriors) decked in ornaments of polished gold, confronted Hanumān staying at the gate. And with their cars sending roars, the Rākşasas, pouring showers of shafts, ranged (the field), resembling clouds during the rainy season. Covered with those arrowy showers, Hanuman had his person concealed, like the monarch of mountains hidden by a downpour. That swift-speeding monkey, coursing the cloudless sky, evaded those shafts of those heroes, as well as the impetuosity of their cars. That hero, playing pranks with those bowmen, appeared like the masterful Wind playing tricks with the bow-bearing clouds. (i.e. having the iris.) Sending up a dreadful shout, and thereby filling that vast host with fright, the energetic Hanumān rushed on that Rākşasa army. That subduer of enemies slew some with slaps, and some he rived with nails, and some he killed by blows, and others with (the pressure of) his chest. And some dropped down on the ground at the very same spot at the sounds that he emitted. And on their being slain or falling on the earth, that army, afflicted with affright, began to fly in all directions. The elephants roared in frightful tones, and the steeds fell down on the earth. And the Earth was covered with broken boxes, flag-staffs, and umbrellas, (belonging to the cars), as also with the cars themselves. And rivers running gore were seen on the way, and Lankā uttered various frightful cries. Having slain those overgrown Rākşasas, that exceedingly powerful and heroic monkey of terrific power, desirous of again coping with other Rākşasas, retraced his steps to the selfsame entrance.