Remaining in that mansion, (Hanuman) desirous of getting a sight of Sītā graced with a fair presence, went into bowers, and picture galleries, and night-houses;* but her he did not find. *Intended for stay at night. And not finding the beloved (spouse) of Raghu's son that mighty monkey reflected, “Surely Sītā is not alive, for although I have searched (through and through), yet Mithila's daughter I have failed to find." That girl solicitous for the preservation of her chastity, and staying in the prime path of virtuous woman, that chaste one has, for certain, been slain by this chief of the Rākṣasas, (ever) finding delight in iniquity. Seeing the wives of the Rākṣasa inonarch, of frightful forms, monstrous; of lurid hue; having huge faces; with large horrid eyes, the daughter of Janaka has given up the ghost from fright. Failing to see Sītā, and (thereby) annulling my prowess, and having long spent the appointed space in company with the monkeys, way have I none to present myself before Sugrīva, that monkey being puissant and given to meting out sharp chastisement. Having searched the inner apartment through, and seen the wives of the Rākṣasa, I do not see the chaste Sită. Therefore vain is the trouble that I take. What, alas! shall the monkeys assembled tell me when I shall go (to them)? 'O hero, tell us what you have done, repairing there.' And not having seen Janaka's daughter, what shall I answer? The term fixed (by Sugrīva) having been past, certainly meet it is that I should fast to death. And what shall the aged Jambhavan, and what shall Angada, say? And what, again, shall the assembled monkeys say to me when I shall have crossed over the main. But perseverance is the source of good fortune; and perseverance bring about supreme happiness. Search again I will, where I have not yet searched. Perseverance, for certain, ever bring people to all profitable objects. Whatever one dose with vigour, bear fruit. Therefore will I put forth fresh dear efforts vigorously. I will search such places held by Rāvana as I have not yet seen. I have again searched the picture galleries and the sporting-structures, and edifices, and roads passing through gardens, as well as the car." Having thought thus, Hanuman again set about searching the subterranean abodes, religious buildings, and many-storied mansions. And flying up, and coming down, and staying, and going at places, and opening doors, and shutting others, and entering and issuing out, and falling down as if darting up, that mighty monkey began to range on all sides. There was not even space measuring four fingers in that inner apartment of Rāvana, to which the monkey did not repair. And he saw the abodes of the nobility, the daises, the trees by the crossings, the holes, and the tanks. And Hanumān saw there Räksasas of various forms, frightful and deformed; but he saw not Janaka's daughter. Hanuman there the the foremost and beautiful wives of Vidyadharas; but he saw not Rāghava's beloved Sītā. Hanumān saw there transcendentally beautiful women, daughter of Nāgas, having countenances resembling the moon; but he saw not Janaka's daughter. saw And Hanumān saw there daughter of Nāgas forcibly brought by the lord of the Rākşasas; but he saw not Janaka's daughter. Having seen other beauteous females, and not seeing her, the mighty-armed son of the Windgod was oppressed with sandness. Seeing that the endeavours of the monarch of monkeys, as well as the bounding over the main, had come to nought, the offspring of the Windgod was plunged in thought. Descending from the aerial car, Hanumān, son to the Wind-god, his senses deprived by sorrow, was again wrought up with anxiety.