Being thus addressed angrily by Sītā, some of those Raksasis, beside themselves with ire, proceeded to relate this to the vicious-souled Ravana. And approaching Sītā those grim-visaged demons again addressed her with words rude and rough. O vile Sītă, O you bent on committing sin, we Rākşasīs shall today devour your flesh to the best of our satisfaction. Beholding those vile demons threaten Sītā, a Raksasa matron, wise and old, named, Trijata cried. O vile demons, do youeat your own persons (The proper expression, I think, should be-“Eat me.” The commentator Rāmānuja explains Atmanam as your own bodies.) but do not devour Sītā, the daughter of Janaka and the esteemed daughter-in-law of the king Dasaratha. I dreamt a terrible dream last night which made my down stand on their end. And in that dream I foresaw the overthrow of the Rāksasa race and the conquest of her husband. And being thus addressed by Trijatā, those demons, exercised with wrath and terrified, accosted her with the following words. "Do you relate (to us) what sort of dream didst you dream last night." And hearing those words proceeding from the mouths of the Rākşasīs, Trijatā began to describe the dream she had at the latter end of the night, I saw Rāma, wearing garlands and clothed in white, ride in a celestial chariot, along with Lakşmaņa, made of ivory, traversing the etherial regions and drawn by a hundred steeds. I saw in my dream to-night, that Sītā, clad in the purest white, appearing on a snow-white hill beaten by the waves of the ocean, had at last met Rāma, like to light joined to the Sun. I again saw Rāma and Lakşmaņa appear in effulgence, seated on a huge elephant, having four tusks and resembling a bull. Thereupon those two (brothers), resplendent like to the Sun by their own effulgence, and wearing white garlands and clothes, appeared near Janaka's daughter. And the lotus-eyed Jānakī, on the top of the hill situate on the welkin, first fell on the lap of her husband and then stationed herself on the neck of the elephant guided by her husband. Then I saw Sītā rubbing the Sun and the Moon with her two hands. Then that best of the elephants, with those two princes and the large eyed Sītā on him, stood high above Lanka. I again saw Rāma, clad in white, and adorned with garlands, ride along with Lakşmaņa in a chariot drawn by eight white bullocks. I again saw that highly energetic, best of men, Rāma, having truth for his prowess, along with his brother Lakşmaņa and Sītā flee to Northern realms, ascending a celestial flowery chariot resembling (in brightness) the Sun. I saw Ravana too, shaved and shorn, besmeared with oil, wearing a crimson cloth, drinking honey, wearing a garland of Karavīra flowers, fall down on earth from the flowery chariot. And dragged by a woman, shaved, wearing a red cloth and garlands and sprinkled with crimson paste, Rāvana was again seen by me riding in a chariot drawn by asses. And quaffing oil, laughing and dancing, that one of agitated senses, forgetting himself sped on the chariot to the South. (In the south is the region of Yama, the God of Death and hence his going to the south is not an auspicious sign.) And I again saw Rāvana, the lord of the Raksasas, stricken with fear, fall, headless, down on the earth. And then rising all on a sudden, and uttering obscene and inconsistent words like to a maniac, Rāvana overwhelmed with fear, and amazement, and intoxicated, fell into a mass of dirt, stinking and resembling the very hell. And again proceeding to the South he entered into a lake devoid of mud and water. And a dark woman, clad in a crimson cloth, and bedaubed with mud, dragged the Ten-necked demon, entwining herself around his neck. Then followed the mighty Kumbhakarņa (Rāvana's brother) and all the sons of Rāvana, shaved and shorn and besmeared with oil. And they all proceeded southward—the Ten-necked demon on a boar, Indrajit (Rāvana's son-the name signifies the conqueror of the lord of the celestials) on a porpoise, and Kumbhakarņa on a camel. I saw only Vibhīșaņa, with a white umbrella and accompanied by four courtiers, range in the welkin. And there was audible in the large assembly sound of music and stringed instruments. And all the Rākşasa wearing crimson clothes and garlands, were quaffing oil, I saw the royal and picturesque city Lankā with her steeds, cars and elephants, drowned in the ocean, having her gateways and ornamented arches broken. And in Lanka, covered with dust, Raksasa women laughing and making terrible sound, were engaged in quaffing oil. I saw all the leading Raksasas-Kumbhakarņā and others, dark-hued and wearing crimson clothes, emerged in an abyss of cow dung. Do youtherefore fly at some distance, and will find that Rāghava shall regain Sītā. And exercised with ire he shall destroy you all along with the Raksasas. Rāghava shall never brook, his esteemed and beloved spouse, living in the forest, being taunted and threatened by you. No more with rough words therefore; do you console the lady and humbly pray her to forgive you. This I think proper. Surely shall she, divested of misfortune, he reconciled to her beloved and excellent husband, regarding whom, in her misery, I have dreamt such a dream. YouRaksasis! You have threatened her, do youimplore her forgiveness—no more with harsh words. Forsooth, from Rāghava shall proceed the mighty disaster of the Rākṣasas. If Maithili, the daughter of the king Janaka, be pleased with you (for your imploring her forgiveness) you might be saved from the mighty disaster. I do not perceive any inauspicious mark on the person of this large-eyed dame. It appears from the paleness of her countenance that she has been overcome by misfortune. And I saw in my dreams) this worshipful damsel, unworthy of any misfortune, stationed in the welkin. Verily I do perceive, before me, the satisfaction of Vaidehi's end, the destruction of the lord of the Rākşasas and the conquest of Raghava. Behold! there, her left eye, spacious, as a lotus-petals, is dancing to hear this pleasant dream announcing the satisfaction of her own end. And her left arm is also dancing with joy, all on a sudden. And her excellent beautiful left thigh, resembling the trunk of an elephant, is also dancing as if indicating, that she shall at no distant date, be reconciled to Rāghava. And the birds, again and again, entering their nests, and highly delighted are pouring forth their notes announcing the advent of a happy occasion. Thereupon that modest dame, dame, greatly delighted in the prospective conquest of her husband, said, “If this be true I shall save you all.”