Seeing the tawny-eyed one staying before him, the mighty-armed Ravana, affrighter of (the worlds), was overwhelmed with fierce wrath. And gazing at that foremost of monkeys girt with power, and with his soul exercised with apprehension, he (thought), “Is this the worshipful Nandi, come hither in person, by whom I, on my jeering at him, had formerly been cursed in Kailāsa? (Rāvaņa had formerly laughed at Nandi for his monkey-face) Or is this one wearing the shape of a monkey Vāli's son, Bāņa?" And with his eyes coppery with rage, the king asked his foreniost counsellor Prahasta, in words fraught with sense and suiting the season, Ask this wicked-minded one, whence is he? And what led him to ravage the grove, and what was his object in brow-beating the Rākşasas? And what has been his purpose in entering my metropolis incapable of being subdued; and what for did he also fight (with my retainers?) Do you ask the wicked-minded one about this. Hearing Ravana's speech, Prahasta said, “Take heart! Fair fortune to you! You need not be alarmed, O monkey." If you had been sent to Rāvana's residence by Indra, tell us truly everything. Let no fear, O imonkey, be yours. You shall be liberated. If you belong to Vaisravana, or to Yama, or to Varuņa, and had entered into this city of ours disguising (your proper shape), or if you had been despatched by Vişnu burning for victory, (tell us this truly). Your prowess is certainly not hat of a monkey, your form alone is that of a monkey. Unfold this (to us) faithfully, O monkey, and you shall get (back) your liberty. But if you should say aught untruthful, your life shall pay dear for it. Or tell us wherefore you had entered into Rāvana's mansion. Thus addressed then that foremost of monkeys said to the lord of Rāks asas, “I am not Sakra's, nor Yama's, nor Varuna's. I have no friendship with Dhanada, (Lit.-giver of wealth-a designation of Kubera) nor have I been despatched by Visnu. This is my race; and I have come hither a monkey for obtaining a, sight of the Rākṣasa chief. And it is to attain a sight of the Rākṣasa lord that I have destroyed his peerless grove; and it is for this that, the powerful Rākşasas seeking for fight, I for the preservation of my person have resisted them in conflict. I am incapable of being slain with weapons even by the celestials and the Asuras themselves. This boon I also (like yourself) happen to have received from the Great-father. It is because I was desirous of seeing the king that I have suffered this weapon to restrain me. Although the Rākşasas have brought me (hither thus), yet I am free from any weapon (restraining me). I come near you on a certain business of Rāma. Knowing me for a messenger of Rāghava endowed with measureless prowess, do you, O lord, listen to my words, calculated to work your profit.