Lakşmaņa again addressed his high-minded elder brother, the son of a king, influenced by passion, stricken with grief, and poorly, with the following words. That monkey shall not follow the actions of the pious, shall not think of the great fruit (the accession of kingdom) reaped by our friendship; kingdom because he has not the right understanding to make good his promise. Owing to the wane of his understanding in consequence of your favour he is addicted to rural enjoyments and has forgot to return your benefits. O hero, killed let him espy his elder brother Vāli. It is not proper to confer kingdom upon that wicked-minded one. I am unable to bear the outburst of my ire forsooth shall I kill today, that liar Sugrīva. May the son of Vāli with other principal monkeys engage in quest of that daughter of a king. Beholding him rise up from the seat with bow in his hand and greatly wrought up with anger and hearing him thus announce his intention about the destruction of Sugriva, Rama, the slayer of foes, spoke to him the following humble words worthy of being spoken on that occasion. Persons like you on this earth do not perpetrate the crime of destroying their friends. He is truly a great hero and an excellent person who subdues anger by his right understanding, O Lakṣmaṇa, it is not proper for you to bring about the destruction of your friend, do you follow your former friendship and good feelings. Avoiding harsh words do you address Sugrīva, who has violated his promise, with soothing words. Being thus duly counselled by his elder brother, that best of men, the heroic Laks maņa-the slayer of foes, entered the city. Thereupon the highly intelligent Lakşmaņa of right understanding, and ever intent upon the welfare of his brother, taking up a bow like to Indra's, resembling the summit of a hill and terrible as Death himself, entered, wrought up with ire, the abode of the king of monkeys like the hill Mandāra. Intelligent like Bșhaspati and ever abiding by his elder brother's behest, Laksmana, revolving in his mind what he should say as well as Sugrīva's answers, and enveloped with the fire of anger arising from the excitement of his brother's amour, and therefore displeased, proceeded quick as air. And on he proceeded, felling down by his velocity, Sāla, Tāla, and Aśvakarņa trees, throwing aside the mountain summits and other trees, breaking rocks into pieces with his feet and striding very quickly like to a fleet-coursing elephant. And that best of Ikşwakus, beheld that splendid city of the king of monkeys hard to enter, surrounded by monkey-herds, and mountains. And having his lips swollen with anger for Sugrīva, Lakşmaņa beheld the terrible monkeys walking outside the city. Beholding that best of men-Laksmana, the monkeys resembling elephants entered the mountainous stronghold and took up the summits of the hill and huge trees. And observing them armed, Lakṣmaṇa was doubly inflamed with anger like to fire kindled with fuels. Beholding Lakṣmaṇa, highly enraged, terrible as Death himself at the time of dissolution, the monkeys, stricken with fear, fled away, by hundreds, into various quarters. Thereat those foremost of monkeys, entering the palace of Sugrīva, communicated to him, Laksmana's ire and approach. That amorous chief of monkeys, attached to Tārā, paid no heed to the words of those foremost of monkeys. Thereupon those terrible monkeys, resembling hills, elephants and clouds, went out of the city being commanded by the minister. Some of them had sharpened teeth and nails, some were grim-visaged, some had teeth like those of tigers, some had the strength of ten elephants, some had the strength of hundred elephants and some had that of thousand elephants. Thereupon Laksmana, angry, espied the city of Kiskindhă, hard to enter and surrounded by mighty monkeys with trees in their hands. And getting over the ditch around the city walls, those terrible-looking monkeys stationed themselves openly. And meditating upon Sugrīva's error and his brother's interest, the self-controlled Laksmana, heroic, proceeded on wards. Sighing hot and hard, that best of men-Laks maņa, with reddened eyes appeared like to smoky fire. He appeared like to a terrible serpent of five mouths having the top of the arrow for his tongue, the bow for his expanded hood and his own prowess for the poison. Beholding him like the flaming fire of dissolution and enraged lord of serpents, Angada, out of fear, became exceedingly sorry. Thereupon the far-famed Laksmana, having his eyes reddened with ire, spoke to Argada, saying-0 child, do you inform Sugriva of my arrival. O conqueror of foes, do you tell him:-'Laksmana, the younger brother of Rama, being stricken with grief on account his brother's disaster, has come to you and is waiting at the gate. If it pleaseth you, do you make good your promise.' Saying these words do you speedily return, O my child, O conqueror of foes. Hearing Laksmana's words, Angada overwhelmed with grief, approaching his uncle said-'Saumitree has arrived here.' Being greatly agitated with harsh words, Angada, with a pale and poorly countenance issued out speedily and approaching touched first the king's feet and afterwards with reverence Ruma's feet. That one of exceeding prowess first touched the feet of his uncle then saluted again his mother and afterwards touching the feet of Rumā related to them every thing in full. That monkey, possessed by amour and under the influence of liquor, being asleep could not hear (what Angada had said). Beholding Lakşmaņa highly enraged, the monkeys, possessed by fear, began to make noise as they were welcoming him. They, approaching Lakşmaņa began to set up a terrible roar like to thunder and resembling the uproar of lions and the noise of water-falls. By that terrible sound awoke that monkeychief, having coppery eyes, agitated, adorned with garlands and possessed by liquor. Hearing the words of Angada, the tow counsellors of Sugrīva, intelligent and of magnificent looks, along with him, approached that lord of monkeys. And those two ministers Yaksa and Prabhava, to give him proper counsels, informed (that monkey-chief) of the arrival of Lakşmaņa. Satisfying Sugrīva with words pointing out his welfare, they sitting by him, spoke to that lord of wind resembling the king of celestials, saying: Of those two great and truthful brothers Rāma and Lakşmaņa, who are born as men, worthy of attaining to kingdom and who have gained for you your kingdom, Laksmana, with a bow in his hand, is waiting at your gate. And afraid of whom, the monkeys, trembling, are setting up terrible roars. That Laksmana, Raghava's brother, having words for his charioteer, and perseverance for his chariot, has approached you at his brother's command. O blameless king, by that Laksmana-Tara's darling, Angada has been despatched to you. O king, of monkeys, that highly powerful one, having his eyes full of ire, is waiting at your gate, as if burning down with his eyes all the monkeys. O king, along with your children and friends do you repair to him speedily and bowing to him with your head down do you pacify his wrath. And do you, O king, with a composed heart, perform what the virtuous-souled Rāma has ordered you to do and thus fulfil your promise.