Then to all the monkey-chiefs, after they had rested, the female ascetic, engaged in righteous practices, eagerly said these words, You monkeys, if your pain has gone off in consequence of the fare of fruits which you have partaken, and also if it be fit to be heard by me, I would listen to your narration. Hearing her words, Hanumān, the son of the wind-god, in all candour began to relate everything faithfully. The Sovereign of all this world, resembling Mahendra or Varuna, Rāma, the graceful son of Dasaratha, entered the woods of Dandaka, in company with his brother, Laksmana, as well as his spouse, Vaidehi. His wife has been forcibly carried of by Rāvana. His friend is that heroic king, the monkey named Sugrīva. By that monarch of the foremnost monkeys have we been despatched (hither). And we have, joining company with these prime monkeys headed by Angada, come to the South, protected by Yama, and inhabited by Agastya. And we have been commissioned, 'Do you all search for the Rākşasa Rāvana, wearing forms at will, along with Videha's daughter, Sītā.' Having searched through the forest as well as the ocean on the South, we becoming hungry, sat down at the foot of a tree. And with pallid countenance, we all, absorbed in thought, sank in a wide sea of anxiety, which we could not cross. And casting our eyes around, we spyed a huge cave covered with trees and plants and enveloped in gloom. And (it came to pass that) from this (cave) came out swans, drenched with water, with drops of water on their wings,-and plumed kuravas and cranes. Let us enter here', said I to the monkeys. And they also arrived at that conclusion.* And thereupon they, bestirring themselves, entered into the cave. And firmly griping each other's hands, they at once made entry into the cave covered with darkness. This is our errand; and it is on this job that we have come. *Namely, that water was to be found there. Having come to you, hungry, and exhausted, we, who had been sore tried by hunger, have been entertained with fruits and roots, agreeably to the code regulating hospitality. And as you had saved the monkeys, who were weary and suffering from hunger, tell (me),-what benefit shall the monkeys do you in return? Thus addressed by the apes, the all-knowing Svayamprabhā replied to the monkey-chiefs, saying, Well pleased am I with the fast-footing monkeys. But by one engaged in your duties, there is no work that is desiderated. Thus accosted in excellent words fraught with asceticism and righteousness Hanumān spoke to that one of faultless eyes, saying. We all take refuge in you, practising piety. the term that had been fixed by the high-souled Sugrīva in respect of us, shall all be spent in this cave. Therefore it behoveth you to deliver us from this place. It behove you to save us, exercised with fear for Sugriva,-who, happening to override Sugriva's command, shall lose our lives. And, further, O you that practisest righteousness, great is the task that is to be performed by us. But if we stay here, that work of ours shall remain unaccomplished. Thus addressed by Hanumān, the ascetic said, Once entering, hard it is for any one to return (hence) alive. But by the potency of my asceticism acquired through self-discipline, I shall deliver all the monkeys from this den. You foremost of monkeys, do you close your eyes. No one is able to issue out of this place without closing one's eyes. Then they, eagerly desirous of going out, closed their sight* with their hands furnished with tender fingers. *The text has nimilitah—and thus they closed their eyes. This redundant epithet has been left out in the translation, as it would render the version extremely awkward. The magnanimous monkeys, with their faces covered with their palms, were in the twinkling of an eye, liberated from the den by her. And then the pious anchoret spoke to them there. And when they had come out of the fearful den, cheering them up, she said, This is the fair Vindhya mountain filled with various trees and herbs. This is the Praśravaņa hill; and this is the great deep. Fair Fortune! I go to my abode, you foremost of monkeys. Having spokea thus, Svayamprabhā entered that captivating cave.