Having reflected for a while and mentally met with her, that highly energetic one leapt from the wall of Rāvana's mansion on to that (of the Asoka wood). All his frame filled with delight, that mighty monkey, stationed on the wall, saw various trees having their tops furnished with flowers through spring and the other seasons, salas and Asokas, bhavyas, champakas, uddalakas, and Nāgas, and those bearing fruits resembling the mouths of monkeys; and those relative to mango woods, with hundreds of plants. And (Hanuman) leapt into the garden like an arrow let go from the bow string. Entering into the grove, variegated all over; resonant with the notes of birds, filled on all sides with golden and silver trees; many-hued with birds and beasts, containing dainty tracts of trees like to the risen Sun, the powerful Hanumān saw the place surrounded with various kinds of trees, having fruits and flowers; frequented by maddened coels and Bhramaras, with creatures expressing happiness by their movements, birds and beasts overflowing with spirits; echoing with the cries of peacocks; furnished with various species of fowls. As he was searching for that surpassingly beautiful and blameless daughter of the king, that monkey awakened the monkeys that were sleeping sweetly.. And blown against by the wind caused by the wings of the birds as they flew upwards, various and variegated trees showered down blossoms. And in the midst of the Asoka wood, Hanumān, son to the Wind-god, covered over with flowers, looked lovely like a hill strewn with blossoms. All creatures, beholding that monkey embosomed among trees and darting on all sides, took him for spring. And strewn with several masses of blossoms loosened from the trees, the Earth appeared breateous like a damsel dight with ornaments. And shaken in diverse ways by the motion of the light fleeting monkey, the tree showered many-hued flowers. With their leaves and tops torn, and their flowers and fruits shrivelled up, the trees looked like worsted gamblers bereft of their clothes. And shaken by Hanumān vehemently moving about, those excellent trees crowned with fruits, speedily cast off fruits, flowers and foliage. And moved by the Wind god's offspring, the trees with their trunks left, and forsaken by the fowls were incapable of harbouring any creatures. And like youthful fair ones with hair dishevelled, their paste worn off, their upper lips with fair teeth sucked of their moisture; and having their persons torn with nails, and teeth; appeared 'the Asoka wood with its trees shattered; and itself ground with the tail, hands and legs (of Hanumān). That monkey with his vehemence scattered the clusters of shrubs, like the wind violently scattering clouds in the rainy reason. And ranging there, the monkey saw beautiful pavements, jewelled, silvern and golden. He saw there various pools filled with excellent water and having steps crusted with jewels. Their sandy soil was filled with pearls and corals, and the ground inside was made of crystal. And their banks were decked with diverse golden trees. They were beautified with full blown lotuses, waterlilies, Chakravakas and Natyuhas* and filled with the notes of swans and Sarasas. *A gallinule. They were encircled on all sides with big tanks having trees on their banks and water, clear and sweet like to nectar. They were entwined with hundreds of creepers, covered with Santāna* flowers and filled with diverse groves and Karaviras serving the purpose of windows. *One of the trees of heaven. 'Literally the passages means "making a gap in that forest thickly filled with trees.” But Rāmānuja interprets thus and we have adopted his interpretaion. Thereupon that foremost of monkeys beheld there a mountain-the most picturesque in the world, resembling clouds, having high summits, covered on all sides with peaks and filled with hilly abodes and various trees. That monkey beheld there a river falling down from the mountain like to a damsel falling down from the lap of her beloved. And the branches of the trees touching the water (of the stream) resembled a fair damsel prevented by her dear companions from forsaking the company of her beloved). And that great monkey beheld further down the stream turning back like to the damsel, pleased, going back to her dear one. That foremost of monkeys, Hanumăn, the son of Maruti, beheld, at some distance, ponds filled with lotuses and various birds. He saw a big artificial pond full of cool water having stairs crusted with excellent jewels and its sandy banks filled with pearls. It was embellished on all sides) with various animals, diverse trees and big mansions made by Viśvakarmāt himself. It was adorned all around with artificial forests and all the trees there bore flowers and fruits, spreading their branches like to umbrellas and having golden and silvern pavements under them. 'The son of Brahma and artist of gods. And that great monkey beheld there one golden Singsapa* tree surrounded on all sides with golden pavements. 'A tree (Dalbergia Sisu). And he saw the glebe, the hill streams and many a golden trees resembling the fire. By the lustre of all those trees that heroic monkey appeared as if made of gold like to the Sun by the touch of the mount Sumeru. Having seen those beautiful golden trees, shaken by the wind and making a sound like that of a Kinkini; having flowery tops and new leaves he was greatly amazed. And climbing that Singsapa tree enveloped with leaves that monkey, gifted with velocity, reflected— Perchance I may see Vaidehi, exercised with grief, anxious to behold Rāma and wandering hither and thither at her pleasure. Certainly this is the picturesque Asoka forest of that vicious-souled one, embellished with sandal Champakas and Bakulas. Here is a beautiful pond abounding in lotuses, thronged with birds and forsooth shall that royal spouse Jānaki repair hither. She is the beloved queen of Rāghava and expert in walking in the garden. And separated from Rāma, certainly shall Jānakī repair hither. Or she having the eyes of a young antelope and adept in roaming in the forest, exercised with thought touching Rāma, shall come here. Or she having beautiful eyes and fond of ranging in the forest, racked with sorrow in consequence of Rāma's separation, dose always frequent this forest.* *The commentator, Rāmānuja interprets this bloka as explaining the cause of Sītā's frequenting the Asoka forest. Ere this, the chaste and worshipful spouse of Rāma–Janaka's daughter, used to love always the birds and animals of the forest. (The morning has set in) and surely the beautiful and graceful daughter of Janaka fond of performing morning ablutions, shall come to this river of pure water to perform them. "Sandhyā literally means the point of time which connect day and night. It however, generally means the period after sunset and before the night sets. But here with reference to the speech which Hanumān began by the end of night, it means the morning. Truly is this beautiful forest of Asoka the worthy abode of the beloved and chaste spouse of Rāma, the lord of men. If that one of moon-like countenance breathes forsooth shall she come to this river of cool water." Having arrived there and anxiously expecting the appearance of the spouse of that lord of men, the high-souled Hanumān hiding himself (on the Singsapa tree) enveloped with flowers and leaves, beheld all.