Having said this to that foremost of ascetics, I smitten with grief, began to weep. Thereat, after, reflecting for a while, that reverend one said, Your wings together with two smaller ones shall grow again; as also your sight, energy, prowess and strength. Having heard of it, and also seen it through ascetic power, I know that a great deed is going to take place. There shall be a king named Daſaratha, increaser of the Ikşwāku race. He shall have a son, named Rāma, endowed with exceeding energy. He (Rāma) shall repair to the forest in company with his brother, Laksmana; that one having truth for prowess, having commissioned to that effect by his sire. A friend named Rāvana, the lord of Rākşasas, incapable of being slain by either the gods or the Dāvanas, shall carry off his Rāma's) spouse in Janasthāna. And albeit tempted by viands and objects of enjoyment and desire, the famous and highly virtuous one, plunged in grief, shall not pertake of those things. And knowing that Videha's daughter (has been fasting for many a day), Vāsava shall offer Vaidehī pāyasa like to ambrosia, difficult of being procured even by the gods. Receiving that food, Maithili, knowing that it has come from Indra,* took up a little of it from the surface, and dropped it to the earth for Rāma. *From the fact of the food not touching the earth, and other signs. It is humorous to read the explanation of the commentator as to the reason of Indra's supplying Sītā with food. If Sītā remained fasting, Rāvana would forego his attachment for Vaidehi, on seeing her altered appearance; and thus his destruction could not take place. Further, if he saw Sītā retaining her former loveliness, he could conclude that Sītā, as also Rāma, were superhuman character, and that as such they could not be agents for his destruction according to the prophecy Rāvana shall be slain by a human being. This inducing him to persist in his bellicose attitude towards Rāma, would being down ruin upon his head. Whether my husband as well as his younger brother live, or they have attained godhead, let this food serve for them. Rāma's envoys, having been despatched thither.* shall come hither. You should relate to them all the facts connected with the queen of Rāma. *For going to Lankā. Do not by any means go hence; and in this case, whither, again, wilt you repair? Do you stay here for season and place. You shall regain your wings. I could this very day furnish you with wings. But, by staying here in this condition, you wilt be able to compass the welfare of the worlds. Even you shall do that act in behalf of those sons of the king, of the Brāhmanas, of the spiritual preceptors, of the ascetics, and of Vasava. I also am desirous of beholding the brothers, Rāma and Laksmana. I do not wish to hold this life long. I would renounce my life.' That Maharși, conversant with the nature of things, told me this.'