Having directed his father-in-law to proceed to the West, that best to monkeys, the allknowing king Sugrīva, lord of apes, then spoke to the heroic monkey, named Satavala, words fraught with good to himself as well as to Rāma, Surrounded by hundreds and thousands of rangers of the forest like yourself, in company with the offspring of Yama as well as the counsellors in a body, do you, O you possessed of prowess, entering the northern quarter furnished with the Himaśaila, search everywhere for the illustrious spouse of Rāma. Having performed this task satisfactorily, and brought about what is dear to Dasaratha's son, we shall, O best of those that achieve success, be freed from our debts. The high-souled Rāghava had done us good. If we can serve him in turn, our life shall be crowned with success. Even the life of him that accomplishes the work of one to whom the former is not obliged, is successful, — what then is to be said in respect of him that has served one formerly.? Pondering this, those that are engaged in our welfare, should so act that Jānaki may be discovered. And this foremost of men is worthy of being honoured by all creatures; and Rāmacaptor of hostile capitals—has also found delight in us. Endowed with sense and prowess, do you explore these many inaccessible places, rivers and mountains. Having searched there Mlechās, Pulindas, Surasensas, Prasthalas, Bharatas, Kurus, and Madrakas, and Varadas, as well as the cities of Kambojas, Yavanas and Sakas, do you explore Himavān. And in tracts of Lodhras and Padmakas, and in Devadāru woods* do you search thoroughly for Ravana along with Videha's daughter. *Belonging, according to the commentator, to Himavān. Then, coming upon the hermitage of Soma, frequented by gods and Gandharvas, do you repair to the mountain called kāla possessing spacious plateaus, In those mighty mountains, as also in others and in their caves, do you search for that exalted lady, the blameless wife of Rāma. Having passed beyond that mighty mountain containing gold in its womb, it behoves you to go to the mountain called Sudarsana. Then (lies) the mountain called Devasakhā, the home of feathered tribes; abounding in various fowls, and embellished with diverse trees. In its golden tracts, fountains and caves, do you search for Rāvaņa along with Videha's daughter. Going beyond it, (you come upon) a vacant land, measuring an hundred Yojanas, without mountains, or rivers, or trees; and void of all living beings. Speedily passing that desert land capable of making one's hair stand on end, you shall feel delighted, on coming to the pale Kailasa. There (you will behold) the charming mansion of Kuvera, resembling pale clouds, of burnished gold, built by Viśvakarmā; where (lies) the spacious tank overflowing with lotuses and lilies, thronged with swans and Kāraņdavas, and frequented by troops of Apsarās. There king Vaiśravana, the lord of Yakşas, bowed down to by all creatures,-the graceful giver of riches—sporteth along with the Guhyakas. In the offshoots belonging to Kailasa resembling the moon, as also in their caverns, do you thoroughly search for Rāvaņa in company with Vaidehī. And coming to the Kruncha mountain, you should, having your wits about you, enter its inaccessible cavern; for that is well known as difficult of entrance. There dwell certain Maharsis, high-souled, of effulgence resembling that of the sun-complete god-like shapes,—who are sought by the deities themselves. And you should thoroughly explore the other caves of Krauncha, its plateaus and peaks; its passes and sides. (Then is) the treeless Manasa-abode of birds-the scene of Kāma's austerities. Way there is none for creatures, or for gods, or for Raksasas. are That also must be explored by you, that mountain with plains and plateous. Going beyond Krauncha, (you shall see) the mountain, named Maināka. There is the residence of the Danvava, Maya, reared by himself. Mainaka also with its plains, plateaus and woods must be searched by you. There are all over, the homes of females with faces resembling those of horses. Going beyond that part, (you shall come to) the asylum inhabited by Siddhas; where ascetics—Vālakhilyas, Siddhas and Vaikhānasas. Saluting those Siddhas, who have been cleansed of their sins on account of their asceticism, you should in humble guise ask them concerning Sītā. There is the Vaikhānasa tank filled with golden lotuses; and ranged by graceful cranes of the hue of the infant sun. Kuvera's vehicle, the elephant known (by the name of) Sārvabhauma, ever rangeth that country in company with she-elephants. Going beyond that expanse of water, (you come upon) a sky void of stars, and where the sun and the moon have been put out; and that land is visible by the rays, as if of the sun, proceeding from (the persons of) self-luminous, god-like ones, who are reposing there, after achieving success in austerities. Leaving behind that region, (you come to) a stream named Sailoda. On its both banks are bamboos named Kīcaka. These take the Siddhas to the other shore and bring them back again. There (are seen the northern Kurus, the abode of those that have acquired religious merit. And there are tanks there with their waters crowned with golden lotuses. There are rivers by thousands with copious blue lapis leaves. And the pools here, resembling the tender sun, are embellished with assemblages of golden red lotuses. And that tract is every where filled with costly gems, and jewels, and woods of blue lotuses, having filaments splendid like gold; and with round pearls and costly jewels. And the rivers there have islets covered with gold; and are crowded with lovely hills of gold, bright as fire, furnished with all kinds of precious stones. And the trees there, thronged with birds, bear flowers and fruits daily; and, charged with savoury juices, publishing superb perfumes, and of delicious feel, they confer every wish. Other excellent trees bring forth attires of divers kinds, and ornaments decked with pearls and lapises,-coveted alike by males and females*. *The present text, according to Kataka, drops a sloka, whose last line is, Beings possessed of powerful effulgence, sport here always in company with females. And other excellent trees bear fruits fit to be partaken at all seasons. And other excellent trees bring forth precious beds dight with costly jewels and furnished with variegated covers. And other trees bring forth charming wreaths, and costly drinks, and various kinds of viands. And females adorned with every accomplishment, and endowed with youth and beauty, and Gandharvas and Kinnaras, and Siddhas and Nāgas and Vidyādharas, of blazing splendour, ceaselessly sport there in company with females. And all of righteous deeds, and all engaged in amorous disports, and all furnished with desire and profit,-dwell in that place in association with their females. And there are continually heard there the sounds of instruments and the voice of song mixed with sweet hilarious laughter, capable of taking all crcatures. No one is depressed there; nor does any one there want any desirable object; and day after day the delightful qualities find their development there. Passing beyond that is the Northern ocean. In the bosom (of the deep) is the mountain named Somagiri, golden and of great dimensions. Albeit without the sun, yet through the brightness of the Soma mountain, the land shines forth with all the loveliness and reality of one warmed by the sun. There that Soul of the Universe, the adorable Sambhu, fraught with the spirits of the eleven Rudras-that lord of the gods-Brahmā.dwelleth, surrounded by the Brahmarsis. You cannot proceed to the north of the Kurus; nor is there way in that region for any other creatures. And that mountain is named Soma, incapable of being entered even by the gods, Sighting this you should speedily turn back. You foremost of monkey, the monkeys are competent to proceed thus far. Beyond that, of regions sunless and limitless I know nothing. You should search all these which I have described (to you); and you should also turn your attention to others besides, which I have omitted to mention. You that are comparable to the wind or fire, by accomplishing the work of beholding Videha's daughter, you will do what is held as exceedingly dear to Daśaratha's son as well as highly grateful to me. Then, having achieved success, do you, along with your friends, honoured by me, and crowned with every virtue, you monkeys, with your enemies slain, range the earth in company with your wives,-the support of all beings.