Commanded by the lord of Rākṣasas, Prahasta's son, the powerful Jambumali, having large teeth, went out bow in hand. He wore a red wreath and attire, with a rings; and he was huge, and terrible, with his eyes whirling, invincible in encounter. He impetuously stretched a graceful bow, resembling the bow of Sakra, and roaring like vajra and the thounderbolt. (For distinction between the two, vide ante). The entire welkin, and all sides and quarters, were suddenly filled with the mighty sounds of that bow as it was being stretched. Seeing him approaching in a car yoked with asses, Hanumān endowed with vigour both rejoiced and shouted. Thereat, the highly energetic Jambumālī pierced with whetted shafts that mighty monkey, Hanumāna, who as seated on an awry plank at the gate serving as a perch for pigeons. (This is all that I can make of the commentator's gloss on toranavitanka.) He pierced that lord of monkey's face with half-moon (shaped) arrows, his head with one having its head made like a hook and his arms with ten nārācas. (Iron arrows). And pierced by the arrows, his coppery face looked beautiful like a blown autumnal red lotus shot at by the solar rays. And his naturally red countenance being painted with blood, looked lovely like a majestic red lotus in the sky, washed with the honey of the red Asoka. Wounded by the shafts, the redoubted grew enraged. And he espied a huge and gigantic crag beside him. Thereat, at once uprooting it, that one endowed with celerity and strength hurled it (at his foe). And the enraged Rākṣasa opposed it by ten shafts. Witnessing his action rendered fruitless, the energetic Hanumān of terrific prowess, uprooting a large Sāla, began to whirl it in the air). Seeing the exceedingly strong monkey whirling the Sāla tree, the highly powerful Jambumālī dischanged a many shafts. He severed the Sāla by means of four shafts, and wounded the monkey in the arm with five, in the chest, with one, and with ten, between the teast. With his body covered all over with shafts, (Hanumān) getting into a furious passion, taking up the same bolt, again began to swing it with rapidity. That terrific one gifted with exceeding impetuosity, having whirled the bolt with wondrous rapidity, let it light upon Jambumāli's spacious breast. And (non) there was neither seen there his head, nor his arms, nor his thighs, nor his bow, nor his car, nor his steeds, nor his arrows at that place. That mighty car-warrior, Jambumālī, speedily slain, fell down to the earth, like a tree whose trunk has been crushed. Hearing Jambumāli as well as his exceedingly powerful servants slaughtered, Rāvana became transported with anger, and his eyes became reddened in wrath. On the mighty-son of Prahasta having been slain, the lord of the night-rangers, with his reddened eyes rolling in rage, speedily commanded the of his counsellors, endowed with vast energy and prowess, (to encounter Hanumān in battle). sons