Surveying the monkey-host consisting of many hundred and thousand,-crest-fallen, Jämbavān thus spoke to Hanumān, O hero among the monkey-multitude, O be of those versed in all branches of learning, staying apart silent, why did you not speak? O Hanuman, you are alil in energy and strength, equal to Sugriva, monarch monkeys, and to Rāma and Lakşmaņa. Aristanemi's son the mighty Vainateya,* famous by the cognomen of Garutmā, is the foremost of birds. *Offspring of Vinatā, Garura's mother. Many a time and oft. I have see that exceedingly powerful, mighty-armed one, endowed with strength of will,-raise up serpents in the ocean. The strength that is in his wings, is equal to the might and virtues your arm. Your energy and prowess are not surpassed by him And your strength, and your understanding, your energy, and your vigour, O foremost of monkeys, (is known among all creatures). Why did not you prepare yourself furnished with everything that is noble or great, (for this feat)? That fore most of Apsarās,—the famous Punjikathală, more famed under the name of Añjana, is the spouse of the monkey Kesarin used over the three worlds, and incomparable on earth by to of her beauty, by an imprecation, my son, she was of in the monkey-race, capable of wearing slopes at her Once on a time, that daughter of the high-souled lord monkeys, Kunjara,-endued with youth and beauty,-used in a delightful garland, and clad in silk, —assum human form, was ranging on the summit of a mountain, ambling a mass of clouds in the rainy season. It came moss that as that one of expansive eyes was standing on the mit of the mount, the Wind gently stole away her elegant bow cloth with crimson skirts. He had a sight of her and fine face, together with her well-developed breasts. As soon as the Wind saw that illustrious one of spacious and slender waist, and whose every limb was lovely,-was amain overcome by desire. And all his frame sessed by Manmatha, and deprived of self, the Wind emced that blameless one by means of his long arms. There influenced by fear, that one of excellent vows said,-no is it that desireth to lay violent hands upon my chastity? Hearing Anjana's words, the Wind answered, do not wrong you, O you of shapely hips. Let not her enter your heart. As, O famous damsel, by embracing the, I have mentally entered into your womb, you shall her a son, intelligent and endued with prowess. And, bed with great strength, and possessing exceeding energy, having vast vigour, he shall equal me in bound and leaping.' Thus addressed, O mighty monkeys, your other, O long-armed one, O foremost of monkeys, your has to you in a cave. In that mighty forest, you, a child, desirous of eating, seeing the sun risen, and taking on to be a fruit, sprang up and leaped into the sky. O mighty monkey, going three thousand Yojanas, you, struck by as energy, didst not feel poverty of spirit. And, seeing you shing through the heavens, O mighty monkey, Indra, owing wrath, hurled his thunder-bolt at you. Thereat, breaking your left jaw, you (didst fall) on the mountain From this circumstance, your name has been known Hanuman. Witnessing you beaten back, that bearer of fumes himself, the Wind, that breaketh everything before in wrath did not blow through the three worlds. Thereat, all gods-lords of the universeinfluenced by fear in consequence of the triune world waxing agitated, began to path the wrathful Wind. And on the Wind being mollified, Bra conferred on him a boon, saying,–O child, O you of prowess, (your son) shall be incapable of being slain in be by means of weapons.' And seeing him sustain (serious) injury consequent on the impact of the thunder. He of a thousand eyes, pleased in his soul, also confer on (you) and excellent boon, O lord, saying, 'Your death: take place according to your will.' *Hanuman. You, endowed with drawful vigour, are the son of Kesarī by his wife; and, resemble the Wind in energy, you had sprung from his loins. The are the son of the Wind, my child-equal to him in power of leaping. Now we are without our lives. And you, endowed with dexterity and vigour, and like another I of the monkeys,+ are before us. *Sugriva. On the occasion of Vişnu enveloping the earth with three steps, I, O child, had circa ambulated the earth with her mountains, woods and fore one and twenty times. Then, commissioned by the gods, had gathered annuals, which (bcing cast on the deep), cat ambrosia to come out after churning. At that time, god was our strength. But now I have grown old, and prowess has left me. At present we have you, furnish with every virtue. Therefore, possessed of vigour, do I bestir yourself, and bound over (the main). You are the qualified of all. This entire monkey host is eager to bell your prowess. O redoubtable monkey, do you arise! leap over the mighty ocean. Your motion, Hanumān, asseth that of all beings. All the monkeys are depressed. O Hanuman, did you overlook this? Put forth your you endowed with mighty vehemence, like Vişnu sing over the three worlds in three steps. Exhorted by foremost of monkeys, that one famed for has speech, that key, the offspring of the Wind-god, gladdening the monkey-chiefs, wore (a fit) shape for crossing the ocean.* *Another epithet of Hanumān, Pavanātmaja-son to the Wind?? on the score of Redundency.