Hearing the speech of the high-souled offspring of the Wind-god, Sītā resembling a daughter of the celestials, said in words fraught with her welfare. Even as the Earth with corn half-way towards harvest is gladdened on receipt of showers, have I, O monkey, been gladdened on seeing you that speakest sweetly. Do you so dispense your kindness to me that, with my desire attained, I may touch that tigerlike one with my body reduced by grief. O foremost of monkeys, present this sign to Rāma, and tell him also for a sign that he had in ire hurled the dart which destroyed a single eye of the crow. And tell him also, (Sītă wishes Hanuman to use her own language to Rama) 'On my (first) tilaka having been wiped out, you didst paint beside my cheek another cheek another made of red arsenic—this you You remember. Why, O you endowed with prowess, resembling Indra the Great or Varuņa, do you disregard the ravished Sītā, sitting in the midst of Raksasa? This jewel for the head I had preserved with care. In my misfortune, O sinless one, I used to inspire cheerfulness by a sight a sight of this, resembling yourself. This graceful water-sprung (gem) I part from. Hereafter, overwhelmed with grief, I shall not be able to live. For you only do I bear insufferable miseries, heart-cleaving speech, and companionship with Raksasas. O destroyer of enemies, for a month longer will I maintain being. Beyond that, О king's son, bereft of you, I will not live. This Raksasa king is dreadful. (This being so), if I hear you tarrying, I would not live for a moment. Hearing Vaidehi's speech pathetic and uttered with tears, the highly energetic Hanumān, son to the Wind-god, said. My revered one, I swear to you by truth itself that Rāma neglect every business because of grief for you. And Rāma being over-whelmed with woe, Laksmana burn in grief. Now that I have succeeded in seeing you after no end of ado, this is no time for lamentation. O fair one, this very moment you shall witness the end of your woe. Those blameless princes-foremost of men, gathering courage from my sight of you shall reduce Lankā to ashes. O you of expansive eyes, slaying in battle Rāvana along with his friends, Raghu's, sons shall take you back to their own palace. Now, O faultless lady, you ought to give me such a sign as Rāma shall certainly recognise, and as shall more please him by far. “Ah!” (answered Sītā), "I have already furnished you with an excellent sign. This ornament, . Hanuman, when carefully examined by Rāma, O hero, shall render your words credible." Thereupon, taking that best of gems, that graceful foremost of monkeys, bowing down the head to that exalted one, prepared to depart. Seeing that monkey-leader intent upon leaping up, and surcharged with energy, with his person enlarged, Janaka's daughter, with a tearful countenance, spake in woe-begone guise, her accents choked with the vapour of grief, O Hanumān, communicate tidings of my good health to those lion-like brothers, Rāma and Laksmana, to' Sugriva along with his counsellors, and to all (the monkeys). And it behove you so to compass things that the mighty-armed Rāghava may rescue me from this sea of sorrow. Do you, going to Rāma, make known to him the fierce current of my grief, as well as the railing of these Rākşasas. Good fortune be your portion, you exceedingly heroic monkey! Thus furnished with the intentions of the princess, the monkey, having gained his object, and, growing exceedingly exhilarated in his heart, reviewed the small work that yet remained for him, became bent upon proceeding to the north.