Then resigning that line of thought, that mighty monkey, regaining his equanimity, set out in another direction of thought touching Sītā. Separated from Rāma, that lady is incapable of sleeping, or eating, or decorating (her person), or drinking. She is incapable of associating with any other person, although he were the sovereign of the celestials himself. And even in all heaven there is none who is equal to Rāma. "She is some other.” Assuring himself of this, that foremost of monkeys, eager to behold Sītā, again began to range in that place set apart for drinking. Some were tired out with sporting; some with singing; some with dancing; and some were fast asleep through intoxication. Some supported themselves on Murajas, Mşdangas, or Celikās; and some women were sleeping on excellent sheets. And that leader of monkey-bands saw (that place of drinking) filled with thousands of women, adorned with ornaments engaged in their sleep) in depicting each other's loveliness, and explaining the sense of songs; conversant with season and place; understanding the meanings of word chiming in with season and place;* and skilful at play. *All this, remarks Rāmānuja, appeared from their talk during sleep. At other places also he saw thousands of superb and youthful dames fast asleep, employed in talking of each other's beauty. That leader of monkey bands saw (women) versed in season and place, and understanding the meanings of words consonant with season and place. In the midst of them all, the lord of the Rāks asas looked splendid like an ox in a spacious stall in the midst of stately kine. Surrounded by them, the Rākṣasa chief appeared beautiful like a gigantic elephant in a forest, surrounded by female elephants. In the abode of the huge-bodied Rākşasa chief, that tiger like monkey saw that place of drinking, furnished with every object of desire. In that place set apart for drinking, he saw heaps of the flesh of buffaloes, deer, and boars, arranged separately, And that tiger-like monkey saw in capacious golden vessels flesh of fowls and peacocks, which remained (after the repast). And Hanumãn saw the flesh of boars, and Vádhrinasas Salyas, deer and peacocks, seasoned with curds and Sauvarcala, and Krkalas, and goats of various kinds, flesh of hare half-fed-Ekasalyas, and buffaloes, all chopped and dressed; and lickable and drinkable viands sharp and mild; and edibles sharp and mild; and Rägakhāndavas# containing sugar and acid, capable of improving a vicious palate. With large and costly stray bangles and bracelests; and scattered cans, and diverse kinds of fruit; and wreaths of flowers, the pavement attained exceeding beauty. And with elegantly jointed bedsteads, arranged (around), the scene of wassail appeared aflame without fire. With meat consisting of many ingredients, fraught with diverse tastes, seasoned with many substances, and dressed by skilful cooks, arranged separately in the scene of revel; and with noble and pleasant wines, natural and artifical, asavas from sugar; and Madhvika' and āsavas from flowers and fruits; and impregnated separately with different kinds of fragrant dust, the pavement, furnished with innumerable garlands, surrounded with golden water vessels and crystal bowls, and golden water-pots, looked exceedingly beautiful. The monkey saw that foremost of all places set apart for drinking, containing silver and golden jars. That mighty monkey saw golden wine-vessels studded with gems, all filled with wine; and some with half full of liquor, some with their wine entirely exhausted, and some full of liquor. And (at some spots) he saw various kinds of viands, and at other wines ranged in rows, and at others the wine-vessels remaining half full. There were many bedsteads belonging to fair ones, remaining vacant; and at some places excellent women were sleeping touching each other. And at one place, a female, borne down by the force of sleep, forcibly possessing herself of another's cloth, and wrapping herself there with, went to the bed of that one, and was indulging in sleep. And with their breath, their variegated wreaths and the cloth on their persons were stirring gently, as if with a mild-blowing breeze. Laden with the odours of cool sandal, and of sweet-tasting Sidhu; and of diverse wreaths and flowers, and with perfumes of various kinds, and entranced with (the aroma) of sandals suitable for use after ablution, and of dhupas, the air, impregnated with excellent scent, was there breathing around the car Puşpaka. And in the residence of the Rākşas, there were some wenches sable, yet exceedingly witching; and some were dark-hued; and the frames of some were of a golden brilliance. Their beauty, in consequence of their coming under the governance of sleep, and their being bereft of their senses by Madana, resembled that of lotuses in a sleep. Thus that highly energetic monkey saw everything thoroughly in the inner apartment of Ravana, but he saw not Janaka's daughter. Seeing those females, that mighty monkey, apprehending loss of righteousness, was seized with an exceeding great fear. Beholding a female, who is the religiously wedded wife of another, while she is asleep, verily cause loss of righteousness. *And therefore presumably incapable of taking care of herself. My sight surely never seek other's wives; but I have beheld this one that has ravished another's spouse. That intelligent one, intent on attaining a knowledge of things capable of being arrived at on grounds of judgement, again reflected effectively as to his course of action. All these unsuspecting wives of Rāvana have been beheld by me; yet there are no signs that my mind has undergone any alteration. In respect of the enlistment of the senses on behalf of any course of action good or evil, it is verily mind which is the cause; and herein my mind is righteously disposed. I could not search for Vaidehī elsewhere; for in the matter of search, people always search for women even among women. People search for creatures among the species to which they happen to belong: none scarchets for a lost lady among female deer. Therefore have I with a pure heart explored the entire inner apartment of Rāvana; but Janaka's daughter I see not. Hanumān endowed with prowess saw the daughters of gods, and Yaksa, and Nagas; but he saw not Jānaki. And not seeing her, that hero, having beheld other magnificent dames, coming out of that place, set about searching for Sītā (afresh). Leaving the place of was sail, the graceful offspring of the Wind-god, taking extreme care, again began to search for Sītā all about (another quarter).