Learning that the sons of the counsellors had been slain by the high-souled monkey, the Tennecked one suppressing the apprehension that was in his heart, restored the balance of his mind. He directed five of the foremost leaders of his forces, the heroic Virūpaksa Yupakşa, the Rāks asa Durdharsa, Praghasa, and Bhasakarma, versed in polity, endowed with the speed of the Wind in conflict and alert on every occasion, to take Hanumān captive. You generals, do youtaking mighty host with steeds, elephants and cars, chastise that monkey. And coming to that dweller of the woods, youhad better act heedfully, and should accomplish this work in consonance with place and season. Having regard to his acts, I do not take him to be a monkey. He is a great being endowed with extraordinary prowess every way. My mind is not satisfied that he is a monkey. He may have been brought into being by Indra, through ascetic might, for injuring us. Backed by you, I have defeated (deities), and Nāgas, and Yaksas, and Gandharvas, and Asuras, and Maharsis. And, for certain, they have herein tried to do us some wrong. Therefore there is no doubt about this, do you by main force take him. And, you generals, go you taking a mighty force with steeds, elephants and cars. Do you chastise this monkey. This monkey of deliberate prowess should not be disregarded by you. I have seen (There is a word sighra, soon-in this Śloka, of which I fail to perceive the relation) monkeys of immense prowess, Vāli with Sugrīva and the exceedingly powerful Jāmbavāna, and Nīla the general, and others with Dwivida at their head. Their speed is not dreadful, nor their energy, nor their prowess, nor their intelligence, nor their strength, nor their courage, nor their capacity to change shapes. Therefore you should know him as some great being staying in the form of a monkey. Exerting yourself to the uttermost, do you chastise him. These three worlds combined, with Indra, celestials and mortals, are incapable of long staying before you in the field of battle. Still a person versed in polity, albeit anxious to secure victory in battle, should carefully preserve self, as success in war is unstable. Thereupon, they, possessed of the energy of fire, accepting the words of their master, rushed forth vehemendy, accompanied with cars, mad elephants, fleet steeds, sharp and whetted weapons, and forces of all kinds. Then those heroes saw that effulgent mighty monkey, shining in his native splendour, like to the risen sun, possessed of great strength and immense speed, and magnanimity of mind, seated at the gate. And soon as they saw him, they, frightened at his appearance, assailed him with their respective terrible weapons. And Durdhasa discharged at Hanumān's head five white iron (This may rather look an incongruous mixture of images; but the iron arrows may have been silvered over) arrows with yellow heads, and possessing the lustre of lotus-leaves. Having been pierced in the head with those shafts, the monkey, roaring, leapt into the sky inaking the ten cardinal points resound. Then the exceedingly powerful and heroic Durdhara mounted on a car, with his bow stringed, came forward showering innumerable arrows by hundreds. Thereat, even as the wind drive away rainpouring clouds at the end of the rainy season, the monkey, remaining in the sky, resisted (his antagonist) as he kept on pouring his shafts. And sore beset by Durdhara, the Wind-god's son again emitted cries, and that puissant one also increased himself. Then darting far up in the air, the monkey suddenly descended on the car of Durdhara with extreme vehemence, like to a mass of lightning alighting on a mountain. Thereat his eight steeds getting mangled, and the wheels and pole of his car having been broken, Durdhara leaving the car, fell down to the earth, deprived of life. Seeing him down on the earth, those irrepressible subduers of enemies, Virūpaksa and Yupaksa, waxing wroth, sprang up. And springing up suddenly, they by means of maces, dealt blows on the chest of the monkey, who was staying in the unclouded sky. Thereat resisting the furious rush of those gifted with ebullient erergy, that exceedingly powerful one descended to the earth with the violence of the Fair-feathered (bird).* (Suparna-a name of Garuda.) Then getting at and uprooting a sāla tree, that monkey, the Wind-god's offspring, slew both of those heroic Rākşasas. Learning that those three had been slain by the monkey gifted with speed, the mighty and onrushing Praghasa laughing in scorn advanced (in the encounter). And the energetic Bhāsakarņa also came forward in rage, taking a dart. And (they) meeting together, Praghasa assailed the famous, tiger-like monkey with a sharp-edged axe, and Bhāsakarņa (attacked) the elephantine monkey with a javelin. And with his limbs wounded by them, and his hair wetted with blood, that monkey resembling in splendour the infant sun, grew furiously enraged. That elephantine monkey, the heroic Hanumān, uprooting a mountain-peak with beasts, snakes, and trees (in it), slew those Raksasas; and, crushed by that mountainsummit, they were reduced to powder. On those five generals having fallen, the monkey slew the remaining forces. As the thousand-eyed Deity destroyed Asuras, the monkey destroyed steeds with steeds, elephants with elephants, warriors with warriors, and cars with cars. And with horses and elephants, swift steeds, with broken wheels and mighty cars, and Raksasas slain, all the ways were blocked up. Having destroyed in battle the heroic generals with all their forces and vehicles, that hero in the same way rested at the gate like Kāla himself engaged in destroying people when he has gained respite. Having destroyed in battle the heroic generals with all their forces and vehicles, that hero in the same way rested at the gate like Kāla himself engaged in destroying people when he has gained respite.