The monkey Hanumān in company with Tārā and Angada swiftly set out for the quarter assigned by Sugrīva. And having proceeded far along with all those foremost of monkeys, he explored the caves and woods of Vindhya; spots inaccessible in consequence of streams intervening in front of mountains; and tanks; and tracts filled with trees; and various mountains rife with wild trees. And having searched in all directions, the monkeys could not find Maithilī, Janaka's daughter Sītā. And subsisting on various fruits and roots, they were overcome with fatigue, after searching dreadful forests, void of water, still and tenantless, as well as other forests of a similar nature. And having searched that country as well mighty forests containing caves, those leaders of monkeyherds fearlessly explored other places, difficult of access, where the trees are fruitless, and without flowers and foliage; where the streams are waterless, and where roots even are rare; where there are no buffaloes, or deer, or elephants, or tigers, or birds-or any other animals that are found in forests. And there are there neither trees, nor annual plants, nor creepers, nor herbs,-and in that place there are no pleasant pools, with cool leaves, and filled with blown lotuses, and it has been renounced by the black-bees. There dwelleth a Maharași, Kandu by name, an eminently pious, and truthful ascetic, irascible, and irrepressible because of his practice of self-discipline. In that wood his son, a boy of ten years, his sands having run out, breathed his last; and it is for this that the mighty ascetic has come under the influence of passion. And cursed by that high-souled one, the entire mighty forest has become unfit to harbour (any creatures); difficult of entrance; and devoid of birds and beasts. They carefully search the skirts of its woods, mountain-caves, and the sources of its streams. And those high-souled ones, devoted to the good of Sugrīva, did not find Janaka's daughter, or her ravisher, Rāvaņa. And entering (into a wood), they saw a terrible Asura, concealed by the shrubs and plants-of dreadful deeds, and cherishing no fear even of the gods. And seeing that dreadful Asura, seated like a hill, and resembling a mountain, they all tightened their cloths, And that strong one also, saying to the monkeys, Destroyed are you, and uplifting his clenched fist, rushed after them in rage. And as he darted suddenly, Angada, the son of Vali, knowing, This is Ravana, administered to him a slap. Struck by Vāli's son, that Asura, his mouth vomiting blood, fell down to the earth like a hill toppled down. And on his having breathed his last, the monkeys, elated with victory, thoroughly searched that mountain cavern. And when they had satisfied themselves that the cave had been searched all through, the dwellers of the woods entered another fearful mountain cavern. And after having searched (that place) also, they came out fatigued; and with desponding hearts sat them down at a distance under the shade of a tree. they came out fatigued; and with desponding hearts sat them down at a distance under the shade of a tree.