Thereupon Rāvana, with sweet words and gestures, expressed his own desire to Sītā, poorly, deprived of joy, encircled by Rākşasīs and leading the life of an ascetic. O you having thighs like the trunks of elephants, while you had, beholding me, hidden your breast and belly, perhaps you are afraid of exposing your person to me. I do long for you, O you having expansive eyes; do you esteem me, O my dear one, O you gifted with all accomplishments and pleasant to all persons. O Sītā, here is no human being or any Rākşasa assuming shapes at will, do you therefore renounce all fear from me. O timid damsel, for certain it is the virtue of the Rākşasas that they always visit others' wives or come by them by force. In spite of this, O Maithili, I do not touch you for you are not under the influence of amour—but for me, I am completely under its sway. Do not fear me, O worshipful damsel, confide in me O my beloved one, and become attached to me. Do not give way to grief. A single lock of hair, to lie down on earth and useless fast-these do not become you. Attaining me, O Maithili, do you enjoy excellent garlands, sandal, ornaments, costly wines, beds, seats, songs, dancing and music. You are a jewel of a female; do you not therefore remain in this guise. Put on your ornaments therefore. How shall you remain unadorned obtaining me, O you of a beautiful figure? This your beautiful youth is passing away, which like the current of a river when once gone, dose not turn back, O you of a fair look, having created you, the artist of Gods, the maker of celestial beauties, has ceased from his work, for a match of your beauty I find in none. Who is there, O Vaidehi, who can withstand the influence of amour, getting you, gifted with beauty and youth? (What of others) even Brahmā, the grand-father of the celestials, is moved. O you having a moon-like countenance, and well-developed hips, whatever limbs of yours, I behold, I find my gaze fixed therein. O Maithili, do you become my spouse, and renounce this delusion. Do you become the foremost queen of all my excellent wives. O timid one, all the jewels that I have collected from the three worlds, and all my kingdom I shall confer on you. O sportive damsel, for your satisfaction, I shall conquer the whole earth, engarlanded by many cities and bestow it upon Janaka. Find I none on this earth who can withstand my prowess. Do you behold my matchless prowess in battle. The celestials and Asuras are incapable of withstanding me, defeated as they were by me in battle and their pennons struck down. Do you therefore desire ine to-day, dress yourself in excellent robes and adorn yourself in beautifully brilliant ornaments. I shall behold your dazzling beauty whenadorned with ornaments. For pity to me, do you embellish, yourself with ornaments, O you of a graceful countenance. O timid damsel, do you, at your pleasure, enjoy all sorts of comforts and luxuries, and do you, as you desirest, confer wealth and land on others. Do you confiding in me, ask for your wishedfor objects and do you command me like to an unmannerly damsel. You shall, by asking favours from me, satisfy the desires of your friends. Ogently lady, O you of great renown, do you observe my prosperity. What shall you do with Răma, wearing bark, O you of pleasant presence. Rāma has ceased from his endeavours for gaining victory. He has lost all his beauty, lives in the forest, is engaged in observances and always lies down on earth. I fear whether he is living still. O Vaidehī, Rāma shall not be able to see you like to the rays of the moon covered with blue clouds preceded by Balākās.* Rāghava shall never get you back from my hands, like to Hiranyakaśipu unable to regain his wife Kirti from Indra. *A kind of crane. O you of beautiful teeth, O you having beautiful eyes, O sportive damsel, O timid one, you do steal my mind like to Garuda catching serpents. Beholding you, wearing a shattered silken cloth, slender and without any ornaments, I do not find any attachment in my own wives. O daughter of Janaka, do you exercise, your supremacy, over all my wives, living in my seraglio and gifted with all accomplishments. O you having black hair, all my wives are foremost in beauty over the three worlds. And they shall all attained you like to Apsaras waiting upon the Goddess of wealth. O you having beautiful eye brows and welldeveloped hips, do you, along with me, enjoy at your pleasure all the wealth and riches of Kubera. "The God of wealth or Pluto in Greak myth. O worshipful damsel, in asceticism, strength or prowess, wealth or fame, Rāma is not my equal. Do you therefore at your pleasure drink, enjoy and eat. I shall confer on you wealth and the whole earth. Do you satisfy all your desires in me, O fair damsel, and let your friends be satisfied in you. And adorned with beautiful golden necklace, O timid lady, do you at your pleasure, range with me, in the forests, situated on the bank of the ocean, and filled with flowery trees and black bees. a