Having related all, Hanuman, the wind-god's son began again, saying. Fruitful is Rāghava's endeavour and Sugrīva's energy, for greatly pleased have I been with Sita's conduct. O heroic monkeys, Sītā has been keeping the life of a highly chaste damsel. She can maintain the animated creation by virtue of her asceticism and burn it with her ire. Rāvana, the lord of the Rākşasas is also highly advanced in asceticism by virtue whereof he has not been ruined albeit he has touched Sītā's person. Even the flame of fire cannot do, although touched by the hands, what Janaka's daughter can bring about by her ire. I have related to you what had happened. It now behove us to behold Vaidehi along with those two sons of a king, after commanding all the monkeys headed by Jambavan and others. I am alone capable of destroying the city of Lankā along with the Rākşasas and their lord Rāvana. What more can I achieve if I am accompanied by the heroic monkeys like ye, powerful, having control over their own minds, well-arıned, able and desirous of winning victory! I shall slay Răvaņa in conflict along with his sons, brothers army and retinue. I shall destroy all the Rākşasas and baffle all the weapons of Indrajit conferred on him by Brahmā, Rudra, wind and Varuņa albeit they are invisible in battle. Without your perinission my prowess has been bought to a stand still. Hills and mountains, uprooted and discharged by me continually, can destroy even the celestials, what of those nightrangers? Without your permission my prowess has been bought to a stand still. Even if the ocean overflow its banks, the Mount Mandara move off its place, the enemy's host cannot frighten Jāmbavăn in conflict. And specially the heroic monkey, Vali's son, is alone capable of destroying the whole host of the Raksasas. Even the mount Mandra is weakened by the velocity of the thighs of the high-souled monkey Nīla-what of the Rākşasas in conflict? What hero is there among the celestials, Asuras, Yaksas, Gandharvas, serpents and birds who can equal Manida or Dvivida in battle? I do not find any one who can oppose in the battle field the two best monkeys, the sons of Asvi gifted with great velocity. By me along has the city Lankā been devastated burnt down and reduced to ashes. And I had announced in the public streets there—“May victory crown the highly powerful Ram and Lakşmaņa, and may the king Sugrīva advance in prosperity being protected by Rāghava. I am the servant of the king of Kosala, the own begotten son of the Wind-God and my name is Hanumān. I have announced thus everywhere.” (And I beheld there) in the Asoka forest of the vicious-souled Rāvana, at the foot of a ſingśapā tree, the chaste Sītā waiting very poorly. She was encircled by the Rākṣasīs, worn out with grief and anxiety and was like to the rays of the Moon shorn of their brilliance being enveloped with clouds. And Vaidehi, having a beautiful waist and devoted to her husband, did not care for Rāvana proud of his prowess and was accordingly confined by him. And that graceful daughter of the king of Vaidehī was by all means devoted to her lord and had all her thoughts centred in him like to Paulomi (The wife of Indra the lord of the celestials who was confined by the king Nahușa) devoted to her lord Purandara. And I saw her in that garden, wearing a single piece of cloth soiled with dirt, surrounded by the Rākşasīs and remonstrated with now and then by those ugly demons. Having a single braid of hair, poorly, engaged in thoughts touching her lord, she was lying on the earth shorn of all grace like to a lotus on the appearance of the winter. She had not the least attachment for Rāvana and was resolved upon putting an end to her existence. And somehow creating her confidence I addressed that damsel having the eyes of a fawn and related to her the whole story. And hearing of the friendship between Rāma and Sugrīva she attained to an excess of delight. She is well behaved and devoted to her lord per excellence and blessed is the high-souled and ten-necked demon that she has not destroyed him (yet). And Rama shall become an instrument only in in bringing about his destruction. She has really been greatly reduced and worn out by the separation of her lord. Her person has been shattered like to learning waning by its prosecution on the first day of a lunar fortnight. Thus live there the great Sītă worn out with grief. Do you now perform what you think proper.