Thereupon getting at the Mount Prasravana surrounded by a variegated forest, lowering their heads to the mighty Rāma and Lakşmaņa, placing before them their prince (Angada) and bowing to Sugrīva, the monkeys began to relate the story of Sītā. And they described to Ráma, the confinement of Sītā in Rāvana's seraglio, the remonstrances of the she-demons, her unflinching attachment in her lord and the time appointed (by the Rākṣasa for her destruction). And hearing of Vaidehi's well-being Rāma said. O monkeys where live the worshipful Sītā? And how is her attachment to me? Do you relate everything to me. Hearing those painful words of Răma, the monkeys desired Hanumān, conversant with the whereabouts of Sītā, to describe every thing to him. Hearing their words, Hanuman, the Windgod's son, versed in the art of speech, lowering his head in Sītā's name and towards the southern direction (where she lives) began to relate how he succeeded in beholding Sītā. Conferring on (Rāma) the heavenly jewel set on a golden leaf and burning with its own effulgence, Hanumān, with folded hands, began-Anxious to behold Sītā, the daughter of the king Janaka, I ploughing over the main extending over a hundred Yojana, wended my way and by and by reached Lankā, the capital of the vicious-souled Rāvaņa. Lankā is situated on the southern bank of the southern ocean, And I saw there Sītā, in the inner appartment of Ravana. Centring all her thoughts in you, breathes that damsel, O Rama. I saw her reviled by the she demons again and again. She is being guarded in that garden by the grim-visaged Raksasis. And that worshipful came, O hero, ever used to happiness, is now stricken with grief in your absence. Confined in Ravana's inner apartment, well protected by those she-demons, wearing a single braid of hair and poorly, she is engaged only in thoughts touching you. She in lying on earth, shorn of all grace like to a lotus on the appearance of the winter. She has not the least attachment for Rāvana and is resolved upon putting an end to her existence. O Kākutstha, O innocent prince, after enquiring for sometime, I found that worshipful dame devoted to you, and narrating the glories of the Ikşvāku race, O foremost of men, I created her confidence by and by, and addressing her I related everything. Hearing of the friendship between you and Sugrīva she was greatly delighted. And she has her respect for you unshaken and all her actions are for you. O great man, O you best of men, I beheld the daughter of Janaka in this plight, engaged in hard austerities and ever devoted to you. O you of great intelligence, O Raghava, offering me (this jewel) as a token, she wanted me to relate to you, the occurrence at the mount Citrakūța regarding the crow. And Jānakī addressing me said'O Windgod's son, do you describe everything of what you have seen here, to Rāma. And relating everything before Sugrīva, do you present him with this jewel which has been preserved by me with great care. I have kept with great care this excellent jewel of great effulgence. Do you remind him of the mark which he made on my forehead with red arsenic. O innocent monkey, greatly delighted am I on beholding the brilliant jewel which he has sent through you. Breathe shall I only for a month, beyond that I shall never live, subject as I am to the demons.' Thus was I accosted by Sītā, reduced to a skeleton, observing pious observances, shut up in Rāvana's inner apartment and having eyes like those of a hind. I have described to you everything, O Rāghava, do you make arrangements for bridging over the ocean. And considering those two princes greatly consoled, the Wind-god's son handed over that token to Rāghava and described everything from the beginning to the end.