And beholding that monkey place his crown at his feet the monkey-chief, with an anxious mind, accosted him, saying. Rise up, rise up, why had you lain yourself at my feet? I declare you had you come here? It behove you to suggest the becoming procedure. Is it all well with my orchard Madhuvana? I long to know everything, O monkey. Being thus addressed hopefully by the highsouled Sugrīva, Dadhimukha, gifted with an intelligence of a very high order, rose up and spoke. Neither yourself, nor Vāli, the lord of the monkeys, O king, allowed that orchard to be freely used by the monkeys but that has been now laid waste by them. I prevented them along with these attendants, but disregarding me, they drank and feasted there at their pleasure. They were prevented, O lord, in their act of devastation, by these guards, but those monkeys, without caring for me the least, feasted there. Some of them went beyond the pale of food conduct, others ate at their pleasure, and all frowned (at us). When these attendants, being insulted by them, were greatly wroth, they were driven out of the garden, by those powerful and enraged monkeys. They were greatly assailed by those many thousand heroic monkeys, worked up with ire and having reddened eyes. Some had their arins broken, some had their knee-joints crushed and some of them were thrown up in the sky. Yourself their lord living, these heroes are beaten, and the entire Madhuvana is being freely enjoyed by them. The highly intelligent Lakşmaņa, the slayer of foes, addressed Sugriva, the foremost O the monkeys, while he was thus being informed, saying. O king, why has this monkey, the guard over the forest, come to you, and what sorrow has led him to give vent to these expressions? Being thus addressed by the high-souled Laksmana, Sugriva, skilled in the art of speech, replied. O worshipful Lakşmaņa, the heroic monkey Dadhimukha speaks that the war-like monkeys headed by Angada have drunk honey. They would not have engaged in such an unfair proceeding had they been unsuccessful in their mission. They have surely achieved success while they have thus been bent upon devastating the orchard. For this the warders were struck on their kneejoints for obstructing their revelry and for this they went so far as to disregard the powerful monkey Dadhimukha. I myself appointed this monkey the lord of my orchard. Forsooth has Hanumān espied the worshipful Sītā and none else. There is none else but Hanumān who is the instrumental of this work, for that best of monkeys has in him a high intellect, know the art of success, is gifted with courage, strength and prowess and is conversant with Śāstras. That work is sure to succeed whose leading spirits are the mighty Jāmbavāna and Angada, and worker is Hanumăn. Forsooth that orchard has been laid waste by these heroes headed by Angada. And ransacking the southern quarter, those leading monkeys have come back and delightedly entered the Madhuvana. And the whole orchard has been explored and enjoyed by those monkeys and the attendants beaten and wounded on their kneejoints. To communicate to me this intelligence, this monkey of known prowess, and sweet accents, named Dhadimukha, has come here. O you of mighty arms, O son of Sumitra, forsooth they have beheld Sītā, since the monkeys, just on their return, have engaged in drinking honey. O best of men, they are all well-known monkeys and without espying Vaidehī they would not have engaged in the destruction of that orchard conferred on us as a gift by the celestials. Hearing these words from Sugrīva, pleasant to ears, the virtuous-souled Lakşmaņa along with Rāghava, was greatly pleased. And hearing this from Dadhimukha, Sugrīva, greatly gratified; addressed that lord of the for st, gain, Saying. Greatly pleased I am, since, they, being successful, have explored this forest. And the insulting procedure of the successful is also pardonable. Do you soon go there and protect that orchards, and send here all those monkeys headed by Hanumān. Along with these two descendants of Raghu, I long to know soon from these monkeys headed by Hanumān, and proud like lions, what they have settled for the regaining of Sītā. And beholding-these two princes greatly delighted and their eyes expanded with joy, the king of the monkeys, thought that the accomplishment of the great work was near at hand, and was accordingly greatly delighted."