Being thus addressed by Sugrīva, the monkey Dadhimuklia, delighted, bowed to him, Rāghava and Laksmana. And adoring Sugrīva and the highly powerful descendants of Raghu, he along with other heroic monkeys, leaped up in the sky. He went away with the same speed with which he came and leaping down on the earth from the sky, entered the orchard. And entering that forest he beheld all the leaders of the monkeys spending the hours delightedly, having passed urine, the outcome of honey. And approaching them, the hero, with folded hands and delighted, addressed Angada, with the following words. O gentle one, do you not take offence, for these monkeys, protecting the garden enraged, unwittingly prevented you. O you of great strength, you are worn out with your long journey, do you drink your own honey, you are our prince and the master of this garden. It behove you to forgive us for our wrath arising out of ignorance. Like to your sire before, yourself and Sugrīva are the lords of these monkey hosts, O you foremost of them and none else. O innocent prince, I have related all about this to your uncle. When I described to him, the arrival of all these forest rangers, as well as of yours accompanied by them, and the destruction of this garden by you all, he was not the least offended, rather delighted. And worked up with joy your uncle Sugrīva, the lord of earth and monkeys, said “Send them all here speedily." Hearing those words from Dadhimukha, Angada, the foremost of the monkeys and skilled in speech, addressed them all, saying. O you leaders of the monkey hosts, I fear, Rāma has heard all about this. Dadhimukha relates everything joyfully and hence I infer this. And our work finished, O slayer of foes, it dose not behove us to remain here (any longer). You have all drunk honey at your pleasure and there is nothing left and you should now go where the monkey king Sugrīva is. O leading monkeys, I shall follow what you will in a band desire me to do. In action I am subordinate to you all. I am not justified to command although I am a prince. You are all of accomplished actions, it is not proper to repress you forcibly. Hearing those sweet words of the prince Angada, the monkeys delightedly replied, saying. O king, O foremost of monkeys, who else can speak thus being a master? Any one else, we think, is proud of his wealth. Such like words become you only and none else. Your humility speaks of your future greatness. We are all anxious to go there, where Sugriva, the king of the monkeys, is. Verily we speak to you, O foremost of monkeys, that without your permission, none among us, is capable of advancing a single step.” They addressing him thus, Angada replied"All right, let us all go.” Saying this he leaped up in the sky and was followed by all those monkeys, clouding the welkin as if with stones thrown up by a tool. And placing before them Angada and Hanumān, the monkeys leaping vehemently up in the sky roared like to clouds driven by the wind. And Angada nearing, Sugrīva, the lord of the monkeys, spoke to the lotus-eyed Rāma, stricken with grief, saying. May good betide you. Do you console yourself. The worshipful dame has been found out; there is not the least doubt about it. Or else they would not have come as the time is already past. I (further more) infer this from Angada's joy, O you of auspicious presence. Without being successful in his mission, the large-armed prince, Angada, the foremost of the monkeys, would not have come to me. If the monkeys had engaged in such an unfair proceeding without being successful in their mission, Angada would have looked poorly and his mind would have been overwhelmed with grief and forgetfulness. Without beholding the daughter of the king Janaka they would not have dared to destroy Madhuvana obtained and preserved by my forefathers. Do you console yourself, O Räma, by whom Kausalyā has become the mother of a good son. O you, rigidly observing any religious vow or obligation, forsooth has Hanumān behold the worshipful dame and none else. No other wight is so qualified an instrument in encompassing this end. O you of excellent intellect, Hanumān know the art of success, is gifted with intellect, perseverance and courage and is versed in Šāstras. That work cannot fail, which is worked out by Jāmbavān and Angada and presided over by Hanumān. Be not laden with anxiety, O you of unmitigated prowess. These monkey have come here excited with pride and drink. They would not have come with such a grandeur had they been but unsuccessful. From their breaking down the orchard and drinking honey I inferred SO. Thereupon he heard in the sky the joyous sounds of the monkeys proud on account of Hanuman's work, proceeding towards Kişkindhā and as if announcing their success. Thereupon hearing the noise of these monkeys Sugriva, their chief, being greatly delighted, uplifted his tail. And placing Angada and Hanumān before them those monkeys proceeded to behold Rāma. Those heroes headed by Angada, delighted and intoxicated, descended before Rāghava and the lord of the monkeys. And the mighty-armed Hanumān, lowering his head, related to Rāghava, Sītā's spiritual and physical well-being. Hearing from Hanumān the sweet words that he had beheld Sītā, Rāma and Lakşmana were greatly delighted. And being confirmed thus by the Wind-god's son, Laksmana, greatly pleased, respectfully looked towards Sugriva. And Rāghava too, the slayer of foes, worked up with joy, cast respectful looks towards Hanuman.