Thereupon, O foremost of men, out of your love and adoring me for your friendship, that worshipful dame-addressed me again, saying. Do you thus speak every thing to Rāma, the son of Daśaratha, so that he might soon take me hence, slaying Ravana in battle. O hero, O slayer of foes, if it please you, you may relieve yourself of the toil by living in a secret nook and then proceed to-morrow. O monkey, in your company, I do momentarily forget the weight of my grief, unfortunate as I am. O you gifted with great prowess, yourself departing, I shall wait for your return, but doubt I very much whether I shall live till then. Burnt I shall be with the fear of not beholding you again, wretched and stricken with grief as I am. And so I shall be, hereafter, overwhelmed with a mightier grief. O hero, besides, I entertain a grave doubt about your assistants, the monkeys and bears. I do not know how shall the host of monkeys and bears and those two princes cross over the mighty main? O innocent monkey of all the creatures three only are qualified to cross over the ocean, yourself, Garuda and the Wind. O you foremost of those skilled in speech, what had you settled about the accomplishment of this hard work? True it is that you are alone qualified to accomplish this work, you the slayer of inimical heroes-but such manifestation of your prowess shall increase your glory only. But if Rāma, obtaining victory, can take me hence to his own city, it shall redound to his glory. It dose not behove the heroic Rāghava, to take me away by steal, like to Rāvaņa capturing me from the forest under a disguise. Truly it shall be his becoming work, if Kākutstha, the repressor of enemy's host, can take me away, enveloping the city Lankā with his army. Do you therefore initiate that work as become that high-souled hero and may display his prowess. Hearing these sound reasonable and affectionate words I gave her the last reply, saying. O worshipful dame, Sugrīva, the foremost of the monkeys, the lord of monkey and bear hosts and gifted with manliness, has resolved upon rescuing you. He has under his command a number of mighty and courageous monkeys gifted with great prowess and quick-coursing like imagination. Their course is never thwarted-whether going upwards or downwardsor moving tortuously. They are never exhausted in their actions—highly courageous and of measureless prowess. And those great and powerful monkeys, coursing in the air, have again and again circumambulated the earth. Sugriva has many monkeys-my equal-and greater than I but none of inferior strength. While I have crossed over the main-what of these mighty heroes? The leading heroes are never sent on a mission but only those of inferior merit. No more of bewailing, O worshipful dame. Do you remove your grief. And with one leap these leaders of monkey-hosts shall reach Lankā. O great damsel, these two princes, placing themselves on my back shall come to you like to the rising Sun and Moon. You shall soon behold before Lanka's gate Rāghava the slayer of foes resembling a lion and Lakşmana with a bow in his hand. You shall soon observe in a band the heroic monkeys, gifted with the strength of lions and tigers, and having nails and teeth for their weapons. You shall soon bear the roaring of the leading monkeys on the summit of mount Malaya, resembling the muttering of the clouds. You shall soon behold Rāghava, the slayer of foes, installed along with you on the throne of Ayodhya after returning from the forest. That daughter of the king of Mithilā although heavily laden with sorrow in your absence was greatly comforted and pleased by my auspicious words boding the fulfilment of her desire.