All the heroic monkeys, headed by Angada and the great monkey Hanumān, approved highly of the words of Jāmbavān. And these leading monkeys headed by the Wind-god's son proceeded leading from the summit of the Mount Mahendra. And there highly powerful ones, having huge persons, resembling the Mount Mandara, covered the welkin as if like so many mad elephants. They carried, as it were with their own looks, the highly powerful Hanumān, gifted with great velocity, having control over his own self, and adored by the Siddhas. They were resolved upon satisfying Rāma's end and acquiring glory for themselves. Their desires were satisfied and mind elevated in consequence of their beholding Sitã and burning down Lankā. All of them were anxious to communicate this pleasant news. to enter into conflict and were resolved upon bringing about Rāma's wellbeing. And leaping and ascending the sky they got at the Madhuvana, (An orchard teeming with various trees bearing delicious and sweet fruits) preserved by Sugrīva, resembling the celestial garden, covered with many trees, picturesque and incapable of being divastated by any. The monkey-chief Sugrīva's maternal uncle, the heroic and high-souled Dadhimukha always guard that picturesque and spacious garden of the lord of monkeys. They were greatly worked up with anxiety. And beholding that large orchard, those yellowcoloured monkeys were greatly delighted and begged honey of the prince. And the prince respectfully allowed these elderly monkeys headed by Jāmbavān to drink honey. And being thus commanded by the intelligent prince-Vāli's son, those monkeys ascended the trees infested with bees and feasting on fragrant fruit and roots, were greatly delighter and intoxicated. And thereupon those monkeys, beside themselves with joy for being allowed to drink honey began to dance hither and thither. Some sang, some laughed, some danced, some bowed down, some read, some walked hither, some leaped and some talked at random. Some sprang upon one one another, some quarrelled with one another, some leaped from one tree to another, and some jumped down on the earth from the tops of the trees. Some rose up with great velocity from the earth to the tops of the huge trees-some sang, other approached them laughing—some wept and others approached them weeping. Some were stricking with their nails and others struck them in return. And thus the entire monkey host were bewildered with intoxication. There was none among them who was not drunk and none who was not excited with pride. Thereupon beholding all the fruits eaten up and the trees divested of leaves and flowers, the monkey Dadhimukha and worked up with ire and attempted to prevent them. And that heroic, elderly monkey, the guard of the garden, was in return remonstrated with by them who were greatly intoxicated. Thereat the highly spirited monkey again made up his mind to protect the garden from their devastations. He used harsh words, undauntedly towards some, struck the weak with his palm, quarrelled with some, and consoled others with soothing words. They were greatly excited with drink, and being prevented forcibly by Dadhimukha, they giving up all fear, began to pull him. And striking him with their nails, biting him with teeth, crushing him with their palms and feel, they being drunk, almost reduced him to death and devastated the mangoe forest.