Being thus addressed by the high-souled Rāghava, Hanumān, related to him all of what Sita had said, O foremost of men, the worshipful Jānaki, related as a token, all the incidents at the Mount Citrakūta from the beginning to the end. Sleeping happily with you, Janaki one day awoke before, and in the meantime, a crow wounded her breast with its beaks. O Rāma, you wert then asleep on Sītā's lap and that crow again afflicted the worshipful dame. And it again wounded her. And being bathed in blood and suffering terrible pangs, that worshipful dame aroused you. O slayer of foes, O you of mighty-arms, seeing her breast wounded, you, wroth like a serpent, didst speak saying. O timid damsel, who, with his nails, has wounded your breast? Who has played with an angry serpent having five faces? Casting your looks around you didst behold a crow facing the worshipful dame with sharpened nails besmeared with blood. That crow, the best of the birds, was Sakra's son. And it entered speedily into the earth with the velocity of the wind, Thereupon, your eyes rolling with ire, you, O mighty armed hero, O foremost of the intelligent, did resolve to destroy that crow. Taking a kusa off your seat you did set it on Brahma weapon. And it flamed like to the fire of desolation before that crow. You did let off that burning Kuśa towards that birds. And there upon that burning Kuća followed the crow. And being forsaken even by the celestials, who were terrified, and ransacking the three worlds it did not get a refuge. Thereupon it again came to you, O subduer of foes. And seeking your shelter it laid itself low on the ground. And O Kākutstha, you didst save it albeit it was worthy of being slain. And thinking if improper to baffle the aim of the weapon, you didst, O Rāghava, destroy the right eye of the crow. Thereupon bowing to you and the king Dasaratha, that crow, bidding adieu, went to its quarter. O Rāghava, you are the foremost of those skilled in the use of weapons, powerful and gifted with an excellent character, why do you not discharge weapons towards the Rākşasas? The celestials, the Gandharvas, the Asuras, the Marutas-none of them is qualified, O Rāma, to equal you in conflict. If you, gifted with great prowess, had any armed shafts, destroy Rāvana in conflict. And obtaining the behests of his brother, why dose not Lakşmaņa, the subduer of foes and best of men, protect me, O Rāghava? Those two best of men, gifted with the effulgence of Wind and Fire, and incapable of being repressed even by the celestials, are disregarding me. Forsooth have I perpetrated a mighty iniquity since those two slayers of foes, being capable, do not protect me. Hearing those sweet and piteous accents of Vaidehi I again spoke to that worshipful dame, saying. 'Forsooth can I swear by you, O worshipful dame, that Rāma is sorely stricken with grief in your absence. And Lakšmaņa too relent heavily beholding him laden with sorrow. It dose not behove you to relent any more as I have succeeded in finding you out. You shall at this very moment behold the end of your grief. And those two princes, the foremost of men and slayers of foes, actuated with energy on hearing that I have seen you, shall reduce Lankā to ashes. And slaying in conflict the terrible Rāvaņa, with his kith and kin, Rāghava, in sooth, O excellent damsel, shall take you back to his own city. O you of a blameless person, do you confer on me such a token, as might be recognized by Ráma and conduce to his pleasure. Thereat, casting her looks around, she took out an excellent jewel from her cloth, worthy of being set on her braid and conferred it on me, O you of great strength. O you, the most favourite of the Raghu race, taking for you that gem with my hands and bowing to her, I addressed myself speedily for departure. Thereupon beholding me ready to depart and increase in bulk and about to leap up in the welkin, Sītā, the daughter of the king Janaka, poorly, bathed in tears, overwhelmed with sorrow and having her voice choked with grief, saying 'Blessed are you O great monkey, since you shall behold the large-armed and the lotuseyed Ráma and the highly famed Lakşmaņa, my lord's younger brother. And being thus accosted by Maithili, I said-Do you speedily place yourself on my back, O worshipful dame,oyou the daughter of king Janaka, and I shall soon show you, O great dame you having dark blue eyes, your lord along with Sugrīva and Lakşmaņa.' Whereto she replied — 'This is not the pious course, O great monkey, O you the foremost of your race, that I shall, of my own accord, place myself on your back. And although before this I was touched by the demon, O hero, it was because I could not help otherwise subject as I was to circumstances. Do you yourself repair, O foremost of monkeys, where those two princes are. Addressing me with these words she again said-O Hanuman, do you relate my well-being to Rāma and Lakshamana of leonine prowess, and Sugrīva accompanied by his followers. Do you so describe as the large-armed Rāghava may save me from this ocean of grief. Do you narrate to Rāma this my terrible sorrow and the affliction by the she-demons. May good betide you, on your way, O foremost of the monkeys.' Thus the worshipful Sítă gave vent to these piteous accents. Hearing these words do you believe that it is all well with her.