As the high-soulcd monkeys and Raksasas taught on, their wrath vastly increase at sight of each other's forces. And furnished with steeds in golden trappings, and elephants resembling flames of fire; and cars appearing like (so many) suns; and shining armour, the valiant Räkşasas issued, making the ten cardinal points resound. The Rākşasas of terrific exploits were burning for victory on behalf of Rāvana. The mighty monkey-army also, eager for victory, darted against the host of the Rākşasa of dreadful deeds. In the meanwhile, as either party assailed the other, there took place single combats between the Raksasas and the monkeys. And as Andhaka had combated with the Three-eyed (deity), That Raksasas, the exceedingly energetic Indrajit, faught with Angada, Son to Vāli. Sampāti, hard to to bear, engaged with Prajangha; and the monkey, Hanumān, entered into conflict with Jambumālī. And Ravana's younger brother, Vibhisana, fired with wrath, encountered Śatrughna, endowed with exceeding impetuosity. The highly powerful Nīla engaged with undertook Praghasa, and the graceful Lakşmaņa was engaged with Virüpākşa. The exceedingly irrepressible Agniketu and the Raksasa Rasmiketu-and Mitraghna and Yajñakopa, were engaged with Rāma. Vajramuștti encountered Mainda, and Asaniprabha Dvivida. And those foremost of monkeys faught with those dreadful Rākşasas, the heroic and terrible Pratapana, incapable of being overcome in battle, was combating with Nala of terrific force; and that lusty son of Righteousness, well-known as Susena, a mighty monkey-battled with Vidyunmāli. And other fearful monkeys encountered other Rākşasas; and many were the encounters the took place. And great and fierce was the engagement that took place between the heroic Rakşasas and monkeys burning for victory, capable of making people's hair stand on end. And from the persons of the Räkşasas and the monkeys there flowed a river of gore, having hair for grass (growing on its banks) and the bodies of the warriors for pieces of planks floating (a down the current). Indrajit, growing enraged, with his mace dealt a blow at that tearer of hostile ranks, angada, like him of an hundred sacrifices striking with his · thunderbolt. Thereat, that graceful monkey, Angada, gifted with vehemence, with his mace crushed his car decked in gold, together with the steeds and the charioteer. Sampāti was pierced with three arrows by Prajangha; and the former (in his turn) slew Prajangha on the edge of battle with an Ašvakarņa. And Jambumali, mounted on a car, possessed of prodigious strength, fired with wrath, with all the access of force derived from his car wounded Hanumān between his paps. Thereat, getting at his car, Hanumān-son to the Wind-god with a slap speedily crushed his adversary's vehicle along with the Raksasa. Then the terrific Pratapana, roaring, rushed at Nala; and thereat Nala, with his body pierced with sharp shafts by that swift handed Rākşasa, plucked out Pratapana's eyes, and cast them to the earth. That lord of monkeys, Sugrīva, with a Saptaparma-swiftly slew Praghasa, who appeared to be devouring up the troops. Tormenting the Räkşasa Virupākṣa of dreadful form, Laksmana killed him with a single arrow. The irrepressible Agniketu, the Rākṣasas Raśmiketu, Mitraghna and Yajñakopa, with their arrows rendered Rāma aflame. Thereat, Rāma, growing wroth, in battle severed the heads of those four by means of four shafts, dreadful, and resembling the tongues of a fame. Vajramuști was slain in conflict by Mainda with a clenched fist; and down came he to the ground along with his car and horses, like a turret toppling (headlong.) Nikumbha in fight wounded Nila resembling a mass of blue collyrium, with sharpened shafts, as the Sun pierce clouds with his rays. Again with an hundred arrows, that lighthanded night-ranger pierced Nīla in the field; and Nikumbha laughed thereat. At this, even as Visnu did in battle, Nila with a wheel of his car, cut off in conflict Nikumbha's head together with that of his charioteer. Dvivida, possessed of the touch of the Vajra and thunder bolt, in the presence of the entire Rākşasas host hurled a mountain-peak at him that was endowed with the splendour of the thunder bolt. Asaniprabha in encounter pierced that foremost of monkeys bearer of trees in conflict, Dvivida, with shafts resembling thunder-bolts. Thereat, beside himself with wrath, with his entire body wounded with arrows, Dvivida with a sala destroyed Asaniprabha along with his car and horses. And Vidyanmālī, mounted on a car, assailed Suşeņa with shafts decked with gold, and behan to shout momentarily. Seeing him mounted on his car, Suşena-best of monkeys-taking up a huge crag, swiftly brought his car down to the ground. Thereat, endowed with lightness, that nightranger, Vidyunmāli, at once extricating himself from his car, stood on the ground with a mace in his hand. Thereupon that foremost of monkeys, Sușeņa, growing furious, taking up a gigantic crag, rushed at the night-ranger. As he was descending, the night-ranger, Vidyunmālī, with his mace swiftly hit at the breast of Susena-greatest of monkeys. Thereat, without thinking at all of the terrific hit of the mace, that best of monkeys in mighty conflict brought down that upon his head. Assailed with the crag, the night-ranger Vidyanmali, having his chest crushed, fell down to the earth, deprived of life. Like the celestials warring against the Daityas, the heroic monkeys warred on and confounded the valiant rangers of the night. And frightful was the field of battle, with darts, and other arms; and clubs, and javelins, and lances, and other weapons, and with broken cars, and war-horses, and mad horses slain, and monkeys and Rākşasas, and wheels and Akşas, and yokes and standards, broken and scattered over the ground; and swarms of jackals began to range on all sides of the monkeys and the Raksasas; and Kabandhas began to rise in that terrific encounter, resembling the encounter of the gods and the Asuras. Thus destroyed by the foremost of monkeys, the rangers of night, beyond themselves with the smell of blood, eagerly wishing for the setting of the Sun, again made active preparation for a renewal of the fight.