Thereupon Rāvana heard in every house of Lankā the piteous cries of the she-demons possessed by sorrow. And sighing hard he engaged in mediations for some time. And terrible-looking as he was greatly worked up with ire. Having his eyes reddened with anger and gnashing his teeth and biting the lips, that one, irrepressible by other Raksasas, looked like the fire of dissolution incarnate. There upon the lord of Rākşasas, in anger as if burning down everything with his look addressed the Rākşasas who were near him. Mahodara, Mahāpārsva, Virāpāksa "Do you speedily speak to the soldiers that they should sally out for battle at my command. Hearing his speech-those Raksasa, possessed by fear, asked by the command of the king, the Rākşasa soldiers to be ready. Thereat all those grim-visaged Rākṣasas saying 'so be it' and performing benedictory ceremonies proceeded to the battle-field. Those mighty car-warrior, worshipping Rāvana, and desiring the victory of their lord, stood before them with folded hands. Thereupon Ravana, beside himself with anger, laughing, addressed those Raksasas, Mahodara, Mahāpārsva, and Virūpākşa, saying. Today shall I despatch both Rāma and Lakşmaņa to the abode of Death with arrows resembling the sun at the time of dissolution, discharged off my bow. And slaying the enemies I shall repair the loss of Khara, Kumbhakarna, Prahasta and Indrajit. The atmosphere, the quarters the sky and the deep being enveloped with the cloud of arrows shall become invisible. I shall slay today all the heroic monkeys with my winged arrows. Ascending my car gifted with the velocity of the wind shall I churn today the monkey host with arrow-like waves coming from the oceanlike bow. I shall like an elephant distress today the monkey-like pools having their countenances for the blown lotuses, and the lustre of their bodies for the filaments. To-day in the encounter, the leaders of the monkey hosts, with their heads transfixed with arrows, shall cover the earth, like to Ictuses with their stalks. I shall today with a single arrow, cleave hundreds of heroic monkeys fighting with trees in their hands. I shall wipe today the tears of those whose brother or son has been slain by destroying their goe. In the encounter today I shall, with the monkeys deprived of their breath and clept with my arrows, so cover the earth that it may not be seen by any. I shall satisfy today with the flesh of the enemies slain by my shafts, the crows, vultures and others who live upon flesh. Get ready soon my car and bring my bow. And let the remaining night-rangers follow me in battle. Hearing his words Mahāpārsva addressed the leaders of the army who were near him, saying, "Get your soldiers ready." The commanders too quickly went round all the houses in Lankā and asked the Rākşasas to be ready soun. Thereupon began to issue out in a moment terrible-looking Raksasas, emitting roars, having dreadful faces and with various weapons in their hands-daggers, Pattisas, maces, clubs, furrows, sharpened Śaktis, traps, various rods, sharpened Cakra, Parasvadhas, Bhindipālas, Sataghnis and various other excellent weapons. Thereupon at the command of Råvaņa the commanders brought one Niyuta (a hundred thousand) cars, three Niyuta elephants, sixty million horses, asses and camels and numberless infantry. They arranged the soldiers before the king and in the interval the charioteer brought the carfilled with excellent celestial weapons-richly adorned, containing many an armour, girt with a network of tinkling ornaments crested with various jewels. Having jewelled pillars and a thousand golden jars. Beholding the car the Rākşasas were greatly astonished. And Ravana, the lord of Raksasas, rising up all on a sudden, ascended that car, brilliant like the flaming fire and the aggregate rays of a million sun, quick-coursing, having a charioteer, drawn by eight horses, huge and shining in its native lustre. Thereupon proceeded Råvana, encircled by many a Raksasa as if rending the earth with the excess of his prowess. arose was There a huge sound of bugles accompanied with that of Mrdangas, drums, conchs, and kalapas. The lord of the Rākṣasa-wicked, the slayer of the Brahmins-the thorn of the celestials, and who has brought away Sītā by stealth, has come with his umbrellas and chowries to fight with the foremost of Raghus-this cry heard everywhere. With his tremendous roar the earth shook. And hearing all on a sudden that sound, the monkeys fled away in fear. The highly effulgent Råvaņa, having huge arms and surrounded by his ministers, came there being certain of gaining victory. Being commanded by Ravana, Mahāparrsha, Mahodara and the irrepressible Virupaksa ascended the car. They, desirous of winning victory, issued out emitting dreadful roars in delight and as if rending the earth therewith. Thereupon the highly effulgent (Ravana) resembling Death, with uplifted bow, sallied out for battle along with the army of Rākşasa. That mighty car-warrior, went out in his chariot drawn by quick coursing steeds by that gate which led to where Rāma and Lakşmaņa were. Thereat the sun lost its brilliance the quarters were enshrouded with darkness; the birds sent forth dreadful cried and the earth shook. The celestial poured down bloody rains-the course of the horses was slackened-the vultures sat on the banners and jackals emitted inauspicious cries. His left eye and the left arm began to shakehis countenance became pale and his voice grew harsher. The Ten-necked Rākşasa thus going out for battle there appeared many bad omens indicating his destruction. From the sky fell a fire-brand accompanied with the sound of thunder; vultures and crows emitted inauspicious cries. Disregarding these dreadful omens which appeared then, Ravana, incited by death, foolishly went out to slay his (enemies). By the wheel-sound of the chariots of the great Raksasas the host of monkeys calling each other, excited with anger and willing to gain victory, addressed themselves for fight. Thereupon the Ten-necked one, enraged, with his arrows feathered in gold, made a dreadful slaughter of the army of monkeys. And some of those heroic monkeys were bebeaded by Ravana-some had their hearts rent and others were shorn of their ears. Some had their breath choked, some were killed and others had their sides broken. Some had their hands cut off and others had their eyes put out. Wherever in the encounter, the Ten-headed Räksasa, whirling his eyes in ire, went in his car the monkey leaders could not stand the vehemence of his arrows.