When things were in this condition, Rāvana's younger brother addressed Lakşmaņa in words fraught with evil to foes and conducing to the welfare (of his own party), saying. Do you without delay bring on an engagement between this cloud-black Räksasa army, which you behold, and the monkeys having rocks for their arms. O Lakşmaņa, do you exert yourself to break through his* mighty-army; and when the ranks are broken, the son of the Rákşasa-lord shall be visible. * Indrajit's, that is. Scattering among the foes shafts resembling Indra's thunder-bolt, charge him while he has not yet finished this ceremony. Slay, O hero, this wicked one, this son of Ravana, given to illusion, and of terrific feats, the fear of all the worlds. Hearing Vibhisana's.words, Laksmana graced with auspicious marks began to shower arrows on the son of the Raksasa-chief. And bears and monkeys, given to fighting excellently with trees, in a body rushed towards that army (of Rākşasa) drawn up there. The Rākşasas (on their part) burning to slaughter the monkey-forces, rushed in the encounter with sharpened shafts and darts and tomaras. There took place a tremendous onslaught of the monkeys and the Raksasas. And Lankā resounded all around with that mighty tumult; and the sky was covered with weapons of various shapes, and whetted arrows and trees and dreadful upraised mountain-tops. Rākşasas having frightful faces and arms, playing their arms among the foremost monkeys, began to spread terror (there). In the same way the monkeys in the conflict fell to slaying and wounding the Rākşasas with trees and hill-tops. And great was the terror that was spread among the warring Räkşasas by the flower of the bears and monkeys, possessed of gigantic persons and endowed with prodigious strength. Hearing his own army hard beset by the enemies, and dropping, the unconquerable one, ere yet he had finished his rites, rose up. Issuing from the gloom of the trees, Ravana's son, fired with wrath, ascended his car, which had already been well yoked (with steeds). Accoutred in a dreadful bow and arrows, that one, resembling a mass of collyrium, having a red face and eyes, looked dreadful like the reaper-death. As soon as they saw him mounted on his car, that host of Rākşas possessed of dreadful impetuosity, eager to engage with Lakşmaņa, stood on their ground. At this time that subduer of enemies, Hanumăn-resembling a mountain, uprooted a giant tree incapable of being handled. In that encounter, the monkey, consuming (the forces) like the fire risen at Doomsday, made that army of Rākşasas insensible with innumerable trees. Finding the Wind-god's son, Hanumān, suddenly spreading devastation among the Rāks asas by thousands, (they) showered (shafts) on him. Approaching on all sides that one resembling a hill, those bearing whetted darts attacked him with darts; those bearing swords in their hands, with swords; those bearing javelins in their hands, with javelins; with pattisas, those equipped with pattiśas; and with bludgeons, and maces and graceful kuntas; and with hundred of sataghnis, and iron clubs; and with terrific axes; and with Bhindipälas, and with boxes like to thunder-bolts; and slaps resembling the asani. And fired with fury, he (on his part) spread a huge havoc among them. Indrajit saw that foremost of monkeys resembling a hill, the offspring of the Windgod possessing himself if calmness, while destroying his foes. Thereat, be* addressed his charioteer, saying, "Go where the monkeys is. Being disregarded by the Raksasas, he makes havoc among us." *Indrajit. Thus accosted by him, the charioteer went where the Wind-god's offspring was, carrying the exceedingly invincible Indrajit seated on the car. And rushing forward, that irrepressible one the Rākşasas-began to shower on the monkey's head arrows and swords and pațțišas and scimitars and axes. And bearing all those dreadful arms, the Wind-god's offspring, overcome with a mighty rage said. O wicked-minded son of Rävaņa, if you are a hero, fight on. Combat with me with your arms. If in the encounter, you bear my impetus, then, O you of perverse sense, you indeed are the foremost of Rākşasas. Then Vibhīşana pointed out to Lakşmaņa the son of Ravana, who with his bow upraised, was eager to slay Hanumān. This one that, mounted on his car, is eager to slay Hanumăn, is the son of Rāvaņa that has vanquished Vasava himself (in battle). Do you, O son of Sumitrā, with peerless shafts capable of resisting enemies, dreadful, and competent to finish the lives (of foes), slay the son of Ravana. Thus accosted by Vibhīşaņa terrific to foes, that high-souled one saw (Indrajit) of dreadful prowess, difficult to gut at, and resembling a hill, stationed on his car.