On the leader of the Rākşasa host being slain in battle by the foremost of monkeys, that army of the Rākşasas monarch, resembling the ocean in violence, furnished with dreadful weapons, began to scamper away. Going to the lord of the Rākşasas, they ar prised hin, of the dealth of his general at the hands of the Fire-god's offspring. And hearing those words of theirs, the Rākşasas lord was overcome with rage. And hearing that Prahasta had been killed in battle (he), exercised with passion, with his heart influenced with grief, addressed those foremost of the Raksasas host, even as Indra addressed the chiefs among the celestials, saying That foe should no longer be disregarded that has slain along with his followers and elephants that leader of my host that had destroyed the forces of Indra himself. Therefore, without taking thought, will I, for compassing the destruction of the foe myself march to that marvellous field of fight. Today, even as a flaming fire burn down a forest, will I with showers of shafts burn up that monkey-army, and Rama and Laksmana. Saying this, that enemy of the sovereign of the immortals ascended a flaming vehicle of dazzling sheen yoked to rows of excellent steeds, displaying itself gloriously and having a glowing body. And eulogized with sacred hymns, the sovereign of the Rākşasa rulers then set out to the sounds of conchs and trumpets and Panavas; and in the midst of those produced by persons striking at their arms, with their hands, and of the sounds defiance, and leonine roars. Like that lord of the immortals-Rudrasurrounded by ghosts, the foremost of the Rākṣsa monarchs was surrounded by bands of flesh-feeding (Raksasa) resembling cliffs and clouds-with eyes glowing like fire. At once issuing from the city, that one endowed with high energy saw that fierce array of monkeys, extended as the ocean or a mighty mass of clouds, with arms upraised with rocks and stones. Seeing that terrific host of Räkşasas, that eminently auspicious one, followed by the forces, having arms resembling the lord of serpents-Rama-spoke to Vibhişana foremost of those bearing arms. Whose is this force furnished with various ensigns and standards-and equipped with pracas and swords and darts and other arms, consisting of intrepid (Rakşasas), and having, elephants resembling Mahendra* itself. *The mountain so named. Then hearing Rama's speech, Vibhisana, possessed of the prowess of Sakra himself, informed Råma anent that foremost of hosts consisting of that flower of high souled Räkş asas, saying. O king, him do you know to be Akampana, who, possessed of a high soul, is on the back of that elephant, whose face looks like the sun new risen, and who approach making the head of his elephant tremble (with the splendour of his person).* *This meaning is the commentator's. That one is named Indrajit-foremost by virtue of the boon (that he has obtained), who ascending a car and having a lion for his ensign, twange his bow like the very bow of Sakra displayed, and who with his terrific round teeth appear like an elephant. That one of a gigantic person is named Atikāya, that, like to the Setting-hill of Vindhya, furnished with the bow and stationed on a car, highly heroic, stretch his bow of unparalleled proportions. That high souled hero is named Mahodara that, furnished with right coppery eyes resembling the sun new risen, and ascending a car resonant with the sound of bells, shout shrill. That one having the vehemence of the thunder-bolt is Pisacha, that, mounted on a steed in variegated golden trappings, and having the aspect of a mass of evening clouds, or a mountain, (appear) with a prāsa furnished with effulgence. That one is the famed Trisiras, that grasping a whetted dart endowed with the splendour of lightning and having the speed of the thunder for its minister, approach, riding a bull-the best of his species-and having the appearance of the Moon himself. That one looking like a mass of clouds, that, having a broad and beautiful breast and a banner surmounted with the king of serpents, goes in collected carriage, stretching his bow is Kumbha. That one is Nikumbha of wondrous valorous deeds (in battle) that, grasping a flaming and smoky bludgeon embellished with gold and diamonds, come-a very banner of the entire Rāksasa host. That one is Narāntaka, fighting with mountain-peaks, that appear before us, mounted on a car flaming like fire, furnished with pennons and equipped with bows and swords and shafts. That crusher of the hauteur of even the celestials, that surrounded by various spectres of dreadful forms having faces of tigers, or camels, or powerful elephants, or deer, or horses, and with their eyes rolling, where the white umbrella resembling the Moon, shine, graced with slender ribs-the high-souled sovereign of Rākṣasa appear like Rudra himself environed by spectres, the sovereign of the Rākṣasa looked with a diadem, with his countenance graced with pendulous earrings, with a person resembling that monarch of mountains-even Vindhya himself-that humbler of the pride of Indra the Great and Yama, shine like the Sun. Then Rāma-repressor of foes-answered Vibhisana, saying, “Alas! Ravana-lord of the Rākşasas-is of exceeding glowing splendour; and Rāvana shine in glory, and is incapable of being gazed at like the Sun himself. And his grace, being enshrouded in his own splendour, I cannot view plainly. The persons of celestials appear splendid as does the person of the Raksasa-chief. All the warriors of the high-souled one are like mountain and fight with crags; and all are equipped with flaming weapons. And environed by glowing ghosts of dreadful forms and fierce-looking and furnished with material tenements the king of Räkşasas appear imposing like the Destroyer himself. And by luck it is that today the wickedminded one has come within the range of my vision; and today will I vent my wrath incident to the ravishment of Sītā. Having said this, Rāma endowed with prowess, eve followed by Laksmana, stood, taking up his bow and pulling out a powerful shaft. Then that high-souled lord of Rākşasas addressed that mighty host, saying, "Do you casting off fear stay at ease, at the gateways, high ways, and the edifices (in Lankā). Taking note of this lapse, viz., that you have all come hither with me, the wood-rangers in a body, subduing the empty city incapable of being withstood, shall suddenly put (all) to straits. Then leaving those counsellors, (Ravana) on the Raksasa having departed agreeably to his injunction, dived into that ocean of monkeys, like a mighty fish diving into the waves of over brimming deep. Seeing the lord of Rākşasas, furnished with flaming deep. And seeing the lord of Rākşasas, furnished with flaming a bow and arrows, suddenly rushing, the king of monkeys uprooting a mighty mountain-top, darted against the sovereign of the Rākşasa. Taking up that mountain-peak having its sides covered with innumerable trees, he hurled it at the night ranger. And seeing it descend swiftly, (Rāvana) in battle severed the same by means of gold-knobbed shafts. On that gigantic peak furnished with fair sides filled with trees, falling to the earth, severed in pieces, the lord of Råkşasas took up an arrow, resembling a mighty serpent and having the splendour of the Destroyer himself. Taking that shaft endowed with the vehemence of the wind, flaming like a fire aglow, and having the impetuosity of the great Indra's thunder-bolt, (Ravana) hurled it in rage to compass the destruction of Sugrīva. Even as the fierce dart discharged by Guha' had pierced Krauñca, that shaft shot by Rāvana, rushing in violence at Sugrīva possessed of a person having the touch of Sakra's thunder-bolt, pierced it. Thereat, agonised by the shaft, that hero, with his senses bewildered, dropped down to the ground with shrieks. And seeing him down on the earth bereft of his senses, the Yātudhānas were filled with rejoicing. Then Gavaksa and Gavaya, Susena, Rsabha, Jyotimukha and Nala, uprooting crags and magnifying their bodies, rushed against the lord of Raksasas. The lord of Rākşasas with hundreds of shafts having sharpened heads, rendered their strokes fruitless. And then he rived those foremost of monkeys with showers of arrows having variegated golden knobs, and covered those fierce monkey-ranks with networks of arrows. On being sore assailed and falling in consequence, those heroes, the monkeys, pierced with terrific arrows, and distressed with the shafts of Rāvana, emitting cries, sought the shelter of Rāma worthy of being sought. Then the high-souled and excellent bowman-Rāma, taking his bow, at once sallied forth. And thereat, Laksmana, approaching Rama, with joined hands addressed him words couching prime import. O noble one, I alone am fit to compass the destruction of this wicked-minded one. I will slay him. Do you, O master, permit me. To him replied Rāma of exceeding energy, having truth for his prowess, “Go then O Lakşmaņa, and put forth your utmost exertions in the encounter. Rāvana is forsooth endowed with mighty energy, and his prowess in battle is wonderful. Without doubt, when enraged, he is incapable of being borne by this triple world. Do you keep an eye on his shortcomings as you should watch your own failings. Being always on the alert, you must with your eyes as much as your bow protect yourself. Hearing Rāghava's speech, Sumitrā's son, embracing Rāma, and saluting him and paying him his respect, went forth to battle. And (going to the field), he found Ravana, endowed with arms resembling the trunks of elephants, wielding his dreadful and flaming bow, and covering with showers of arrows those monkeys, whose bodies had been swarming with shafts. Seeing Răvaņa, the exceedingly powerful Hanuman-son to the Wind-god, resisting that downpour of arrows, charged him vehemently. Coming at his car, the intelligent Hanumān, uplifting his right arm and terrifying Rāvana, said. Incapable of being slain by gods, Dānavas or Gandharvas, Yaksas or Raksasas, Fear has (at last), found you, coming even from monkeys. This my upraised right arm furnished with five fingers shall rod you of your soul long resident (in your body). Hearing Hanuman's words, Ravana possessed of dreadful prowess, with his eyes reddened in wrath, said these words. Strike you swift maugre fear; and acquire lasting renown. And, O monkey, having (at first) taken the measure of your might, will I finish you. Hearing Rāvana's words, the offspring of the Wind-god said, "(First) remember you your sonAkşa-slaughtered by me !" Thus addressed, the exceedingly energetic lord of the Rākṣasas possessed of prowess dealt a slap to the offspring of the Wind-god. Struck with his slap, he shook momentarily. And staying for a moment and calling up fortitude, that magnanimous one administered a slap to the foe of the immortals. Hit by the high souled monkey, the Tennecked one trembled, as tremble a mountain during an earthquake. Witnessing Răvaņa struck with a slap (by Hanumān saints and Siddhas and celestials and the Asuras shouted in glee. Then attaining a little respite, Ravana said, “Well done, O monkey. In prowess you are a foe I pride in." Thus addressed by Ravana, the Wind-god's son said, "Fie on my prowess seeing that you breath yet, O Rāvana. Strike at the same time, O perverse one. Why did you bluster? And then my blow shall despatch you to the mansions of Yama. At the speech of the Wind-god's son, his ire flamed up. And then that one endowed with prowess clenching his right fist carefully, let it alight a main on the monkey's chest. Hit at his spacious chest, Hanumān shook over and over again. And seeing the mighty Hanumān overwhelmed, that powerful carwarrior ascended on his car, approached Nīla. The powerful lord of Raksasas-the Tennecked one-made that general of forces-Nilaaflame with dreadful shafts entering into the vitals, resembling snakes. Assailed with shafts, Nila-leader of monkeyswith one arm took up a mountain-top and hurled it at the lord of Rākşasa. The energetic and high-minded Hanumăn, attaining respite, eager for encounter, seeing (the fight between the Raksasa and the monkey), wrought up with rage said, “It is not meet for me to attack Rāvaņa-lord of Rākşasas-engaged with Nila." The highly powerful Rāvana, by means of seven shafts with sharpened points, hit at the mountain-top; and shivered in pieces, it fell (to the earth). Seeing that mountain peak shattered, that general of the monkey-forces-slayer of hostile heroes-flamed up in wrath like the fire at the universal wreck. In that encounter Nīla discharged Aśvakarņa trees, and sālas, and mangoes in full flower, and also various other trees. Ravana, getting at the trees, severed them (by means of his arrows), and poured on the Firegod's son terrific showers of shafts. Assailed with fearful showers of arrows as with a mass of clouds, that one endowed with eminent strength, decreasing his dimensions, dropped on the top of Ravana's banner. Seeing the son of the Fire-god descend on the top of his banner. Råvana was fired with ire, and Nila shouted (thereat). Seeing the monkey (now) at the top of the banner, and (now) at the end of his bow, and (now) at the crest of his tiara, Laksmana and Hanuman and Rāma were stuck with astonishment. Rāvana also endowed with exceeding energy, astonished at the lightness of the monkey, took up a wonderful flaming fiery weapon. The monkeys seeing Rāvana bewildered, and delighted thereat, set up shouts. Rāvana enraged at the shouts of the monkeys, with his heart overwhelmed with agitation, could not address himself to any affort. Then taking a fiery shaft and setting the same on his bow, that night-ranger Rāvaņa gazed at Nila who was on the tip of his banner. Then exceedingly energetic lord of the Rākşasas said, O monkey, by virtue of your skill in illusion, you are furnished with lightness. But O monkey, if you can, preserve your life. You transform yourself into many shapes. Yet this shaft of mine discharged from my weapon, shall deprive of your life you that are preserving it. Having said this, the mighty-armed Ravanalord of the Rākşasas-fixing his shaft on his bow, shot it at the general. Nila, struck at the chest with that arrow, which had been shot (by Ravana), burning, suddenly fell down to the earth. And by virtue of the greatness of his sire and also of his own energy, he went to the earth on his knees, but was not utterly deprived of life. Seeing the monkey deprived of his senses, the Ten-necked one, eager for encounter, riding a car emitting a rattle resembling the rumbling of clouds, darted against Sumitra's son. Entering into the arena of fight and posted there flaming, the powerful lord of the Rakşasas, baffling (the foe), kept stretching his bow. As that one of immeasurable prowess kept stretching his bow. And as that one of immeasurable prowess kept stretching his bow, Sumitrā's son of unflagging mettle, addressed him saying, “O lord of night-rangers, do you today try me in encounter. You ought not to strive with the monkeys." Hearing Saumitri's speech uttered in a full voice, as well as the terrific twangs of his bowstring, that Raksasa-the king-approaching Sumitrā son staying in the field, spoke to him wrathfully. O Raghu's son, by my luck have you of perverse sense, finding your fate come within the range of my ken. This very instant, tormented with the springs of my shafts, you will repair to the regions of Death. Thereat Sumitra's son, without being overwhelmed with wonder (on witnessing Rāvana's prowess), addressed that one furnished with large and sharp teeth, setting up roars, “O king, those who are (really) endowed with prowess, do no storm. O prince of sinners, in vain you vauntest. O lord of Raksasas, I know your prowess and strength and energy and vigour. Here am I stationed, bow and shafts in hand. Come you. What is the use of vain-glorious self-laudation? Thus accosted, the Raksasa monarch, growing wroth, discharged seven shafts furnished with knobs. Thereupon Lakşmaņa split them up with sharp-pointed arrows having variegated golden knobs. They suddenly severed like powerful serpents cut.off, Lanka's lord came under the away of passion, and discharged other whetted arrows. Rāma's younger brother poured showers of arrows from his bow; and, planting himself at his post, cut off those arrows (of his adversary) by means of .razors, and crescents, and excellent karnas and darts. Seeing his arrowy net-v orks rendered ineffectual, that enemy of the celestials-the kingwas seized with wonderment, and again shot sharpened arrows. Laksmana also, resembling Indra the Great, setting on his bow sharpened, sharp-pointed, flaming, and luminous shafts, endowed with the dreadful vehement impetus of the thunder-bolt, discharged (them) to compass the destruction of the lord of Räkşasa. Thereat the Rākşasa sovereign cut off those whetted arrows; and smote Lakşmaņa in the foreheads with an arrow resembling the Fire of Dooms-day in energy, which had been conferred on him by the Self-create. Laksmana, tortured with Ravan's arrow, shook, loosely holding his bow; and then recovering his consciousness after undergoing extreme agony he severed the bow of the foe of the foremost of celestials. Having cut off Ravana's bow, Dasaratha's son hit (him) with three sharp-pointed arrows. And the king smarting under the shafts, with much ado regained his consciousness. The enemy of the immortals of terrific power with his bow severed, and himself hit with shafts, and his body covered with fat, and himself washed in blood, took up a dart conferred on him by the Self-create. The sovereign of the Rākşasas and their lord in that encounter hurled at Sumitrā's son the dart resembling smoking fire, sending up living flames, and striking terror into the monkeys. As it coursed on, Bharata's younger brother resisted it with arrows resembling a sacrificial flame. Yet the dart pierced into the broad arm of Dasaratha's son. Smite with the dart, that hero of the Raghu race, although possessed of strength, was aglow. And the king at once with his arms seized that one, who had been deprived of his senses. But he that could with his arms wield Himavan or Mandara or Meru or the triple world itself along with the immortals, could not (for all his strength) lift up Bharata's younger brother. And hit at his chest by the dart of Brahmā, Sumitrā's son remembered that he was verily a portion of Vişņu himself. Then pressing hard Sumitrā's son-that humbler of the hauteur of the Daityas, that thorn in the sides of the celestials-could not move him (from his place). Then the Wind-god's offspring waxing wroth rushed at Rāvana, and overwhelmed with rage smote at his chest with his clenched fist resembling the thunderbolt. And boxed (by Hanumāna), Ravana-lord of the Rākşasas-went down to the ground on his knees, and shook and dropped to the earth. And blood gushed out in streams from his mouths and eyes and arms, and staggered and senseless, he sat down on the platform of his car. He was rendered insensible with his senses lost; and he knew no where he was. And seeing Rāvana endued with terrific prowess, rendered insensible in the encounter, saints and monkeys and gods with the Asuras set up shouts. Then energetic Hanumān taking Lakşmaņa racked by Rävaņa, with his arms brought him before Rāghava. And albeit incapable of being moved by the foes, (Laksmana), on account of the friendship of the Wind-god's offspring as well as the high reverence in which he was held by Hanumān, became extremely light to the monkey. Then that dart, renouncing Sumitra's son vanquished in fight, again sought its place in Ravana's car. The exceedingly powerful Răvaņa recovering his consciousness in the dread encounter, took up whetted shafts and seized a mighty bow. That finisher of foes-Lakşmaņa-recovered the exercise of his senses, and had his entire person perfectly healed, on his recalling that he verily was a part and parcel of Vişņu himself. Witnessing the mighty army of the monkeys and the redoubted heroes brought down in the conflict, Rāghava rushed at Ravana. Thereat drawing near to him, Hanuman said to him, "It behove you to chastise the foe ascending my back, even as Vişņu chastise the enemies of the immortals, riding Garutmān." Hearing the words spoken by Hanumān, Rāghava at once got up on that gigantic monkey; and that master of men beheld Rāvana in battle. Seeing him, that highly powerful one darted against Rāvaņa, even as the enraged Vişnu had rushed against Virocana's son, upraising his weapons. He sharply twanged his bow-string sounding like the terrific crash of thunder, and then in solemn tones, Rāma addressed the lord of Răks asas, Saying. Stay, stay, having done me such wrong. Repairing whither, shall you, O powerful Raksasa, attain respite? Even if you should seek Yama or Indra or the Sun-son to Vivaśvăn-or the Self-sprung or the Fire-god or Sankara himself, or go to the ten cardinal points in ten portions, yet shall you not, so resorting attain deliverance. And (Laksmana), going forth to the fight, has been wounded with the dart and has suddenly been stupefied. But, o king of the Rākşasa today in conflict Death shall claim for his own you and your sons and grandsons. By me with my shafts have been slaughtered four and ten thousand Rākṣasa residing in Janasthāna, wielding excellent weapons. Hearing Rāghava's words, the exceedingly strong lord of the Rākşasas, overwhelmed with a mighty wrath, recalling enmity a gone, with burning shafts resembling the fire of Doom hit in encounter the exceedingly impetuous offspring of the Wind-god, who was bearing Rāghava. Although struck and resisted by the Rākşasa with arrows, the energy of that one, endowed by nature with prowess-increased greatly. The exceedingly energetic Rāma, on seeing that foremost of the monkeys wounded by Ravana, was mastered by wrath. Rāma, closing with his enemy, by means of whetted arrow-points severed in pieces his car together with the wheels and the steeds, the banner, the umbrella, and the majestic streamer, as well as with the charioteers and the thunderbolts and darts and swords. Then as the reverend Indra cleave Meru with his thunder-bolt, (Raghava) swiftly smote on Rāvaņa's spacious and shapely chest with a shaft resembling Vajra and the thunderbolt. That the king hero-who had not smarted nor shaken under the impetus of Vajra and the thunder-bolt, assailed with the arrows of Răma and agonised in consequence, shock and lost hold of his bow. Seeing him overwhelmed, Ráma took up a flaming half-moon and with the same at once severed the sun-bright tiara of the high-souled sovereign of the Rākşasas. Rāma in the encounter addressed the lord of Rākşasas, resembling a serpent bereft of venom, shorn of his splendour, like to the sun shrouded (in mist), without his wonted grace, and having his entire tiara riven-saying. You have in battle) performed high and dreadful deeds, and have also (in-the conflict) slain my foremost heroes. And therefore I know you are fatigued. And for this reason it is that I will not with my shafts bring you to the door of Death. Go you. I know that you are worn out with fight. Therefore, O king of night-rangers, enter Lankā. Havirg a little respite, do you depart on your car along with your bowmen. Afterwards, mounted on your car, shall you behold my power. Thus addressed, the king, with his pride and joy defeated, with his bow severed, and his steeds and charioteer killed himself smarting under. shafts, and having his crown splintered, speedily entered Lankā. On that foe of the deities and the Dănavas-the puissant lord of the night-rangers-entering (into Lankā), Rāma rendered the monkeys along with Lakşmaņa hale in that fierce conflict. At the break-down of that foe of the immortals, the celestials and the Asuras, the ghosts and the Cardinal points, and all the mighty serpents together with the oceans and the creatures inhabiting earth and water, felt exceedingly delighted.