Having leapt over the wall, the exceedingly powerful and gigantic Kumbhakarņa resembling a mountain-summit, speedily went out of the city. Then he sent up a mighty shout making the sea resound, and as if drowning the roar of the thunder and riving mountains. Seeing that fierce-eyed one, incapable of being vanquished by Maghavān or Varuņa or Yama, the monkeys began to fly away. Seeing them scamper, the king's son-Angada said to Nala and Nīla and Gavākșa and the mighty Kumuda. Forgetting your lineage and prowess, whither do you, exercised with fear, fly-like inferior monkeys? You amiable ones, desist. Why should you save yourselves? This Rākşasa does not come to fight, this is only a great phenomenon to affright. We shall by our vigour destroy this featful phenomenon of the Rākşasas that has presented itself. Therefore, let the monkeys desist. Cheered with much ado, the monkeys rallying, took up trees and advanced to the field of fight. Ceasing from flight, the wood-rangers waxing, enraged, began to assail Kumbhakarņa, like to elephants in rut. And the exceedingly strong Kumbhakarna, attacked with towering mountain peaks and crags and trees with flowering top, did not shake. And countless crags descending on his person, were shattered; and trees with flowering tops, being broken, fell down to the earth. Incapable of containing himself (through rage), Kumbhakarņa on his part fell to agitating the ranks of the powerful monkeys, even as a fire breaking out burn dowit a forest. Many a prime monkey, crimsoned and drenched (with blood) lay down (on the ground); and many, resisted dropped to the earth, like trees bearing coppery flowers. Without looking before or after, the monkeys bounded and rushed. And on being attacked by the Rāksasa with ease some of those heroes dropped into the deep and some entered the wilderness. Some ran by the same way by which they had crossed the ocean; and some with pale faces darted into downs. And some of the bears ascended up trees, and some took shelter in mountains. Others dropped down; and some ran on. And some fell down to the earth, and some lay insensible as if dead. Seeing the monkeys break down, Angada addressed them, saying, “Stay we shall fight. Desist, you monkeys. Going round this Earth place find I none where you may rest. Stop you all. What is the need of preserving your lives. You poltroons, if you fly away leaving your arms behind, your wives shall deride you; and that is more painful to honourable persons than death itself. Born in long and noble lines, whither go you, suffering from fear, like abject monkeys? When renouncing your prowess, you fly away in fear, forsooth you are base. Where now is gone that talk of your anent your nobility and the welfare (of your king) which you had held in society. He that live, despised (of all), hear the reproach of being a craven. Therefore do you follow the way frequented by the worthy, and cast off fear. We will either lie down on the earth, being slain in consequence of our shortness of days, and thus attain the region of Brahmä incapable of being attained by dastards; or achieve renown by slaying the foe in fight and slain in battle, we shall enjoy the wealth of the region of heroes. Like an insect coming to a glowing and flaming fire, Kumbhakarna, seeing Kākutstha, shall not away.hence living. If we save our lives by flight, and if the many are brought down by one, we shall lose our fame utterly. As Angada decked in golden angadas was saying this, the monkeys, flying away spoke to that hero words not worthy of being spoken to an hero. Great is the havoc that the Rākşasa-Kumbhakarma-has spread among us. “This not the time to stay: life is dear to us." Having said this the monkey bands darted to the ten cardinal points, as they saw that dreadful and grim-eyed one approach. As those flower of the forces were on the flight, those heroes were made to desist by Angada with words of comfort and hope pointing to the future. On being cheered by the intelligent son of Vāli, all the monkey-bands stood expecting his commands. Rşabha, Sarabha, Mainda, Dhūmra, Nila, Kumuda, Susena, Gavaksa, Rambha, Dvivida, Panasa, and son of wind Hanuman and other powerf:! leaders speedily proceeded to the battle field.