By Rāma of unwearied actions, with flaming arrows feathered in burning gold, were destroyed thousands of elephants-many horses with their riders, many a car crested with flaming banners; thousands of heroic Rákşasas assuming shapes at will engaged by Råvana, and armed with clubs and parighas; and golden pennons. Beholding and hearing of this the remaining night-rangers assembled and were greatly bewildered, poorly and stricken with anxiety. The widows and those who had lost their children or kinsmen approached those Rākşasas and overwhelmed with grief bewailed piteously. Alas! why did the aged and grim-visaged Śūrpanakhă, having her belly extending down ward, behold in the forest Rāma graceful like Kandarpa. Beholding him of great beauty and prowess, ever engaged in the welfare of all creatures, that ugly one, worthy of being slain by people, was excited with lust. Why did that ugly-faced she-demon, devoid of all qualities, address Räma, having a beautiful countenance, gifted with many virtues and great effulgence? Alas for the misfortune of the Rākşasas, the aged Rākşasaee brought before him such a vile proposal, hated of all and worthy of creating laughter. for the destruction of Khara, Düşaņa and other Räksasas that ugly one approached Rāghava with such a vile intention. It was for her that Rāvana created enmity (with Răma) and Sītä was carried away by the Ten-necked Rākşasa. But he could not spread his influence upon Sitā the daughter of king Jannak and deep rooted and eternal became the enmity with the highly powerful Rāghava. Beholding the Rākşasa Virādha slain by Rāma alone (Rāvana) wishing Vaidehỉ should have regarded that as a sufficient proof of his prowess. And fourteen thousand Rākşasas of terrible deeds were slain by him in janasthāna with shafts resembling the flame of fire. Khara Düş aņa as well as Tricira were slain by him in conflict with arrows resembling the Sun-this was a sufficient proof (of his power). Yojanabāhu and Kabandha, drinking blood, were slain by him, roaring with wrath-this too was a sufficient proof of his power. Rāma slew the powerful Vāli, the son of the thousand eyed one, resembling the cloud-that too was the sufficient proof of his prowess. By him Sugriva, poorly and living in the mount Rșyamūka, having all his desires frustrated, was placed on the throne-that too even was the sufficient proof of his power. He (Rāvana) from foolishness did not like the becoming speech of Vibhīşaņa conducive to the acquirement of piety and wealth and securing the welfare of the Rakşasas. Had the younger brother of the lord of wealth (Rāvana) observed the words of Vibhīşaņa, Lanka would not have been overwhelmed with grief and reduced to the state of a cremation ground. Hearing of the destruction of the highly powerful Kumbhakarņa by Rāma of the irrepressible Atikay by Lakşmaņa as well as of his beloved son Indrajit, Rāvana did not come to his senses.* *One śloka has been omitted here by some of the editors which when translated stands thus; When one monkey only Hanumān killed the prince Akşaya and reduced the whole city to ashes with the fire of his tail Rāvana should have come to his senses. There is audible in every house of the Rāks sas, the cry-My son, my brother, my husband is slain in battle. In conflict have been destroyed by the heroic Rāma, thousand cars, horses, serpents and infantry. Perhaps Rudra, Visnu, Mehendra or the performer of hundred sacrifices, or even Death, in the shape of Rāma, is slaying us. By Rāma all the heroes have been slaindespair has taken possession of our minds-we do not behold the end of our terror and are bewailing being deprived of our lords. Does not the Ten-necked hero, who has obtained boons (from Brahmă) perceive that a mighty disaster shall befall him from Råma? Neither the celestials Gandharvas, Piśācas nor Rāksasas shall be able to save him from Rāma in conflict. In very battle many an accident befalls Rāvaņa, this bespeaks of his destruction at the hands of Rāma. The great Patriarch, being pleased conferred upon Rāvaņa the boon that no fear would proceed to him from the celestials, the Dānavas or the Rākşasas-but he did not beg of him, security from men. Forsooth, he is that fearful man who shall slay Rāvana and the Rākşasas. The celestials being thus oppressed by Ravana, who had obtained the boon, worshipped the great Patriachs with sever austerities. Being propitiated with them, the high-souled Patriarch, for their welfare, addressed the celestials, with the following pregnant speech. From today shall the Rākṣasas and Dänavas roam for ever afraid of the celestials in three worlds, Thereupon the celestials headed by Indra engaged in propitiating Mahādeva, the slayer of Tripura, and who rides upon a bull. And being pleased, Mahädeva addressed them saying, For your welfare there will be born a woman who shall be the cause of the destruction of the Rākşasas. As hunger, being engaged by the celestials, did destroy in olden time, all the Dānvas, so shall she (Sītā) the root of the extinction of Rāksasa race destroy us all with Rāvana. Alas! for the foolishness of the vicious minded and insolent Răvaņa destruction has faced us and we are overwhelmed with grief. We do not see any such being in the world who can afford us shelter. Rāghava has attacked us like to the fire of dissolution. There is no refuge for who have been stricken with fear as no help re.. hes the elephants in a forest best with fire. The high-souled Vibhīşaņa did the just thing in proper time-he took shelter of him from whom he expected danger. Thus bewailed piteously and loudly-the she demons holding each other by neck and being stricken with fear and grief.