Then the counsellors of Pulastya's son, hearing of Indrajit having been slain, speedily conveyed the tidings to the Ten-necked one, who was ignorant* of the same. O mighty monarch, in our very sight your exceedingly effulgent son has been slain by Lakş maņa with the help of Vibhīşaņa. That hero confronted by the (other) heros, has been vanquished in fight. And the hero, you son, the conqueror of the celestial chief, has also been slain by Lakşmaņa. And having gratified Lakş maņa with his shafts, he has repaired to the supreme regions. Hearing of that mighty terror, viz., the rueful and dreadful destruction of his son, "Indrajit, in battle, he straightway swooned away. Then regaining his consciousness after a long while, that foremost of Räkşasas-the kingover-whelmed with grief for his son, and distressed, burst into lamentations, with his senses wildered, thus. O foremost in the Räkşasa army! O my child endowed with high might! Having conquered Indra himself, wherefore today have you come under the sway of Lakşmaņa? Doubtless, you enraged could pierce with you arrows the Destroyer of Time himself, and the summit of Mandāra, what shall I say of Laks mana in encounted? Today king Vivasvata has raised himself immensely in my estimation, for today he, O mighty-armed one, has brought you under the law of Time. But this is the way of capable warriors as well as celestials. He that lay down his life for his lord, repair to heaven. To-day seeing Indrajit slain, the deities and the guardians of the worlds, and the mighty saints, their fear gone off, shall sleep peacefully. This triple world and this entire earth with her woods, reft of one—Indrajit—appear to me as vacant. To-day shall I hear the cries of the daughters of the Naiſtas in my inner apartment, like to the roars of she-elephants in a mountain-cavern. Renouncing your state of an heir-apparent, and Lanka and Raksasas, O subduer of enemies, and your mother, and me, and your wifewhither have you gone, (leaving) us all? O hero, I having gone to the region of Yama, you ought to have performed my last rites, but you stand in a relation the very reverse of this.* *i.e. I have to perform your last rites, you having fallen in fight while I am alive. And Sugriva living and Lakşmana and Raghava, without extracting my dart, whither have you gone, leaving us all? Then arising from the disaster that had befallen his son, a mighty wrath overcame the lord of Räkşasas-Rāvaņa, as he was thus indulging in lamentations. And even as in summer, the (Solar) rays flame up the Sun, the destruction of his son flamed up all the fiercer, him, who was naturally irascible. As he kept yawning in passion, a flaming fire with smoke darted from his mouth, even as it did from the mouth of Vſtra. And burning in grief for the destruction of his son, and coming under masterdom of passion, that hero-Ravana-reflecting (awhile) in his mind, resolved upon slaying Vaidehi. And naturally red, and reddened (still more by the fire of wrath, Ravana's glowing eyes were dreadful (to behold). And his form, terrific by nature, in consequence of the fire of his wrath having possessed it entirely, resembled the form of the enraged Rudra. And from the eyes of that infuriated one fell drops of tears as drop from a flaming lamp drops of burning oil. As the grinded his teeth, the gnashing resembled the sounds sent by the machine* drawn by the Dänavas and churing the deep. *Meaning the mountain Mandara. The Rakşasas durst not approach that one eyeing round and resembling the Destroyer himself, intent on devouring both mobile and immobile. Then exceedingly enraged, Ravana-lord of Rākşasas-spoke in the midst of the Räkşasas, inciting them to battle. I practised severe austerities for thousands of years; and gratified the Self-sprung at times. Neither from Asuras nor from celestials can any fear spring to me. My mail conferred on me by Brahma, which in effulgence resembles the Sun himself, was not broken by blows like to thunder-bolt at the war between the deities and demons. Today who will come forward against me in battle accoutred in that and mounted on a car in the conflict? Not even Purandara himself. Do you, beating hundreds of drums, today raise that mighty and dreadful bow of mine which, with arrows, had been bestowed on one by the gratified Self-sprung at the war of the gods and Asuras, so that I may therewith compass the destruction of Rama and Lakşmaņa in mighty battle. Burning (in grief) for the destruction of his son, the fell Råvana. coming under the influence of anger, reflection (in his mind), resolved to slay Sīta. And eyeing round, that copper-eyed and dreadful one of a terrific aspect, distressed, in a piteous voice addressed all the night-rangers, saying. By his power of illusion, my beloved child, for deceiving the wood-rangers, slaying something (else), had shown it to them as Sītā. Now will I do that good office myself, Vaidehi will I slay-even her that is devoted to that friend of Ksatriyas. Having spoken thus to his counsellors he swiftly took up a sword; and raising it, of excellent temper and of cerulean hue, he rushed out vehemently, surrounded by his wives and counsellors. From grief for his son. Råvana with his consciousness wilderd, taking up a sword; in rage, rushed towards the place where Mithila's daughter was. Seeing the Räksasa rising on, some, emitted leonine roars, and seeing the Räkşasa enraged, embracing each other, said-"To-day those two brothers, seeing this one, will be exceedingly pained. By this one influenced with passion were the four guardians of the worlds conquered; and many other foes were brought down in battle. Procuring gems from the three worlds, Răvana enjoy them. Neither in strength nor in prowess is there and one on earth who is his compeer. As they were speaking thus, Ravana, reft of his senses by wrath, rushed against Vaidehi, who had taken up her abode in the Asoka wood. And dissuaded by his friends endowed with good intelligence, he wrought up with high wrath, darted (against Sītā), even as an enraged planet' rush against Rohinr in the firmament. 1. Kuja etc. 2. Hesperus. The blameless daughter of Mithilă protected by the Rākşasis, saw the infuriated Rāvana bearing that best of blades in his hand. Seeing (Ravana) approach, sword in hand, despite the earnest entreaties of his friends, Janaka's daughter, SIta, pained and overcome by grief, said, weeping-From the way in which, wrought up with wrath, this wicked-minded one is rushing on at me personally it appears that he will slay me, who have a lord, as one who has not. He did urge me much ever devoted to my lord saying Be you my wife; but forsooth I disregarded him. And plainly in consequence of my refusal, he has given way to despair. And overcome by anger and passion, he is ready to slay me. Or it may be that today for me those foremost of men, the brothers-Rama and Laksmana-have been slain in encounter by this inglorious one. I heard a furious and fearful uproar raised by countless Rākşasas rejoicing and expressing their delight. Alas! O fie! For me those princes have met with destruction. Or it may be that not without slaying Rāma and Laksmana, this terrific Rākşasa having his heart set on sin, from grief for his son will slay me. Fool that I am I did not then act agreeably to Hanumān's words. If I had gone away seated on his back, without waiting for the victory (of my lord). I devoted to him placed on his lap, should not have come by this repentance. When Kausalya, having an only son, will hear of her son slain in battle, I fancy, her heart shall burst. And weeping she will remember that highsouled one's birth and weeping, she will remember that high-souled one's birth and boyhood, and youth and pious acts and loveliness. That one bereft of her consciousness, filled with despair, after having performed his srāddha,* will doubtless enter into fire or water. *Funereal rites performed in accordance with the injunctions of the Hindu Scriptures. Shame on the unchaste and hump-backed Manthara, having her heart fixed in sin, for whose sake this grief shat Rāvana's exercise Kausalya! Seeing the distressed daughter of Mithila lament thus, like to Rohiņi come under the sway of a planet in the absence of the Moon, in the meanwhile his (Rāvana's) pure and good courtier, named Suparsva, endowed with intelligence, albeit prevented by other courtiers, spoke to Rāvana, foremost of Räkșasa. Wherefore, O Ten-necked one, O you who are the very younger brother of Vaiśravaņa himself, Did you desire to slay Vaidehī, forsaking righteousness? Why O hero! O lord of Rākşasas! having led the Brahmacarya mode of life, studied the Vedas, and returned from the house of your spiritual guide, and ever engaged in religious acts, today did you intend to slay a woman? Do you, O king, now stay expecting Mithila's daughter' endowed with loveliness; and do you along with us vent your wrath on him." 1. Explains the commentator: till you slay Rāma in battle. 2. Rama. To-day being the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, do you this very day prepare for conflict; at amăvāsyā,* environed with your forces do you march for victory. *i.e. tomorrow. Heroic, and intelligent, a mighty car-warrior and swordsman, you, mounted on a car, slay the redoubtable son of Dasaratha, will obtain Mithilā's daughter. Thus exhorted by his friend, the untighteous Rāvana accepted his virtuous speech; and then that powerful one went (back) to his house, and, surrounded by his friends, entered the court.