Seeing Prahasta sally, ready for encounter that chastiser of foes-Rāma-with a smile said to Vibhisana. Who is this huge-bodied one that armed with impetuosity, advance to the encounter And what is his power and prowess like O Mighty-armed one, tell me this concerning this powerful nightranger. Hearing Raghava's words, Vibhîşana answered, In Laňkā this is the general of the lord of Rākşasas-the Rākşasa named Prahasta, surrounded by a third of the forces. He is possessed of prowess and is of distinguished gallantry. That mighty army of strong monkeys, wrought up with wrath, and roaring at Prahasta, saw him dreadful and of terrific prowess and huge-bodied, surrounded on all sides by the Raksasas, and setting up roars, marching. The Raksasas, eagerly desirous of victory, pursued the monkeys, wielding swords and darts and Rştis, and javelins and shafts and maces and clubs and bludgeons and práşas and various axes and curious bows. The monkeys on their part, eager for encounter, took up flowing trees and hills and huge and broad crags. And each party approaching the other, great was the encounter that took place. And innumerable (monkeys and Rākṣasas) kept showering rocks and arrows. And many Rākşasas in conflict slew many a powerful monkey, and the monkeys on their part slaughtered many a Rākşasa. Some were pierced with darts and with (other) powerful weapons; and some were wounded with bludgeons; and some were hewn with axes. Some rendered senseless, dropped down to the earth, and some hit with weapons, had their breasts riven. Some, severed in twain with swords, dropped to the earth lifeless, and monkeys were hewn in their sides by heroic Rākşasas. Numbers of Rākşasas all around were beaten to the ground by infuriated monkeys with trees and mountain-peaks. Some smitten sore with slaps having the touch of the thunder-bolt, began to vomit blood from their mouths, with faces and eyes turned pale. And great was the uproar that arose in consequence of Rākṣasas and monkeys emitting distressful cries and sending forth leonine roars. Monkeys and Rākṣasas wrought up with wrath, engaged in treading the path of heroes, looking terrific with their faces moving about, performed deeds of intrepid courage. Narāntaka and Kambhahanu and Mahānand and Samunnata-all counsellors of Prahasta-set about slaughtering the rangers of the woods. Of these doing swift execution among the monkeys, Dvivida, taking up a mountain-peak, slew one-namely Narāntaka. Then the monkey, Durmaukha, rising up afresh, armed with a mighty tree, killed the lighthanded Räksasa-Samunnata. Jāmbavān endowed with energy, waxing enraged, uplifting a giant crag brought the same down on Mahananda's breast. There speedily assailed by Tārā, with a mighty tree, the powerful Kumbhahanu gave up the ghost in the conflict. And not brooking that feat, Prahasta, mounted on a car, taking a bow in his hand, fell to spreading a dreadful havoc among the rangers of the woods. Then there the two hosts mingled into almost a vortex; and the sounds that arose from those infuriated once of immeasurable might, resembled the roar of the ocean. In terrific encounter the enraged Rākşasa irresistible in battle drove the monkeys to sore straits with showers of arrows. The earth was covered quite with the terrible bodies of monkeys and Rākşasas; and it looked as if covered with mountains. The earth drenched with streams of gore looked as if swarming with blossoming palāśas in the month of spring. As leaders of elephant-herds cross a lotus-tank covered with lotus-dust, those Rākşasas and choice monkeys crossed that river flowing in the field of conflict incapable of being crossed; having for her banks hosts of heroic warriors slain; for her mighty trees broken arms; for her volume of waters showers of blood; coursing to Yama resembling the Ocean; with livers and spleens for her vast slime; with scattered entrails for her moss; with riven bodies and heads for her fish; limbs for her lawns; swarming with vultures for her swans; with Kankas for her cranes, filled with fat representing her foam; with the roars (of warriors) for her sounds, incapable of being crossed by cravens, and resembling a real river swarming at the end of the rains with cranes and swans. Then all of a sudden Nila saw Prahasta stationed on his car, discharging vollies of shafts and harassing the monkeys therewith. Mounted on a sun-bright vehicle, that leader of the army-Prahasta-seeing Nīla advance towards him a main in the encounter, like the wind in the sky scattering a mighty mass of clouds, rushed towards Nila. That leader of forces-Prahasta-foremost of bowmen, stretching his bow, began to shower arrows on Nila. Having pierced Nīla sore and wounded him, those shafts sought the earth like enraged serpents. That mighty monkey-Nila-endowed with energy, struck with those sharpened shafts resembling flames, uprooting a tree, assailed therewith the irrepressible Prahasta-who was rushing against him. Thereat, that foremost of Raksasas, on being attacked, flaming up into fury and uttering roars, poured showers of arrows on the monkeyleader. And not being able to resist the arrowy vollies of that wicked-minded Raksasas, (Nila) bore them, even as a bull bear with closed eyes a fastdescending autumnal shower. And in the very same way did Nila with his eyes closed suddenly stand the mighty arrowy buffet of Prahasta incapable of being withstood. And wrought up with rage, the exceedingly strong and mighty Nila with a giant Sala slew the steeds of Prahasta. Then his-soul surcharged with wrath, Nīla swiftly shattered the bow of that wicked-minded one, and then shouted again and again. On being bereft of his bow, Prahasta, general of forces, taking a terrible mace, leapt down from his car. The redoubtable leaders endowed with activity, bearing hostility to each other, their persons bathed in blood, stood (on the ground) like two elephants (with their temples) riven, They kept tearing each other with their teeth like a lion and a tiger, and alsò striving like a lion and a tiger. Endowed with victorious vigour, those heroes, never knowing to desist from fight, were eager for fame, even like Vrtra and Vasava (fighting). Then Prahasta putting forth his dearest effort, hit Nila on the temples with a mace; and the blood began to flow. Then the mighty monkey, with his person drenched in blood, wrought up with passion, discharged a tall tree at Prahasta's breast. Without caring for that hit, he, taking up a mighty mace, furiously rushed against the monkey-Nila. Witnessing that enraged (hero) rushing against him with exceeding impetuosity, that redoubted monkey endowed with vehemence, took up a tremendous crag. In the encounter Nila at once let that crag alight right on the head of Prahasta, eager for encounter and fighting with the mace. And hurled by that foremost of monkeys, that huge and terrific crag then shattered Prahasta's head in pieces. Then bereft of life and shorn of nerve and devoid of sense he suddenly dropped down to the earth like a tree whose roots have been severed. Even as fountains flow from the sides of a hill, blood flowed profusely from the person of that one, whose head had been riven. On Prahasta being slain by Nila, that mighty army of Raksasas never trembling (from fear). retreated towards Larikā. And like waters rushing (through a breach in) a dyke, the Rākşasas could not stand their ground, on their leader being slain. And on that head of the hosts being killed, the Rākşasas, growing dispirited, repairing to the residence of the lord of Rākşasa, remained plunged in thought, without speaking anything. And plunged in that sea of sorrow, they seemed as if they had been bereft of their senses. Then the highly powerful and victorious Nila, leader of forces, on being extolled with gracious offices, and on being joined by Rāma and Laks maņa looked exceedingly exhilarated.