Hearing Sarana's words, pregnant and truthful, king Ravana addressed him, saying. Even if the gods, Gandharvas and Dänavas should attack me, Sītā will I not part with from fear of all creatures. O amiable one, you, having been hard handled by the monkeys and distressed in consequence, deems it fit that Sītā should be rendered back this very day. What foe of mine is there who is competent to conquer me in battle? Having uttered this rough speech, the graceful Ravana-lord of the Raksasas, desirous of surveying (the monkey-hosts), ascended an edifice white like snow, and elevated like many palms (placed one upon another). And transported with passion, Răvaņa in company with those spies, saw the sea, mountains and forests. And they beheld the Earth enveloped with monkeys, and the mighty host of monkeys, boundless and irresistible. And having seen this, king Ravana asked Sarana. Who among these monkeys are the foremost, who are the heroes, and who possessed of great strength? Who, bursting with spirits, stay all about the fore? Whom does Sugriva listen to? And who are the leaders of the monkey-leader? O Sarana, relate you all this to me. And what is the prowess of the monkeys? Thereat, Sarana knowing the chiefs (of the monkey-army), spoke to the sovereign of Raksasas, who had asked (him), as to who were the heads of the rangers of the woods. This monkey, that, setting up roars, stay in front of Lankā, surrounded by hundreds and thousands of monkey-leaders, by whose tremendous shouts Laúkā tremble with her wall, gateways, hills, woods and forests, and who is posted in front of the forces of the high-souled Sugriva, master of all the monkeys-is the heroic leader of monkey-bands named Nila. That one, possessed of prowess, who, folding up his arms, pace the gound on foot, who, facing Lankā, from wrath is frequently yawning, who resembles a mountain-peak and is like the filaments of a lotus, who, enraged again and again, sound his tail, and the ten cardinal points resound with the sounds of whose tail, is he who has been sprinkled by Sugrīva-king of monkeys, the heir apparent, named Angada. He challenge you to the fight. The worthy son of Vālī and ever dear to Sugrīva, he puts forth his prowess, as Varuņa does for Sakra. That that well-wished of Rāghava, the vehement Hanumān, has seen Janaka's daughter, was owing to the advice of this one. That powerful (hero) is proceeding, taking innumerable bands belonging to the lord of monkeys, for the purpose of beating you by means of his soldiery. Following Väli's son, and surrounded by a mighty force, stay in the field the heroic Nala, the builder of the bridge. Those that with their limbs lying inactive, and setting up roars and ululation's, are following this one,' are heroes dwelling in Candana.? *The reference is prospective. It means the monkeys, Sveta, in the next slok. With his own army alone, the silver-hued Śveta of dreadful prowess hopes to subdue Lanka. Marshalling his monkey-forces and cheering up his soldiers, that intelligent monkey, famed over the three regions, having speedily met with Sugrīva, is retracting his steps. From days of yore on the banks of the Gomatī there is a mountain, (named) Ramya, (otherwise) called Sanrocana. The mount abounds with various trees. There that leader of bands, named Kumuda, governs his kingdom. He that cheerfully draws after him hundreds and thousands of monkeys, and the long grim hairs of whose tail, coppery, yellow, sable and white, are cast about, is the energetic monkey, Canda, eager for encounter. And he hopes to conquer Laňkā by help of his own forces. And this one, resembling a lion, tawny and furnished with a long mane, who, remaining apart, view all Lankā as if consuming her with his eyes, dwell for ever and a day in Vindhya, the mountain Krisha, Sahya, and the mount Sudarcana, and a leader of bands, is named Rambha. Three hundred Koțis of the foremost of monkeys, dreadful and fierce and possessed of terrific prowess, surrounding (him) go in his wake for the purpose of demolishing Lankā by their (native) might. And he that expand his ears and yawn again and again, who define the fear of death and does not move his forces, who tremble for wrath and eye frequently askance, and behold the lashing of his tail!—and who set up leonine shouts, O king, with great energy and with fear cast off, reside in the romantic mount, Sālveya, and a leader of companies, is named Sarabha. To him, O king, belong forty hundred thousands of powerful leaders. And he that stay, like to a mighty mass of clouds covering up the sky, in the midst of the monkey-heroes, as does Vasava in the centre of the celestials, whose lofty shout is heard (mingled with the uproar set up by the foremost monkeys, burning for battle, dwell in the excellent hill Pārijātra; and, ever irrepressible in fight, is named Panasa, a leader of (monkey) bands. Fifty lacs of leaders with their forces arranged, environs this commander of monkeys. He that stay gracing the dreadful array overflowing with talk, stationed on the shore of the ocean, resembling a second sea and like to Durdara*-is the leader named Vinată. And he range, drinking of the waters of) the Veņa, best among streams-and his forces are sixty lacs of monkeys. *Name os a celebrated monkeys-leader. The monkey, named Krathana, challenges you to conflict. He has (under him) powerful and vigorous generals, and forces well divided. The monkey owning that person of the hue of red chalk, and, who, elated with strength, disregard all the monkeys, is named Gavaya, who approach you wrathfully. Seventy lacs (of troops) girt him round; and by their means he hopes to bring down Lankā. These are the heroes, incapable of being borne, whose numbers cannot be enumerated. These are the leaders and the heads thereof, as well as the forces set in order of battle.