Those Raksas that remained after the others had been slain, swiftly informed Răvaņa that all those foremost of Rākşasas Devantaka and the rest, Trisiras, Atikāya and others-had been slain. Suddenly hearing them slain, the king with his eyes charged with brine, thinking of the disastrous destruction of his sons and brothers, was extremely agonized. Thereupon, seeing the king afflicted, and sunk in a sea of sorrow, that foremost of carwarriors-son to the Räkşasa king—Indrajit, addressed (his sire), saying. O father, it does not behove you to be overcome with this excessive grief, inasmuch as, O lord of Nairtas, Indrajit yet breaths. Smite by the enemy of Indra, (Rāghava) can by no means save his life in encounter. To-day behold Rāma along with Lakşmaņa with their bodies torn with my shafts, lying down lifeless on the ground, having their persons covered with my sharpened arrows! Hear this vow of the foe of Indra, never swerving and instinct with prowess and divinity, this very day will I with unfailing shafts slay Rāma along with Lakşmaņa. To-day let Indra and Vaivasvata and Vişnu and Rudra and Sādhyas and Vaiśvānaras (Agni) and the Sun and the Moon, behold my immeasurable prowess, terrific like that of Vişņu at the sacrificial ground of Vali. Having spoken thus, that foe of the lord of celestials endowed with exceeding energy, taking the king's permission, ascended a car having the velocity of the wind itself, yoked with asses, and furnished with every variety of weapons. Ascending the car, resembling the car of Hari himself, that exceedingly powerful repressor of enemies at once set out for the field of battle. As that high-souled (hero) marched, he was followed by countless mighty (Rākşasas) breathing spirits; bearing bows in their strong hands. Some of those, resembling mountains, were mounted on elephants, and some on superb steeds, and some on bears, and some on beasts of prey, and some on lions and jackals, and some of the Rākşasas endowed with dreadful vigour were mounted on crows, and some on swans, and some on peacock, they were equipped with präsas and maces and nistrinsas and axes and clubs. All sides were filled with the blares of conchs and the sounds of kettle-drums. And then that enemy of the lord of celestials marched forth with impetuosity. And with an umbrella hued like the Moon, that destroyer of enemies appeared like the full Moon stationed in the sky. That hero garnished in golden ornaments that foremost of all bowmen, was fanned by an excellent and graceful golden chowri. With Indrajit furnished with the splendour of the Sun himself, and possessed of peerless prowess, Lankā looked beauteous even as the firmament graced with the glorious Sun. Arriving at the scene of conflict, that highly powerful repressor of foes arrayed his forces around the car. Then that foremost of Rākşasas with choice mantras duly offered libations to fire.* And that powerful lord of Rākşasas there worshipping fire with fragrant wreaths and fired paddy, sacrificed to it. *Hutabhoktāram-eater of sacrificial offerings-a designation of fire. Arms served for Kasa and Bibhitakas for fuel; and there were red cloths and a ladle made black iron. Spreading fire there, with tomaras representing Kāśa, he seized the neck of a living goat of black colour. Then the kindled smokeless fire blazing up brilliantly, displayed signs betokening victory. Thereat, with his right tongue whirling, the Deity of fire himself looking like one made of gold, arising, accepted the offering. Then that (Rākşasa) skilled in weapons acquired a Brāhma weapon (from that deity), and inspired his bow and car with mantras. On that weapon having been invoked, * and on (the god of fire) also having been worshipped, the firmament furnished with the suns and stars and planets was afflicted with affright. *i.e. on the deity presiding over that weapon, being invoked. Having worshipped (the god of fire), that one endowed with the splendour of fire itself, that one possessed of the prowess of the great Indra and gifted with inconceivable vigour, accoutred in bows and arrows and swords and having steeds and cars and darts, disappeared in the sky. Then burning for battle, setting up roars went out the Rākşasas ranks, thronging with steeds and cars, and graced with pennons and standards. They fell to slaughtering monkeys in the engagement with countless shafts, sharp, variegated and decorated; as also with Tomaras and hooks. Rāvana's son, fired with wrath, seeing those night-rangers, addressed them, saying, “Do you, burning with a desire to destroy the monkeys, fight cheerfully." Thereat all those Raksasas, eager for victory, smiting roars, covered the dreadful monkeys with showers of shafts. And environed by Rākşasas in that encounter, he* poured on the monkeys nälikas and nårācas and maces and clubs.. *Indrajit. Trembling in the encounter, those monkeys armed with trees at once began to shower rocks and trees on Ravana's son. Then the exceedingly powerful Indrajit, son to Ravana, endowed with wondrous energy, pierced the bodies of the monkeys (with arrows). Fired with wrath, that (hero) rejoicing the Rākṣasas with a single shaft pierced nine and seven monkeys in that encounter. That invincible hero in that conflict mangled the monkeys with shafts resembling the Sun, decked with gold. Their persons pierced in that contest, and the myself pained with those arrows, they began to fall down, giving up all intention of fight, like mighty Asuras smite by the celestials. Then waxing highly enraged, those considerable monkeys in that conflict hotly pursued (Indrajit) resembling the sun himself and having terrific arrows for his rays. All the monkeys, with their bodies riven and deprived of their senses, and bathed in blood and writhing in torments, pursued (Indrajit). Putting forth their prowess in behalf of Rama, those monkeys, equipped with rocks in the encounter, who had set apart their very lives (for him), paused, shouting up loudly. They in that conflict showered trees and crags and mountain-tops on Ravana's son. That destroyer of foes—the exceedingly energetic son to Rāvaņa resisted that mighty shower of trees and stones capable of compassing destruction. Then that lord pierced the monkey-hosts in the encounter with shafts resembling fire or venomous serpents. And piercing Gandhamādana with eight and ten sharp arrows, he wounded Nila stationed at a distance with nine shafts. That one endowed with redoubtable prowess pierced Mainda with seven shafts capable of piercing into the pith; and he pierced Gaja with five shafts in the encounter. He pierced Jāmbavān with ten and Nīla with thirty. And then with dreadful sharp shafts obtained as boons, he rendered Sugrīva and Riş abha and Angada and Dvivida (almost) lifeless. And transported with passion, and resembling the Five arisen at doomsday, Indrajit, harassed other principal monkeys with countless arrows. In that terrific conflict, he agitated the monkey-hosts with swift-speeding shafts, resembling the Sun himself, deftly discharged (from his bow). In the great battle, he crushed the forces of monkeys and put them into trouble by shooting out arrows. Seeing the monkeys wounded he was delighted immensely and again the effulgent and foremost of Raksasas, powerful Indrajit by shooting out dreadful arrows and missiles, crushed the army of monkeys from all sides. Then in that encounter, leaving his army, Indrajit became suddenly invisible to the monkey-hosts—and began to shower fierce arrows, like dark clouds pouring rain. With their persons torn by the arrows of the conqueror of Sakra, slain by his power of illusion, with their teeth uprooted, those mountain-like monkeys fell down in the field, emitting frightful cries, like a mountain smite with Indra's thunderbolt. In the conflict they could only see sharp pointed shafts among the monkey-ranks, but that foe of the celestial chief-the Raksasas, hidden by virtue of illusion, they could not discover there. Then the high-souled lord of Rākṣasa covered all sides with sharp-pointed shafts resembling the rays of the sun; and he rived the foremost monkeys. And whirling darts and nistraišas and axes, flaming and having the effulgence of fire, and furnished with flames shooting forth sparks, he discharged them furiously at the forces of the sovereign of monkeys. The monkey-leaders struck with Śakrajit's shafts. resembling flames, appeared like laughing Kinsukas. They foremost of Vānaras, pierced by the missiles of the lord of Raksasas gliding towards one another and crying bitterly fell down on earth. Some looking at the sky were struck at their eyes. They gradually began to hide themselves in each other and drop to the earth. That foremost of Raksasas-Indrajit-with präsas and darts and whetted arrows, inspired with mantras, pierced all those powerful monkeys, Hanuman and Sugrīva and Angada and Gandhạmādana and Jämbhavān and Sușeņa and Vegadarsin, and Mainda and Dvivida and Nīla and Gavākṣa and Gavaya and Kesari and Hariloman and the monkey Vidyutdanshtra and Suryyānana and Jyotimukha and the monkey Dadhimukha and Pāvakākṣa and Nala and the monkey Kumuda. Having pierced those foremost monkeys with golden-hued maces, he showered on Rāma and Lakşmaņa arrows resembling the rays of the sun. And showered with those vollies of arrows, Rāma, without heeding that discharge resembling a very downpour, reflecting, spoke to Laksmana. O Lakşmaņa, this lord of Rākşasas, this foe of the lord of celestials, having obtained the Brāhma weapon, after having brought down the monkey-hosts, are assailing us with sharpened shafts. That high-souled heedful one, having been given a boon by the self-sprung, has rendered his dreadful body invisible. How can we slay him, who is fighting with upraised weapons, but who has hid his body. The reverend self-sprung, I deem, is incomprehensible. And this is his weapon, embodying his energy. Therefore, O intelligent one, do you today along with me calmly bear this. Let this foremost of them all, this lord of Rāks asas-cover all sides with the showers of his shafts. And in consequence of this, the army of the monkey-king with its greatest heroes fallen, does not appear to advantage. Seeing us also fallen, senseless, and desisting from fight with our joy and anger gone off from us, for certain will the enemy of the immortals, taking the Fortune of fight seek his home. Assailed by Indrajit with networks of arrows, they were then sore distressed in the field. And having struck them with sadness, Indrajit from joy shouted in the encounter. Having thus worsted in battle that monkey army and Rāma along with Lakşmaņa, he-speedily entered the city ruled by the hand of the Ten-necked one. And extolled by the Yatudhānas, he, filled with delight, related everything to his sire.