And witnessing that mighty exploit of the foremost of the monkeys, Akampana waxed furious with wrath. And transported with passion, he, twanging his mighty bow seeing that feat of his foe, addressed his charioteer saying. O charioteer, swiftly conduct you the car to that same place. These powerful ones are slaying innumerable Rākşasas in fight. And all those vigorous monkeys of dreadful deeds stay before me, armed with trees and rocks. Those, pluming themselves overmuch on their martial worth, I intended to slay in battle. And all this Rākşasa force appeared to be harassed by these. Then on a car drawn by moving steeds, Akampana from a distance attacked the monkeys with showers of arrows. Thereat the monkeys could not so much as maintain their ground in the field, and how could they fight? Broken by the arrows of Akampana, they began to fly. and the exceedingly strong Hanumān, seeing his kindred come under the masterdom of Death and follow the course pursued by the shafts of Akampana, advanced (to the conflict). And seeing that mighty monkey, all those heroic prime monkeys together surrounded (Hanumān) in the field. Those best of monkeys, seeing Hanumán stay, grew strong by relying on that strong one. And even as the great Indra shower down rain, Akampana showered shafts on Hanuman resembling a mountain-summit in grandeur. And without casting a thought on the showers of arrows poured on his person, that monkey gifted with exceeding strength, set his heart on compassing the death of Akampana. And laughing, that exceedingly energetic offspring of the Wind-god rushed after that Rākşasa, as if making the Earth herself tremble. The form of that one roaring and flaming up in energy, was irresistible, like to the appearance of a flaming fire. And thinking that he was unfurnished with any arms, that foremost of monkeys, waxing wroth, vehemently rooted up a hill. And taking that huge hill, the Wind-god's son endowed with prowess, sending up a tremendous roar, began to whirl it with a single arm. As of yore Purandara had in encounter pursued Namuchi with the thunder-bolt, (Hanuman) pursued that best of RāksasasAkampana. Akampana, seeing that uplifted crag, from a distance cut it off with mighty crescent-shaped shafts. And finding that mountain top severed by the shafts of the Räksasa and scattered in pieces, Hanumān was seized with a mighty wrath. That monkey, wrought up with rage and pride, grasping an Aśvakarņa elevated like to a hill, at once uprooted it. And taking that broad-shouldered Asvakarma, that one furnished with high splendour, with great glee whirled it above the ground. Thereat rushing a main vehemently (Akampana) speedily broke the trees. And (seeing this) Hanumān, transported with passion, rived the earth with his kicks. And Hanumān slaughtered elephants, and the riders thereof, and cars with their riders, and dreadful Rākṣasas and footmen. Seeing the enraged Hanumān resembling the Finisher armed with trees and destructive, the Rākşasas began to fly fast. Seeing that one enraged, terrific to the Rāks asas, the heroic Akampana was agitated greatly and sent up shouts. Akampana pierced Hanumān endowed with exceeding prowess with four and ten shafts, sharpened and capable of cleaving the bodies of people. And thus covered with iron arrows and whetted darts, that hero Hanumân-looked like a hill covered with trees. That huge-bodied one endowed with wondrous prowess and great strength, appeared like a flowering Asoka or a fie without smoke. Then uprooting another tree, (Hanuman) summoning up hi best impetuosity, swiftly hit Akampana foremost of Rākşasas-on the head. And slain with that tree by that high souled monkeys chief wrought up with passion that Raksasas fell down and died. Seeing that foremost of Rākşasas-Akampanaslain (and lying) on the ground, the Raksasa were extremely aggrieved, and (appeared)like trees in an earthquake. And those Rākşasas defeated, leaving their arms behind, made for Lankā in fear, pursued by the monkeys. And with their hair flowing loosely, (the Rāks asas), afflicted with affright, and dispirited and beaten, fled fast, with the water of fatigue running down their persons. And crushing down each other, they entered the city in a panic, momentarily casting their looks behind them. When the Rákşasas had entered Lankā, the exceedingly mighty monkeys, assembled together, paid homage to Hanuman. And Hanumăn, gifted with strength, honoured the seniors each as he deserved in consideration of his lineage. The monkeys eager for victory shouted with might and main, and began to drag the Rākşasas with the view of taking their lives. That mighty monkey-son to the Wind godhaving destroyed the Rākşasas and arrived (in the midst of the host), attained heroic glory, even as did Vişnu, having slain that destroyer of enemies-the mighty and dreadful Asura possessed of exceeding strength, stationed in the ban of the forces. And then the deities and Rāma himself and the highly powerful Lakşmaņa, also the monkeys headed by Sugrīva, and Vibhīşaņa endowed with great strength, honoured that monkey.