As Lakşmaņa devoted to his brother was comforting Rāma, Vibhīşaņa, posting his forces at their proper quarters, came there, surrounded by four heroes accoutred in various arms, resembling masses of collyrium or leaders of elephant-herds. And approaching the high-souled Rāghava, overwhelmed with grief, he saw the monkeys with tears in their eyes. He saw that joy of the Ikşvāku race the high-souled Raghava-stupefied with grief, lying on the lap of Lakşmaņa. son Seeing Rāma cast down and inflamed with grief, Vibhisana, inlay pained, said, "What is this? Thereat, gazing at Vibhisana's countenance as well as all those monkeys, Laksmana, with his eyes flooded with tears, said these words pregnant with dire import. O placid one, hearing from Hanumān's lips that Sītā has been slain by Indrajit. Rāghava has been overcome with stupor. As Sumitra's was speaking thus, Vibhisana,. preventing him, addressed the stupefied Rāma in these pregnant words. O king, all that Hanumān in distressful guise had communicated to you I deem as improbable, like to the drying of the deep. I know the intent of the impious Rāvana with reference to Sita, O mighty-armed one. Her he will not slay. I, seeking his welfare, had besought him much, saying, 'Let go Vaidehi', but he did not act up to my speech. Neither by conciliation, nor by gift, nor by dissension, and where is war? nor by any other means is one capable of obtaining the very sight of Sītā. Having bewildered the monkeys, the Raksasa has gone back; and, O mighty-armed one, know her to be the illusory daughter of Janaka. Today, going to the sacrificial ground (called) Nikumbhilā, he will offer oblations into fire; and there the deity of fire will present himself along with Vasava and the (other) divinities. Then Rāvana's son shall be invincible in batile. Indubitably that illusion has been wrought by him, to deceive (the monkeys), so that they might not through their prowess disturb him there. Thither will we go before he has furnished his (sacrifice). O foremost of men, shake off this vain sorrow that has overcome you! Seeing you smitten with grief, this entire host is dispirited. Here, with your heart composed, do your stay, summoning your strength. Send Lakşmañana along with us and the flower of the forces. This foremost of men by means of sharpened shafts will make Rāvana's son give up his rites; and then shall he be capable of being slain by us. These keen and sharpened shafts of his, attaining access of velocity through the feathers of birds, and themselves resembling fierce fowls, will drink his* blood. *Indrajit's. Therefore, O mighty-armed one, do you in order to the destruction of the Rākşasa, commission Lakşmana, even as the wielder of the thunder-bolt command the same. As today no time should be lost, therefore do you send Lakşmaņa for campassing the destruction of the foe, even as Mahendra send the thunder-bolt for bringing about the destruction of the enemies of the immortals. If that foremost of Räkşasas can finish his rites, he shall be invisible to both celestials and Asuras; and, he fighting after finishing his sacrifice, the celestials themselves shall be placed in great jeopardy.