Then surveying that entire assembly, that conqueror in battle delivered himself to Prahasta, general of the forces, saying. O general, it behove you so to order the disciplined fourfold forces that they may successfully protect the city. Thereat, Prahasta, carefully carrying out the royal behest, stationed all the forces within and without the city. Having posted the army for the defence of the city, Prahasta sitting down before the king, said. I have stationed the forces belonging to you who are possessed of strength, inside as well as outside. (Now), without suffering your mind to be agitated with anxiety, speedily, do what is in your heart. Hearing the speech of Prahasta seeking the welfare of the kingdom, Rāvaņa craving for enjoyment, spoke in the midst of his aderents. When virtue, or happiness, or interest is in straits, it behove you to (know your course) in relation to pleasant and unpleasant, happiness and misery, profitable and unprofitable, and good and evil. No business of mine which you have set about after taking counsel, has miscarred. Like Väsava environed by the moon, stars and planets and the Maruts, I surrounded by you, have attained to plenitude of prosperity. I am, for certain, going to employ you all. In consequence of Kumbhakarņa's sleep, I could not inform him of this matter. After having slept for six months that one of prodigious strength, foremost of those bearing arms, has just risen. Janaka's daughter and Rāma's beloved wife has been brought hither from the forest of Dandaka, the region ranged by Raksasa. That indolent damsel wish not to ascend my bed; nor is there any in the three spheres, that to me is like to Sītā. She is slender waisted and high-hipped and her face is as the autumnal Moon resembling a golden image. She is meek and look like the hand work of Maya himself gifted with an infinite variety of fascinations. And beholding her dainty and tender fect with roseate soles, and having coppery nails, my mind burn (with desire). Seeing her resembling the flame of a sacrificial fire and the splendour of the Sun himself; and her fair face furnished with a prominent nose and elegant eyes, I, having lost control over self, have come under the sway of desire. And my passion, uninfluenced by anger and joy, capable of producing pallor, and constantly causing anguish and sorrow, has rendered me pale. Expecting her lord, Rāma, the beautiful one having expansive eyes, has solicited for a year's space; and I have pledged my fair woods to her of graceful eyes. But tired am I on account of my passion, like a horse spent on the way. How can the rangers of the woods, or the sons of Dasaratha cross over the sea ungovernable and swarming with countless creatures and fishes? On the other hand, a single monkey has troubled us grievously. Hard it is therefore to understand the course of events. Do you act, each as he thinks proper, And although no fear come from mortals, yet you should deliberate (as to what you should do). Formerly, I had gained victory with the help given by you; do you in the same way stand by me now. The king's son, having learnt that Sita can is on the other shore of the ocean, taking before them monkey headed by Sugriva, reached Varuna's abode. Do you so counsel that Sītã may be withholden by me and the sons of Dasaratha may be slain; but you must prefer certain counsel. No other* person in this world has the power to cross the sea along with the monkeys, victory, therefore, is undubitably mine." *I fail to understand anyasya, "no other person" nor does the commentator helps me anyway. Hearing the sorrowful speech of (Rāvana) afflicted with lust, Kumbhakarma grew enraged, . and said. When just on seeing (Sītā) of Rāma along with Lakşmaņa, you did by main force carry away, it plainly appear that your mind, like the Yamunā filling her bed, has been possessed by her).* *This passage very obscure, and the commentator's gloss does not at all serve. O great king! all this (that you have done) is not worthy of you. If you had at the outset consulted us in this matter, we would have done what was proper. *i.e. we would have prevented you. O ten-faced one, the king, that arriving at certain conclusions, carry on his regal affairs agreeably to justice, has not to repent afterwards. But those actions that are done without deliberation, like to clarified butter poured in an impure sacrifice, conducted only to harma. He does not know what is proper and what not, that performs prior actions afterwards, and posterior actions first. Others spy holes in the actions of the volatile, the latter may be possessed of great power, like swans passing Krauñca through the hole. * *The hole made by the dart of Kumāra. By luck it is that Rāma has not yet slain you, who has done this tremendous thing, with poison. But as you have entered upon a course of action which is improper even in respect of foes, I will, O sinless one, perform your work by slaying your enemies. O ranger of the night, I will exterminate your foe. Even if Sakra and the sun, even if fire and the War-god, even if Kubera and Varuna, should range themselves against me, I will fight them. Purandara himself shall be afflicted with fright when I having my body measuring a mountain, and furnished with sharp teeth, shall, setting up roars, fight with my huge bludgeon. Before Rama shoot a second shaft, to slay me, I shall drink his life-blood. Be you comforted by slaying Daſaratha's son, I will exert to secure blessed victory for you. Having killed Rāma along with Lakşmaņa, I shall devour all the principal monkeys. Do you make merry at your will, drink the Vāruņi, and, with your mind set at rest, conduct affairs fraught with your welfare. On Rāma being despatched to the mansion of Yama, Sītā shall come under your subjection for ever and a day.