Having passed the night in Suvela, the heroic monkey-leaders surveyed woods and forests in Lankā. Seeing those extensive (woods and forests), mild, and charming, and beautiful to behold, they were seized with wonderment. Abounding in champakas, asokas, vakulas, śālas, and palms; covered with tamālas and panišas, and environed all around with trees, and surrounded with Hintālas, Arjunas, blossoming Saptaparmas, Tilakas, Karmikāras, and Patalas, trees with flowering tops, entertwined with creepers, Larkā looked exceedingly lovely, with various sights, resembling the Amarāvatī herself of Indra. And trees there, furnished with variegated flowers having tender rosy leaves, and blue lawns, and rows of woods; and bearing odorous and charming blossoms and fruits, looked like men adorned with ornaments. There a delightful and pleasant wood resembling Caitraratha, and like to Nandana itself, having all the seasons present, appeared beauteous to the view, with black bees all around. And it had Dātyühas, and Koyașthivas, and peacocks dancing; and the strains of the coels were heard at the woodland rills. The heroic and exhilarated monkeys, capable of wearing forms at pleasure, entered those woods and groves frequented by maddened birds and ranged by Bhramaras, tracts overflowing with the lays of coels, and ringing with the voices of songsters, resonant with the notes of Bhramaras, sovereigns of their species and eloquent with the cries of ospreys. As the exceedingly energetic monkeys entered, there blew upon them the breeze-like to life-redolent of perfume obtained from contact with the blossoms. And others of the leaders among the heroic monkeys, coming out from the bands, ordered by Sugriva, made in the direction of Lankā crowned with ensigns. And, terrifying the fowls and dispiriting beasts and birds and shaking Lankā with their roars, those foremost monkeys set up shouts. They, endowed with great impetuosity, went on, oppressing the earth with their battle-array; and clouds of dust suddenly arose from the march of the soldiery. And bears, and lions, and buffaloes, and elephants, and deer, and birds, overwhelmed with affright, made for the t en cardinal points. The graceful and lovely summit of Trikūța was entire, elevated, skypiercing, of golden splendour, measuring an hundred Yojanas, clearshining, level, inaccessible even to fowls, and not to say of actual ascension by people. Lanka, ruled by Ravana, was situated on its' top, ten Yojanas in width and twenty in length. And that city was graced with lofty ornamented gateways resembling pale clouds, and golden and silver wall; and Lankā was adorned with palaces and piles; like the sky graced with clouds on the approach of the rainy season. 1. Trikūța's. 2. Madhyamam Vaisnavam padam, the middle foot of Vişnu. When Vişņu in his Dwarf-from took the conceit out of Vāli, the renowned Asura king, he covered the earth with one pace, the sky with another and heaven with last. That palace, which was adorned with thousands of pillars, and which, as if piercing the heavens, looked like a peak of Kailasa—was the residence of the Sovereign of the Rākşasas—the ornament of the city, (ever guarded by full hundreds of Raksasas. Lakṣmaṇa's auspicious and puissant elder brother, beholding that flourishing and wealthy city resembling the celestial regions, charming to the mind, made of gold, graced with mountains, and decked out with mountains containing various metals, resonant with the notes of various birds; abounding in various beasts, furnished with various kinds of flowers, and inhabited by various orders of Rākşasas, was struck with astonishment. Rāma, surrounded by his mighty forces, saw that palace, filled with diverse kinds of gems, adorned with rows of edifices, and having huge engines and gateways.