That tiger-like Rakşasa possessed of prowess, (still) under the influence of slumber, strode along the picturesque highway. That exceedingly unconquerable one, surrounded by thousands of Raksasas, went on, showered with blossoms from the houses (standing by). Then he saw the grand and graceful residence of the lord of the Räkşasas, having golden networks and sun-bright to behold. Entering the mansion of the Raksasa sovereign, like the sun entering into a mass of clouds, he saw his elder brother seated at a distance; even as Sakra sees the Self-sprung seated. Kumbhakarņa surrounded by numbers of Rākşasas, entered his brother's abode, making the very earth tremble with his tread. Arriving at the abode and passing the entrance, he saw his superior anxiously seated on the car, Pusphaka. Seeing Kumbhakarņa come, the Ten necked one, exceedingly rejoiced, raised him up and drew him near himself. Then the exceedingly mighty Kumbhakarņa saluted the feet of his brother and said, "What did you say ?" Thereat, delighted, Ravana, springing up, again embraced (his brother). And embraced (by his brother), and duly greeted by him, that brother (of Ravana). Kumbhakarņa seated himself on a shining and superb seat. And seating himself on that seat, the wondrous powerful Kumbhakarna, with his eyes reddened in wrath, addressed Ravana, saying. O king, why honouring me, has you awaked me? Tell me whence springs your fear? And who shall be a ghost?* Thereat Ravana, waxing wroth, and with his eyes rolling in rage, said to Kumbhakarma, seated. *Having been slain by me. O highly powerful one, you have slept away a long space of time. And having been asleep, you did not know the great fear of mine springing from Rama. This graceful son to Daśaratha possessed of strength, along with Sugriva, having crossed the ocean, is destroying our race. Alack! see in own Lanka, woods and forests have been flooded with an ocean of monkeys never even coming without any ado by the bridge (which they have constructed). Those Rākşasas that were prime have been slain in battle by the monkeys; but I find no destruction of the monkeys in fight. Nay, the monkeys have been before vanquished (by the Raksasas) in battle. Therefore has this fear sprung up in my heart). Save me from this, O exceedingly powerful one. Do you now destroy these. It is for this that I have roused you. Do you, favouring me, whose exchequer is empty, save this city of Lanka, having only young folks and the aged left. O long-armed one, do you perform your dearest acts in behalf of your brother. O subduer of enemies, I had never before said so to my brother. In you is my affection and great is the probability of your succeeding. In the wars of the celestials and Asuras, O foremost of Rāks asas, countless were the celestials that you as an antagonist had beaten. Therefore, o you of dreadful strength! summon your entire energy. Him find I not among all beings, who is your peer in prowess. O lover of battle! O dear to friends, as you like, do this beloved good office, this prime benefit, to me. By your own energy, smite the hostile hosts, even as a mighty and strong wind (scattered away) autumnal clouds.