Then the foremost of Raghus addressed Ocean in stern words, saying, To-day will I dry up the Ocean along with the nether regions. O Ocean, your waters being burnt up by my shafts, and you being dried up, with your (aquatic) animals slaughtered, a mighty volume of dust shall arise (from your bed). O Ocean, in consequence of the arrowy shower discharged from my bow, the monkeys shall go over to the further shore on foot. Having attained dimensions in consequence of access of waters you know not my manliness or my prowess. But, o abode of Dānavas, grief shall you reap at my hands. Then fixing an arrow resembling the rod of Brahmā with a Brahmā Mantra, on the best of bows, that exceedingly strong on drew it. As Rāghava suddenly stretched his bow, heaven and earth seemed to be riven, and the mountains trembled. And darkness covered the world, and the cardinal points became invisible. And at once the watery expanses and rivers were agitated. The stars appeared simultaneously with the Sun and Moon.* And the sky was illumined with the rays of the Sun, and yet it was overspread with darkness; and it burned with an hundred meteors. And thunder-bolts sending forth sounds surpassing all others, dropped from the firmament. *The phenomenon, remarks the commentator, was owing to the heavenly bodies obstructing each other's orbit. The winds began to below violently; breaking down trees and momentarily scattering clouds; damaging mountain-tops and shattering summits. Then the dread and mighty thunders possessing impetuous speed and emitting tremendous roars, coming together, produced lightning flashes. And those creatures that could be seen, uttered sounds resembling the thunder; and those that were invisible gave forth f rightful cries. And overwhelmed with fright, and quaking (for fear), the creatures began to measure their lengths, and they were sore afflicted, and bereft of motion through terror. Then the mighty deep with its animals, and with its waters and waves, and with its serpents and Rākşasas, was suddenly wrought up with a violent motion. And albeit it was not the occasion of the universal dissolution, the Ocean passed beyond his shores for a full hundred yojanas. Seeing the elated Ocean-lord of streams and rivers, thus overpass his bounds, that destroyer of enemies, Raghu's son, Rāma, was not moved.* *Naticakrāma may also mean, (Rama) did not discharge any more arrows. Then from forth the mid-sea arose Ocean himself, even as the maker of day rise from the mighty ascending-hill, Meru. And accompanied by Pannagas* of flaming faces, the Ocean showed himself, appearing like cool lapises, adorned with golden ornaments, wearing a wreath of gems and a jewelled vesture, with his eyes resembling lotus-leaves, bearing on his head a noble garland containing all flowers; decked with ornaments of polished gold; as well with excellent ornaments of gems originating in himself, like the mountains Himavān embellished with metals (sprung in himself).-(the Ocean arose) with wave on wave whirling around, and rife with winds blowing among clouds, surrounded by streams, Gangā, Sindhu (and others). *Semi-divine serpents. And approaching the arrow-showering Rāma, and greeting him fair, Ocean spoke to him with joined hands. O Rāghava, earth, air, sky, water and light, these, O mild one, retaining their eternal course, maintain their (respective) nature. Mine also is that nature whereby I am fathomless and incapable of being crossed. The reverse of this is the having a bottom. And for this reason I speak to you (concerning the means). O king's son, not from desire, covetousness, or fear, or anger, can I anywise deprive my waters abounding in alligators of their (perpetual) motion. I will tell you how you will pass (over me); or and I will bear it. And no ferocious aquatic animals shall do wrong so long as your forces have not crossed. And, O Rāma, I will make as it were firm land for the crossing over of the monkeys. Then Rāma said, O Varuna's abode, listen to me! This arrow (of mine) must accomplish the end (intended). Where shall I let it light? Hearing Rāma's speech, and looking at the mighty arrow, that exceedingly energetic one, the great Deep, addressed Raghava, saying. There is a certain spot of mine in the North, which is more sacred (than the rest). It is famed as Drumakulya, even as you are famed in the world. There are there many robbers of ferocious forms and actions, wicked wights, headed bycow-herds, who drink of my water. These persons of unrighteous acts touch me, and I cannot bear this sin. O Rāma, do you at that place render this best of arrows successful. Hearing the words of the high-souled Ocean, (Rama) immediately after,* let fly that flaming shaft. *Săgaradarśanāt-may also mean, agreeably to the instruction. The place where the arrow resembling the thunder-bolt and vajra in splendour, alighted, has been celebrated on earth as Marukāntāra. And hurt with the dart, the Earth emitted roars; and in consequence of this, water began to gush out at the mouth of the wound from the subterranean regions. And this then became well-known as Vrana3; and there are seen the waters of the Ocean spring up. There arose a terrific report of riving. And owing to this,* as well as the incident of the arrow, the water that existed in the tanks, was dried up. Having dried up Marukāntāra famous throughout the three regions, as well as the reservoirs of water Rāma the son of Dasaratha, learned and of god-like prowess, conferred a boon on the desert, saying. *i.e. the sound. This place shall be filled with food nourishing beasts; and ailments shall be rare here. And the fruits and roots shall be replete with relish; and it shall abound in oil and overflow with milk; and it shall contain various adorous drugs. Thus did the desert come to possess these attributes; and from Rāma's bestowal of a boon, it attained a pleasant aspect. On that place being burnt up, that lord of streams, the Ocean, thus spoke to Rāghava, versed in every branch of learning. O mild one, this one is named Nala, son to Viśvakarmā. He has received a boon from his sire. Visvakarma's son is well pleased with you. Let this monkey, surcharged with exhuberant spirits, build a bridge over me. I will hold that up. This one is as his sire. Having delivered himself thus, Ocean disappeared. Then that foremost of monkeys, Nala, arising, spoke to the mighty Rāma. Resorting to my sire's skill, I will build a bridge over the spacious abode of Makaras. The mighty Ocean has spoken justly. In respect of the ingrate even chastisement is supreme in this world, this is my conviction. Down with forbearance, or moderation, or gift! This dreadful Ocean, this mighty deep, expecting to see a bridge (thrown over him), has granted depth to Rāghava. (Formerly) in Mandara, Visvakarma had conferred a boon on my mother: 'O exalted one, your son shall be like me. I am a son of his, sprung from his lions, and I am like to Viśvakarmā. Ocean reminded me all the things. Not having been asked by you, I had not unfolded my qualifications. I also am capable of constructing a bridge over Varuna's abode. Therefore this very day let the foremost monkeys construct the bridge. Then directed by Rāma, the principal monkeys with alacrity entered the mighty forest in hundreds and thousands. Themselves resembling mountains, the foremost of the monkeys began to break down trees and draw them towards the Ocean. The monkeys filled the Ocean with Sālas, and Ašvakarņas, dhavas, bamboo's and kutajas, arjunas, palms, tilakas, tinicas, billakas, saptaparnas, and blossoming karnikāras, mangoes, and asoka trees. And those monkeys the foremost of their species-began to gather the trees, some with their roots, and some without them, carrying them like Indra's ensign. And those huge-bodied monkeys possessed of prodigious strength, procured palms, and pomegranates, cocoanuts and Vibhitakas, Kariras, Vakulas, and Nimbas, as well as rocks, measuring elephants' dimensions; and uprooting crags, they carried them by means of machines. And on rocks being plunged into the waters, the latter, suddenly swelling up, mounted to the welkin, and again subsided. And (the trees) dropping (into the deep), vexed it all around. And some took lines (for insuring straightness to the bridge). And at the middle of the lord of rivers and streams, Nala made a grand bridge measuring an hundred Yojanas. Then he set about constructing the bridge with the assistance of monkeys of dreadful deeds. And some took the measuring rod, and others bore (timber tea the sea). And by help of hundreds of monkeys following Rama's mandate, hued like clouds or mountains, (they) constructed a bridge with grass, and wood. And the monkeys made the bridge of trees with blossoming tops. And (monkeys) resembling Danavas were seen rushing all around with rocks resembling hills, and mountain-summits. And tremendous was the tumult that arose of crags thrown and rocks toppled down into the mighty deep. And on the first day the elephant-like monkeys full of spirits and exerting themselves vigorously, finished fourteen Yojanas. The exceedingly strong and huge-bodied monkeys on the second day speedily disposed of twenty Yojanas. And on the third day the huge-bodied active monkeys did one and twenty Yojanas on the sea. And on fourth day the exceedingly impetuous monkeys, bestirring themselves vigorously, did two and twenty Yojanas. And on the fifth day they monkeys leaping speedily twenty three Yojanas reaching to the fair shore. And resembling his sire, that best of monkeys, the lusty and graceful offspring of Viśvakarmā, (thus) constructed the bridge over the sea. That bridge built by force over the abode of makaras, looked graceful and splendid like the Milky way in the firmament. Then the deities and Gandharvas, the Siddhas and the prime saints, appearing in the heavens, stood there, eager to behold this wonder. The gods and Gandharvas saw that bridge of Nala, difficult of being made, having an area of ten Yojanas and measuring an hundred in length. The monkeys, leaping and bounding and roaring, as well as all creatures, beheld that building of the bridge the ocean, on inconceivable, and marvellous, displaying skill past thought and capable of making one's hair stand on end. And those thousands of Koțis of exceeding vigour, having constructed the bridge over the ocean, went over to the other shore of the mighty main. And spacious, skilfully constructed, graceful, well-paved and nicely finished, the great bridge appeared like the line where the hair has been parted on the Ocean's head. Then on the other shore of the ocean, Bibhisbana with the view of opposing foes (that might advance), stationed himself mace in hand, along with some councilors. Then Sugrīva spoke to Rāma having truth for his prowess, Do you get upon Hanumān, and let Laksmana get upon Angada. O hero, vast is this Ocean-abode of Makaras. These monkeys, rangers of the sky, shall hold you up both. Thereat the graceful and righteous Rāma along with Laksmana, equipped with his bow, set out in the van of the army in company with Sugriva. And some monkeys proceeded along the middle, and some plunged into the deep, and some went by the road. And some coursed through the air, bounding up bird-like. That dreadful array of monkeys crossing over, with its mighty uproar drowned the dreadful roar of the deep, which had been arising. On the monkey-host having crossed by the bridge of Nala, the king stationed it on the shore abounding in fruits, roots, and water. Beholding that work of Rāghava incapable of being performed the deities together with the Siddhas and Caranas, and the Maharsis, suddenly presenting themselves before Rāma, sprinkled him one by one with sacred water, and said. May you be victorious, O human-divine one! Rule you the Earth eternally! Thus in various auspicious words, did they pay homage to that one honoured by the Brāhmanas, Rāma.