Then out spoke the highly energetic and exceedingly mighty king of monkeys, “Why is this host agitated like a bark driven hither and thither by the wind?" Hearing Sugriva's speech, Vali's son said, Did you not see both those heroes-sons of Dasaratha, Rama and that mighty car-warriorLakşmaņa-covered with arrows? And (did you not see) those high-should ones lying in the field of battle, covered with blood ? Thereat, the lord of monkeys, Sugrīva, spoke to his son, Angada "I do not deem it without cause. This may have come to pass through sheer fear. These monkeys with sad faces, leaving their arms behind them are flying in all directions, their eyes distended in affright. They are not ashamed of each other, and they do not cast their looks back. And they hug each other, and go leaping over the fallen. In the meanwhile that hero, Vibhisana, bearing a mace in his hand, (approaching) greeted Sugrīva as well as Rāghava with blessings of victory. And Sugriva, seeing Vibhisana, capable of inspiring fear in the monkeys, spoke to the highsouled sovereign of bears, who stood by. This is Vibhișana that has come hither, seeing whom the foremost among the monkeys, from fear of Rāvana's son who, they apprehend, he is, are fleeing away, seized with a panic. Do you at once stay these agitated with fear and scampering all around; and proclaim, 'This is Vibhisana, who has come here.' Thus directed, Jõmbavān-king of bearsrestraining those that were flying, composed the monkeys. Hearing the bear-king's words, and seeing Vibhisana, the monkeys, renouncing fear, desisted (from their flight). Then the righteous Vibhīșaņa, viewing Rama's as well as Laksmana's body pierced with arrows, was exceedingly aggrieved. Washing their eyes with water, he, with his mind overpowered with grief, began to weep and broke out into lamentation. The Rāksasas, fighting in wily ways, have brought to this pass these ones endowed with prowess and possessed of every perfection and gifted with might (of arm). And with his guileful mind, that brother's son of mine, wicked-souled and an evil son (to me), has deceived these ones of straight prowess. Pierced with innumerable shafts, and covered with blood, these are lying on the ground like Salyakas. Those depending on whose prowess, I had sought eminence, those foremost of men, sleep here soundly for renouncing their bodies. Living, today I am in distress: and my desire of dominion is annihilated; and my foe, Rāvana, has his promise fulfilled and his aim crowned with success. As Vibhīşana was thus lamenting, the lord of monkeys-Sugriva-endowed with strength, embracing him spoke to him. O you cognisant of righteousness, you will here in Lankā obtain empire: no doubt of this; and Răvaņa along with his sons will be disappointed in their expectations. Both these-Rāma and Lakşmaņa-are under the aegis of Garuda; and, casting off their stupor: they will in battle slay Rävaņa along with his adherents. Having thus soothed and comforted the Raksasa, Sugriva addressed his father-in-law, who was at his side, saying. Do you along with numbers of heroic monkeys, taking those repressors of foes, the brothers-Rama and Laksmana-when they shall have regained their consciousness, repair to Kiskindha. And I, slaying Råvaņa along with his sons and friends, shall bring back Mithila's daughter, even as Sakra recovered the lost Sri. Hearing the words of the monkey-king, Suşeņa said, I had witnessed the war of yore between the gods and the Asuras. Then the Dänavas, enveloping themselves, momentarily destroyed the deities, albeit versed in arms and accomplished in weapons. They, their senses lost, and their lives departed, Bịhaspati treated by means of his knowledge of mantras, as well with medicines. Let Sampati, Panasa, and other monkeys speedily hie to the Milky Ocean for the purpose of bringing those medicines. The monkeys well know that mighty mountainous medicine-divine and capable of reviving the dead, and made by the deities themselves-visalya. There are (the mountains) named Candra and Drona: where the ambrosia was churned, there is that supreme drug. And those mountains have been placed by the deities in the mighty deep. And, o king, let the son of the Wing-god go thither. In the meanwhile, the wing arose, and masses of clouds appeared along with lightning, and the wind blew, agitating the waters of the deep, and shaking the mountains. And mighty trees of the ocean-islands, broken down by-the terrible wing-raised wind, began to topple headlong into the salt waters. The serpents dwelling there were seized with affright; and speedily all the aquatic animals dived into the Salt sea, Then in a moment the monkeys saw Vinatā's son possessed of terrific strength, like to a flaming fire. Seeing him come, the serpents began to dart away, those exceedingly powerful ones that, turning into shafts, had bound those persons.* *Rama and Laksmana. Then, touching the Kākutsthas and saluting them, Suparna rubbed with his hands their countenances furnished with the splendour of the Moon. Their wounds, on being touched by Vinata's son, were (immediately) healed: and the bodies of both speedily became cool and shone with an excellent complexion. They attained immense energy and prowess; and a double share of strength, and of rational and perceptive powers, and of memory. Then raising them up, the exceedingly energetic Garuda, resembling Vāşava himself, embraced both joyfully. And then Rāma addressed (Garuda), saying. By your grace we have through means survived the mighty calamity that had sprung from Răvana's son; and we have also speedily been rendered strong. My heart is delighted on having these, like to my father, Dasaratha, or my grand sire, Aja. Who are your, furnished with beauty, and bearing wreaths and unguents (on your person); clad in stainless attire: and adorned in noble ornaments ? To him spoke the exceedingly energetic son of Vinată endowed with great strength, the lord of birds, with a pleased heart, and his eyes wild with glee. O Kakutstha, I am your friend-your life ranging externally-Garutmän. I am come hither for aiding you. Neither the highly powerful Asuras, nor the exceedingly strong monkeys, nor the celestials along with the Gandharvas, having him of an hundred sacrifices at their head are, capable of delivering (any one) from these dreadful arrowy bonds, which had been forged by Indrajit of tortous deeds by help of illusion. These serpentsoffspring of Kadru-are sharp-fanged and venomous; and had bound you as arrows through the potency of illusion. O Ráma having truth for prowess, you are fortunate-along with that destroyer of foe in fight, Laksmana. Hearing this, I, summoning energy: have come hither swiftly, and I, doing by you as a friend, have from affection at once set you free from these dreadful arrowy bonds. you should always be on your guard. By nature the Rākşasas have cunning shifts in fight and you, who are heroic and of a pure spirit, can but rely on your simplicity alone for strength. Therefore you must not trust the Raksasas in the field of battle. By this one instance you must know that Rakşasas are ever deceitful in fight. Having said this the wondrous mighty Suparna, embracing Rama tenderly again) said. My friend Raghava, O you who even cherish affection for your foes, permit me, I shall go at pleasure. And O Raghva, entertain no curiosity as to our friendship. when, O hero, you shall have achieved success in battle, you shall know all about this friendship of ours. And with the surges of your shafts, making Larkā contain only children and aged, and slaying your foe, Ravana, you shall recover Sita. Having spoken thus, Suparna, endowed with vigour, having rendered Rāma hale in the midst of the monkeys, having gone round them and embrace them also, that one possessed of prowess, set out, covering up the sky, like to the wind. Seeing Raghu's sons rendered hale, the monkey-leaders set up leonine roars, and began to flourish their tails. Then beat the kettle-drums and the drums struck up. And conchs were cheerfully blown; and shouts were sent. And others struck at their arms with their hands. The monkeys, accustomed to battle with trees, uprooting them, stood by hundreds and thousands. And emitting tremendous roars and thereby frightening the night-rangers, the monkeys eager for encounter, approached the gate of Lanka. That mighty and dreadful din raised by the monkeys, resembled the terrible rumbling of the clouds at midnight about the end of Summer.