Hearing the terrible war-cry of the Rākşasas and monkeys Rāghava spoke to Jämbavän, saying. O gentle one, forsooth has Hanumān performed some mighty act for I hear the dreadful sound of the weapons. Do you therefore proceed speedily, O lord of bears, with all your soldiers to assist that foremost of monkeys. Thereupon, saying, 'So be it,' that king of bears, surrounded by his forces, approached the Western gate, where the monkey, Hanumān, was stationed. Then the lord of bears saw Hanumān approach, surrounded by monkeys sighing hard, who had faught the fight. Seeing on the way that host of bears dreadful and resembling dark clouds, on the march, Hanumān made them desist. That illustrious one along with that force, speedily presented himself (before Rāma), and with a heavy heart addressed him, saying. As we were fighting the field, Ravana's son, Indrajit in our very sight slew Sītā, crying (in distress). O subduer of enemies, seeing her (in this plight) I, with my senses bewildered, have been overwhelmed with grief. Therefore I have come to you to inform you of what has befallen. Hearing these words of his, Raghava, overwhelmed with grief, dropped down to the earth, like a tree whose roots have been severed. Seeing the god-like Råghava down on the earth, the foremost monkeys from all sides rushed forward and came to where (he was). With water scented with lotuses, they fell to sprinkling that one resembling a furious fire that has suddenly arisen. 1. Padmotpalasugadhibhiḥ-water scented with padmas-lotuses proper, and utpalas-blue lotuses (Nymphea cerulea). 2. 'Rama,' remarks the commentator, 'was a fire lighted by his grief for Sītā.' Thereat Laksmana, over-come with sorrow, embracing Rāma, spoke to his words fraught with reason and import, “Profitless* virtue is incapable, O noble one, of delivering from calamities you, who have subdued your senses, and who ever abidst in the good path. * 'Profitless, although apparently an epither of virtue, is really the predicate of the sentence. 'Virtue, incapable of delivering you is profitless. Beings and the mobile as well as the immobile cannot have that direct perception of virtue which they have of happiness. Therefore, I ween, virtue is a non-entity. Inasmuch as the immobile (albeit devoid of any regard for virtue) are nevertheless happy and as the mobile also are so, this virtue cannot lead to happiness. (If it were so), one like you would have not been placed in peril. If unrighteousness would bring unhappiness on creatures, Ravana should hence to hell, and you possessed of virtue, should not come by misfortune. Seeing that he is free from danger, and you are in itrighteousness and its opposite are found to have tendencles the very reverse of those assigned to them respectively (by the Vedas). If by means of virtue, one attain the felicity attached to it, and by means of unrighteouness, one reap its proper fruit, then let those that are unrighteous reap the fruit of their impiety nor let those that set their face against sin, be deprived of the fruit of their righteousness, and let those that walk in the way of virtue reap the fruit of their piety. But as prosperity attend those that are established in unrighteousness, and as those regardful of righteousness fare lamentably, these*have not the senses assigned to them (by the scriptures). *Virtue and vice. If, O Rāghava, Rāghava, (it is contended that) unrighteousness cut off the wicked, then whom shall Unrighteousness, himself slain by the act of slaughter of the destroyer, slay in his turn? Or if it is said that one is slain or slay another by ordinance, then it is destiny, which is touched by the sinful act and not he. O chastiser of foes, incapable of meting out retribution,* unmanifest itself, and non-existent, how can virtue, even if we grant its existence, find out the person that should be slain? *"In consequence,' remarks Ramanuja, 'of their being devoid of consciousness. If, O foremost of the good, it had existed, you wouldst not have come by any misfortune. But inasmuch as you have fallen into this plight, there is no such thing as virtue. Or itself feeble and impotent, it take refuge in manliness. And being powerless and bereft of dignity, it should, I deem, by no means be followed. If virtue is a property of manliness, then carefully forsaking virtue, do you follow strength as you have hitherto followed virtue. But, O subduer of enemies, if truthfulness be virtue, are you not bound by that departing from which the king lost his life?* *Explains the commentator, 'King Dasaratha lost his life, because he did not observe his word of installing you in the kingdom. Are you not bound by his word as well?' O chastiser of foes, if virtue must be practised above all, or if prowess must have precedence, then the thunder-handed Satakratu would not have celebrated his sacrifice, slaying the ascetic.* *The Logic is all in a jumble; but such is the text. The ascetic was Visvarūpa. The meaning, according to the commentator, is that, prowess is first and virtue next. Indra first used force, and then acquired merit.) O Rāghava, virtue aided by prowess, destroy enemies. Therefore, O Kakutstha, people, for compassing their ends, resort to both virtue and prowess. This, sire, is my opinion, this, O Raghava, is virtue. But you, having then renounced the kingdom, have laid the axe at the root* of righteousness. **Root, remarks, Rāmānuja, 'which is interest!' Like streams issuing out mountains, all acts spring from wealth flowing from various regions and attaining magnitude. Like a shrunken stream in summer, all the acts of that foolish person who has been devorced by wealth, are annihilated. He that renouncing riches, within his reach,* hankers after enjoyment, being carried away by his overmastering desire, take to getting at wealth by sinful acts; and then he incur guilt. *The commentator would have gotten riches.' To him that has wealth are friends, to him that has wealth are acquaintances, he that has wealth is an individuality in this world, and he that has wealth is a learned person. He that has wealth is powerful; he that has wealth is intelligent; he that has wealth is mighty-armed; and he that has wealth is full of all graces. All these that I have en-numerated are the evils of forsaking fortune. (I cannot divine) what made you, renouncing the monarchy, to adopt such a course. He that has riches, has virtue and desire attending on him, and has everything auspicious. That one without wealth, that seek it, cannot secure the wealth of prowess, without riches and desire. O lord of men, cheerfulness, and desire, and pride, and piety, and anger, and self-restraint, and self-control, all these come from wealth. As the planets are not discovered on a stormy day, that wealth, the want of which renders this world naught even to the ascetics practising righteousness, is not visible in you. O hero, you having abode by the words of your superior and having come (to the forest), your wife dearer then life itself has been ravished by Rākṣasas. But, O hero, today, O Raghava, by my acts will I remove this huge sorrow that has been heaped upon us by Indrajit. Therefore, rise you up. Rise up, O foremost of men, O long-armed one, O you who observe vows. Why did you not understand yourself as the supreme soul?* *Räma is conceived as an incarnation of Vişnu. Osinless one, urged on behalf of your welfare, I, waxing wroth on hearing of the slaughter of Janaka's daughter, shall with my shafts entirely raze to the ground Larkā with cars and elephants and steeds and the foremost Rākşasas.