Seeing those ominous signs, Lakşmaņa's elder brother, Ramā, embracing Sugrīva, said. Without consulting with me, you have acted thus rashly. But kings should not act in such a rash way. Placing in suspense, me, this army and Vibhīş aņa, you, O hero, enamoured of daring deeds, have put yourself to all this trouble. But, O hero, henceforth, do not act so. O subduer of enemies, if you come by any mischance, what shall Sita avail me; or Bharata; my younger brother-Lakşmaņa; or Satrughna, O slayer of enemies; or, again, my own person? Ere you had come, I had arrived at this determination; albeit, O you that are equal to the mighty Indra or Varuna, I knew your prowess full well. Slaying Rāvana in battle along with his sons, forces and vehicles, and installing Vibhīşaņa in Lankā, and placing the kingdom in the hands of Bharata, I shall renounce my body, O exceedingly powerful one! When Rāma had said this, Sugrīva answered, Knowing my own strength, how, O Rāghava, viewing Rāvana, who had ravished away your wife, could I forbear, O hero? As that hero was speaking thus Raghava addressed Lakṣmaṇa having auspiciousness, thus. O Lakşmaņa, occupying some tract furnished with cool water and woods bearing fruits, we shall sojourn, dividing and marshalling our forces. I see a mighty fear present, destructive of people, and boding destruction to the foremost heroes among the bears, monkeys and Rākşasas. The winds ruffle; and the earth is tremulous. And the tops of mountains tremble, and the mountains themselves send up loud sounds. The clouds are goblinish; and fierce; and harsh-sounding. And wearing terrific looks, they fiercely pour down showers mixed with drops of blood. The Evening resembles the red sandal, and is fearful. And a flaming circle dropped from the Sun. And exciting great fear, inauspicious birds and beasts, wearing cruel looks, and in distressful guise, cry in piteous accents, facing the Sun. At night, the ominous Moon with a black-red brim as at the time of universal wreck, burn. O Laksmana, there is a crimson, rough, slight, and graceful rim round the Sun; and a blue mark is visible on his disc. The stars do not course as formerly. Behold, O Laksmana, all these, prefiguring the Doom. And crows and hawks and vultures drop down. And jackals yell loud inauspicious notes. The Earth, converted into mud with flesh and gore, shall be covered with darts and javelins and swords, discharged by Rākşasas and monkeys. This very day with all expedition shall we surrounded on all sides by the monkeys, march towards the city governed by Rāvaņa. Having said this to Laksmana, Laksmana's elder brother possessed of exceeding strength, hastily descended from the top of the mountain. And descending from the mountain, the righteous Rāghava surveyed his troops, incapable of being beaten by enemies. After making the mighty host of the monkeysking equip itself, Raghava versed in season, along with Sugrīva, at the proper hour, issued orders for battle. Then in due time that one, accoutred with his bow, surrounded by a mighty army, set out, with the intention of entering the city of Lanka. Those two-Vibhisana and Sugriva-~-and Hanumān, and jāmbavăn, and Nala, and the bear-king Nila, and Laksmana, followed (Rama). Behind them, the mighty array of bears and monkeys followed Rāghava, severing a wide surface of land. The monkeys, resembling elephants, capable of resisting foes, took mountain-peaks and tall trees by hundreds. In a short time those repressors of foes— two brothers Rāma and Lakşmaņa-arrived at the city of Răvaņa; with pennons streaming over her; charming; garnished with groves and woods, having variegated gateways; inaccessible; and having walls and gates. And urged on by Rāma's command, the wood-raingers,* as commanded, blocking up (Lankā) incapable of being subdued even by the gods, stationed themselves. *Monkeys. Coming to Lanka ruled by Ravana, that hero, Rama, son to Dasaratha, along with Laksmana, remained stationed at the Northern gate, where Råvaņa used to reside. None save Rāma was competent to protect that dreadful gate, where Råvaņa used to reside and guarded by Rāvana himself, like the Ocean guarded by Varuna, and protected on all sides by terrible Rākşasas equipped with weapons; capable of striking terror into the weak; like to the nether regions guarded by Danavas. And (Rama) saw there : many and various arms and mail of the warriors, ranged together. And coming to the Eastern gate, that leader of the monkeys-army, the powerful Nila, along with Mainda and Dvivida, took up his post there. The exceedingly strong Angada, accompanied by Risabha, Gavaksa, Gaya, and Gavaya, occupied the Southern gate. And the mighty monkey Hanumān protected the Western entrance. And Sugrīva himself, with Prajangha, Tarasa and other heroes, was quartered near the garrison in the centre. And accompanied by all the foremost monkeys resembling Suparņa or the Wind, twenty kotis of renowned monkey-leaders, blocking up all sides, stationed themselves near the monkeys, Sugriva. At Rama's command, Laksmana along with Vibhisana, went from door to door, issuing instructions to kotis of monkeys. On the west of Rāma, Jāmbavän along with Susena, followed by innumerable troops, remained hard by at the garrison in the minddle. And those tiger-like monkeys, furnished with teeth like to tigers, wielding trees and mountaintops, stood ready for fight. All had their tails curled up, and all were armed with teeth and nails, and all had chequered bodies, and all had frightful faces. Some had the strength of ten elephants; and some had strength ten times as much; and some of the monkeys-leaders there had the strength of a thousand elephants. Some had the strength of numbers (of elephants); and some had strength hundred times as much. And others had immeasurable might. And wonderful and astonishing was their meeting. And the concourse at that place of the monkey-forces was like the concourse of locusts. The air was filled up, and the earth was covered quite with the monkeys coursing towards Lankā and dropping down into it. And hundreds and thousands making up the army of monkeys, arrived at the gate of Lanka; while others were pouring in from all sides for encounter. That mount was covered with monkeys by all sides and a thousand ayutas were going round the city. And Larkā, blocked up everywhere with powerful monkeys bearing trees in their hands, was incapable of being entered even by the Wind. The Rākşasas, sore pressed by thousands of monkeys resembling masses of clouds, and like to Śakra himself in battle, were seized with amazement. Like to the roar of water on the ocean being riven, there arose a mighty tumult in consequence of the forces surging hither and thither. With that sound the entire Lankā, with her wall and gateways, her mountains, woods, and forests, began to shake. That army, protected by Rāma and Lakşmaņa as well as Sugrīva, became and the more invincible even by the Asuras and celestials. Having arraigned his forces with the view of destroying the Räkşasa, Rāghava, versed in the resources of war, taking counsel of the counsellors, and deciding again and again his course of action, intending to adopt further measures, resolved to abide by the advice of Vibhīşaņa, remembering the morality regulating monarchs. And then, calling Vāli's son, Angada, (Rāma) said. O mild one, going to the Ten-necked one, tell him in my words, Bounding over the deep and casting off fear and dejection, I have laid siege to the city of Lankā; and have reft you of your prosperity and your wealth; and rendered you moribund and senseless. You have, O night-ranger, through delusion and pride injured saints and celestials, and Gandharvas and Apsaras, and Serpents, and Yaksas, and crowned heads. But, O Raksasa, your pride begot of the boon received from the Self-create has gone from you, whose destroyer I, afflicted in consequence of my wife having been carried off, wielding the rod, have sat down at the door of Lankā. O Rākşasa, you shall, remaining steady in fight, attain the state of celestials and Maharsis and Rājarşis. O worst of Rākşasas, do you display that prowess of your by which, aided by your power of illusion, you have forcible carried off Sītā, disregarding me. I shall with my sharpened shafts render this world free from Rākşasas, unless rendering back Mitbila's daughter, you throw yourself on my mercy. And, for certain, that foremost of Rākşasas, the righteous and graceful Vibhīşaņa, who has joined us, shall obtain, without having a thorn in his side, all this wealth of Lankā. For you, foolish, wicked, ignorant of selfknowledge, and having dolts for councillors, are not competent to unrighteously exercise kingship for a moment. Fight you, O Rāksasa, summoning fortitude and heroism. On being slain with my shafts, you shall attain peace. O night-ranger, if you should range the three worlds in the shape of a bird, you, coming in my ken, shall not be able to preserve your life. It is all this for your good; do you perform acts for the good of your body surviving death; and do you see Lankā well; for your life is in my keeping. Thus addressed by Rāma of untiring deeds, Tara's son went through the welkin like the embodied bearer of sacrificial offerings. Arriving near that subduer of enemies, Rāvana, in a moment, that graceful one saw Rāvana, sitting calmly in the midst of his ministers. And dropping down in his vicinity like a flaming fire, that best of monkeys, Augada, resembling a golden bracelet, stood there. Then introducing himself, Angada delivered to Rāvana along with his ministers all that Rama had excellently spoken to him, neither extenuating nor setting down aught of himself. I am the envoy of the king of Kosala, Rāma of untiring deeds; and I am the son of Vāli I do not know whether you have heard of me. Raghu's son, Rāma-enhancer of Kausaiya's joy-has said to you, 'Do you, O fell one, coming out, give me battle and prove your prowess. I shall slay you together with your ministers, and with your sons and relations and friends. And you being slain, the three worlds shall attain peace. Today shall I destroy the enemy of the gods and Dänavas, and Yakşas, of the Gandharvas serpents and Rākṣasas, and the thorn (in the side of the Saints). On you being slain, all the wealth shall be Vibhisana's; unless, bowing down (to me) and paying me homage, you render back Maithilī. When that monkey-chief had spoken thus, the lord of the night-rangers was wrought up with wrath. And coming under the sway of passion, he commanded his counsellors, saying, "Take this one of perverse understanding, and slay him at once.” Hearing Råvaņa's speech, four grim-visaged night rangers seized (Angada) flaming in energy like fire itself, Tara's son suffered himself to be taken, in order that the hero might then display his prowess before the Yātudhānas. Then Angada, taking them up, who were pressed against his arms, like insects, leapt up on a palace resembling a hill. Thereat, in consequence of the impetuosity of his bound, the Raksasas, slipping off, fell on to the ground in the very sight of the Rākṣasa king. Then the powerful son of Vāli with his legs attacked the top of that palace, elevated like a hill, of the lord of Rākşasas. Thereat, as formerly the summit of the Himavān had been cleft by the thunder bold, the palace, thus assailed, was split in the very presence of the Ten-necked one. Having reft the top of the edifice, and proclaimed his name, Angada, setting up a mighty roar, sprang into the sky. Aggrieving the Rākşasas and rejoicing all the monkeys, he came back to the side of Rāma in the midst of the monkeys. Rāvana was transported with wrath in consequence of the breaking down of the palace. And, finding his destruction (at hand), he began to heave sighs. Rāma, surrounded by innumerable delighted monkeys setting up shouts, anxious for slaying his foe, prepared for battle. At the command of Sugrīva, the exceedingly powerful monkey-Susena, resembling a mountain-summit, surrounded by a large number of monkeys capable of assuming shapes at pleasure, began to range from door to door; like the Moon ranging the stars. Seeing the hundred Akşauhinis of the woodrangers, stationed in Lankā, extending down to the sea, some of the Rākşasas were struck with astonishment, while some came under the influence of fear; and some experienced delight from the (anticipated) delight of battle. The space between the well and the moat all was flooded with monkeys. And the distressed Rākşasas saw the wall thronging with monkeys; and thereat exclaiming “Alas” “Alas,” the Rāks asa were extremely terrified. *A translator cannot help feeling of disappointment at the difference, to the disadvantage of English-between Sanskrit and English. The original for 'thronging with monkeys' is a verbal attributivevanarikrita-lit. monkeyed. On that frightful uproar arising, the warriors of the Rākşasa monarch, Raksasa-seizing mighty arms, began to patrol about, like to winds blowing at the time to the universal dissolution. a