Being thus accosted by their lord, the highly powerful Rākşasas, devoid of good sense and ignorant of sound counsel, replied with folded palms, saying. You have, o king, enough of soldiers and various types of weapons like parighas saktis etc. Why are you smitten with sorrow then? Repairing to Bhagavatī, you did discomfit the serpents in battle. The God of Death, living on mount Kailasa, encircled by Yaksas, was subjugated by you in a great battle. That mighty lord of men, proud of his friendship with Śiva, was defeated by you wrathfully in battle. Discomfiting and slaying the band of Yaksas, you did bring this flowery car from the mount Kailasa. O lord of Rākşasas, desiring your friendship out of fear, Maya, the king of Danavas, offered you his daughter for your spouse. O you of mighty arms, you did bring under your subjection the powerful and irrepressible Dänava for the pleasure of Kumbhīnasī. And entering the region under the earth, you did defeat the serpents-and thus bring under your subjection Väsuki, Takşaka, Sankha, and Jațī. Those heroic Dänavas, the Kālakeyas, were greatly powerful, irrepressible, and proud of the boons conferred on them. And fighting with them perpetually for a year, you did bring them under your control, O lord, O slayer of foes, and learn from them the science o varied illusions, O king of the Rākşasas. O great hero, by you were defeated in battle, the heroic and powerful sons of Varuņa, followed by a fourfold division of their army. The dominion of Death is like the mighty main, having his rod for aquatic animals, agonies for the frees that cover its islands, the noose for the billows, his attendants for the serpents and his terrible fever for the dreadful attitude of the deep. And diving into this terrible deep, you did, O king, discomfit Death himself and win glorious victory. And every one was pleased there with your successful fight. The Earth was filled with various heroic Kșatriyas, resembling Sakra in prowess as she is adorned now with various trees. Rāghava is not their equal either is strength or prowess. And all those heroes, hard to repress in battle, were slain by you, O king. Do you wait here, O great king; you need not take any trouble, Indrajit alone shall slay all these monkeys. This one, O mighty monarch, having celebrated the the Māheśvara* sacrifice, has obtained a noble boon, rarely (attained by persons). *Relating to Mahasvara, the great Lord, a designation of Sivā. Having agitated the ocean of celestial hosts, having darts and lances for its fishes, showering arms for its moss, elephants for its tortoises, steeds for its frogs, Rudra and Aditya for its ferocious animals, the Maruts and Vasus for its mighty serpents, cars, horses, and elephants for its volume of waters, and infantry for its spacious shore, this one (Indrajit), taking captive the lord of the celestials himself, had brought him into Lanka. Then, O king, liberated agreeably to the injunction of the Great-father, the slayer of Sambara and Vſtra, worshipped of all the celestials, went (back) to heaven. Do you, O great king, entrust Indrajit with this business, until he bring to destruction the monkey-host along with Rāma. O king, you must not think that this calamity, coming from an ignoble person is not insignificant. You shall slay Rāghava.