Hearing the words of the lord of Rākşasas, as well as the thundering of Kumbhakarņa, Vibhīşaņa addressed the Rākşasa chief, in a pregnant speech, fraught with his welfare. You have been bound about your neck by the mighty and huge serpent, Sītā, having her breast for its body anxiety for its venom, smile for its sharp fangs, and her five fingers for its hood. Therefore before the monkeys, resembling mountain peaks, having teeth for their arms and nails, for their weapons, subjugate Lankā, do you render Maithili to Dasaratha's son. Before the shafts shot by Ráma, resembling the thunder-bolt and having impetuosity of the wind, cut off the heads of the foremost of the Rākșasas, do you render Mithila's daughter to the son of Dasaratha. Neither Kumbhakarņa nor Indrajit, neither Mahāparáva nor Mahodara, neither Nikumbha nor Kumbha nor yet Atikāya, O king, can stay in the field against Rāghava. Living, you, whether you are protected by the Sun or the winds, or throw yourself into the lap itself of Vāsava, or enter the sky or the nether spheres, shall not escape death. Hearing Vibhisana's words, Prahasta said, Fear know we none whatever from the celestials, or Danavas, or Yaksas, or Gandharvas, or huge snakes; fear know we none in battle with birds and serpents. How can fear at all afflict us proceeding from the king's son, Rāma? Hearing Prahasta's speech, Vibhisana, seeking the welfare of the king, and having his intellect grounded in virtue, interest and profit, said words enfolding high sense. O Prahasta, like a sinful person being unable to ascend heaven what the king, Mahodara, you, and Kumbhakarņa, are saying with reference to Rāma, shall not prove true. As one without a raft cannot cross over the mighty main, how can I, or you, or all the Raksasa combined, cause death to Rāma, who, O Prahasta, is versed in the sense of things. Even the gods become stolid before the sovereign of the Ikşvāku race, having righteousness for his principle quality, and being a mighty car-warrior and of such a character, and who is competent in action. As yet the Kaňka-feathered, terrible and sharp shafts shot by Raghava, have not pierced into your body; and therefore you did speak so. And, O Prahasta, as yet the sharpened shafts, capable of destroying life and having the impetuosity of the thunder-bolt, have not entered into your body, and therefore you did speak thus, neither Rāvana, nor the exceedingly powerful Trisirşa. Neither Kumbhakarna's son Nikumbha nor Indrajit, is capable of bearing in battle the son of Dasaratha, resembling Sakra himself. And neither Devāntaka nor Narāntaka, neither Atikāya, nor the magnanimous Atiratha, nor the equally strong Akampana, is competent to stay Rāghava in fight. The king, naturally of fierce temper and thoughtless, through the instrumentality of you who appearing to be his friends are in reality his foes, seek to destroy the Rākşasas. Do you take out and deliver the monarch, who has through force become subject to a dreadful and mighty, and thousand-headed serpent bursting with immeasurable prowess. As a person possessed by fearfully strong ghosts, is saved by his friends pulling him by his hair, attaining your desire you desire you should, assembling together, rescuer the king. This one is sunk in the Rāghava sea having excellent waters. He (the king) has fallen into the Kākutstha neither regions. Do you speedily coming together deliver him. I tell you my full mind, fraught with the welfare of this city together with the Rākṣasas, as well of the king with his adherents. Do you make over Maithili to the son of the king. He is a true counsellor who advises his master, after duly ascertaining the strength, position, increase or destruction of the enemies as well as of their own party.