Then those Rākşasas, going to that subduer of enemies, Rāvana, informed him that Rāma along with the monkeys had laid siege to the city. Hearing the city besieged, the night-ranger was enraged. And, hearing that double arrangements had been made (by Rāma) in guarding the gateways (Råvaņa) ascended the palace. He saw Lanka with her hills, woods, and forests, covered everywhere with innumerable monkeys eager for encounter. He saw the entire Earth tawneyed with the monkeys; and he reflected within himself how he could destroy these. And reflecting for long, Rāvana having expansive eyes, Assuming patience, gazed at Rāghava and the leader of monkeys. Rāghava with his host was fast approaching (the wall); and Ravana saw Lanka defended on all sides by Rākşasas. Dasaratha's son, seeing Lankā crowned with variegated ensigns and standards, mentally went to Sītā, with a sad heart. For my sake, here that one. Janaka's daughter, having eyes resembling those of a young deer, is undergoing affliction; and Leith down on the ground. And aggrieved at the thought of Vaidehī; the righteous Rāma speedily commanded the monkeys to compass the destruction of the enemies. As Rāma of untiring deeds said this, the monkeys, filling (The air) with leonine roars, began to press forward furiously. "We shall cleave Lankā with mountainpeaks, or with our blows" thus thought the leaders within themselves. The monkey-leaders stood, raising up gigantic mountain peaks and tops of mountains, and rooting up various trees. And for doing what was dear to Rāma, that army, divided into separate parties, in the presence of the Raksasa chief commenced scaling Lanka. Those copper-faced once of golden sheen, who had consecrated their lives to the service of Rāma, equipped with trees and rocks, began to throng upon Lankā. The monkeys with trees and hill-tops and blows crushed countless gates and tops of walls; and they filled the moat containing crystal water with dust, tops of crags, straw, and wood. Then leader of thousands and koțis and hundreds of koțis began to scale Lanka. The monkeys crushed golden gateways; and, breaking down gates resembling the tops of the summits of Kailasa, bounded roaring, some towards the wall and some all around. And resembling gigantic elephants, they rushed towards Lankā. Victory to the mighty Rāma, and victory to the exceedingly powerful Lakşmaņa, and Victory to king Sugriva, who is protected by Rāghava.' Thus shouting, those monkeys, wearing forms at will, sending up roars, rushed amain towards the wall of Lankā. And Virabăhu, Subāhu, Nala and Panasaleader of monkeys-breaking (a portion of) the wall, took up their post there. In the meantime, (they) arranged the forces in order of battle. The strong Kumuda, surrounded by ten kotis of victorious monkeys, stood obstruction the Estern gate. For backing him, there remained the monkey, Prasabha, as also the long-armed Panasa, surrounded by monkeys. And obstruction the Southern entrance stood the strong and gallant monkey, Śatabali surrounded by twenty koțis. The strong sire of Tārā the powerful Sus ena, obstructed the Western gate, backed by kot is upon kotis (of monkeys). Obstructing the Northern gate, remained the puissant Răma himself along with Sumitrā's son, as well as the king of monkeys-Sugriva. That huge-bodied and dreadful Golangula-the mighty and powerful Gavākşa-surrounded by a koti, remained by the side of Rama. That destroyer of foes-the exceedingly mighty Dhūmra of the bears of terrific wrath, remained by the side of Rāma-where, surrounded by vigilant counsellors, and bearing a mace in his hand stood the exceedingly strong Vibhīşana, endowed with wonderful powers, in complete panoply. And Gaya, and Gavāksa, and Gavaya, and Śarabha, and Gandhamādana, protected the monkey-army, coursing all around. Then, his soul wrought up with wrath, Rāvaņa-lord of Rākşasas-speedily ordered the whole host to sally out. Hearing those words, which came out from Ravana's mouth, all of a sudden the nightrangers sent up a dreadful yell. Then awoke the kettle-drums, having moonlike pale faces-sounded by means of golden sticks. And conchs by hundreds and by thousands, capable of producing loud blares, filled with air proceeding from the mouths of dreadful Rāks asas-were winded. With conchs placed in their mouths, those night-rangers, having bodies blue like those of Śukas, resembled masses of clouds, with lightning and cranes. And commanded by Råvana, the troops cheerfully issued forth like the onrushing of the mighty main filling all at the time of the universal dissolution. Then the monkeys-army gave roar, spreading all around, and it seemed as if the sound filled all Malaya with its sides and caves. And sounds of conchs, and drums as well as the leonine shouts of the impetuous (warriors), made the earth, air, and ocean, resound: and these mixed with the roars of elephants, the neighing of steeds, the rattle of the car-wheels, ant the tread of the Rākşasa' feet. In the meantime there commenced a mighty a encounter between the Raksasas and the monkey, like that which took place of yore between the gods and the Asuras. And displaying their prowess, They* began to slaughter monkeys with maces, and darts, and adzes. *Raksasas. The vehement monkeys (on their side) slaughtered Rākşasa with trees and tops of crags as well as with their nails and teeth. A mighty sound arose of 'Victory to king Sugrīva!' and 'Victory to you, O king,' each army taking the name of its king. Then other dreadful Rākṣasa that were stationed upon the wall, dropping down, pierced the monkeys with darts and bhindipālas. And (thereat) the monkeys, flying into fury, descending to the earth and bounding, brought down the Rākşasas with their arms. That encounter of the Rākşasas and the monkeys was mighty and wonderful, and the ground became wet with flesh and gore.