Seeing the Rākṣasa-Dhūmrākṣa of dreadful prowess-issue out, the monkeys, rejoicing greatly, eager for encounter, set up roars. Then there took place a terrific conflict between the monkeys and the Rākşasas, charging each other with fearful trees, and darts, and maces. The Rākşasas began to scatter the dreadful monkeys on all sides; and the monkeys (on their parts) felled the Raksasas with trees. The Raksasas, growing enraged, began to pierce that monkeys with straight speeding sharp shafts winged with Kanka plumes. And riven by the Rākşasa with drcadful clubs and bearded darts, daggers and maces and terrible and curious bludgeons and grasped javelins, the exceedingly powerful (monkeys), their anger aroused, began with alacrity to perform deeds of intrepid valour. Those monkey-leaders, their bodies pierced with shafts and their persons riven with darts, took up trees and crags. Those monkeys, endowed with terrific vehemence, sending up shouts, and proclaiming their respective names, set about tossing the brave Rākşasa rank, The monkeys, waged with diverse rocks and innumerable trees, waxed exceedingly furious. Sparkling in the glory of victory, the monkeys crushed the Rākşasas and some among them feeding on gore began to vomit blood. And some were severed along their flanks; and, some, slain with trees, were heaped up; and some were crushed with crags; and some were torn with teeth. Some being broken down by means of broken standards, and some by means of fallen swords, and some crushed down by cars, the rangers of the night suffered sorely. And (anon) the earth was covered with huge elephants measuring mountains, and mountaintops, and steeds crushed and the riders thereof, all borne down by the monkeys. Bounding again and again, the vehement monkeys endowed with terrific prowess, with their finger-nails tore up the Rākṣasas by the mouths. With woebegone faces, and with hair dishevelled, (the Raksasas), stupified with the smell of blood, saught the earth. Other Rākşasas endowed with dreadful vigour, waxing wondrous wroth, dealt the monkeys slaps with hands having the touch of the thunder-bolt. Gift with greater impetuosity, the monkeys felled the impetuous (Raksasas) with blows, and feet and teeth; and some were slain with trees. Seeing the forces fleeing away, that foremost of Raksasas-Dhumraksa-flying into fury, began a terrific conflict with the monkeys desirous of encounter. Some of the monkeys, sore assailed with prāśas, began to bleed; and some, wounded with maces, dropped down to the ground. Some were beaten hard with bludgeons; and some were cleft with bhindipālas. And some, on being assailed with bearded darts, became insensible and lost their lives. Some among the monkeys lay slain on the ground, drenched in blood. and some, fleeing away from the field, were slaughtered by the infuriated Rākşasas. Some, having their breasts pierced, lay on their sides. and some were riven with tridents; and the entrails of some had come out. That mighty and dreadful encounter of the Räksasas and the monkeys, was waged with countless weapons and rocks and trees. That battle he come a musical entertainment' mellifluous with bow-string for Vina, having the neighing of chargers for its measure, and with the cries of Maindas' for its strains. 1. The reader has already perceived that the carrying out of a simile to a number of details is a characteristic as much of Vālmīki as of his rival in the epic sphere-Vyāsa, but the comparisons are never on all fours, as in the case before us. 2. A classical Hindu musical instrument, having metallic strings, with a pair of gourds at one end for the sounding-board. Vide Yantra-Kosa by Sir Saurindra Mohan Tagore, Mus-Doc. 3. A species of elephants. Then in the field, Dhūmrākṣa bow in hand, laughing, pursued the monkeys in all directions with showers of shafts. Seeing the forces hard beset by Dhūmrākşa and distressed thereat, the Windgod's offspring, waxing enraged, seizing a huge crag, approached (the Rākşasa). And with his eyes double reddened in wrath, the one, like to his sire himself in prowess, brought down the crag upon Dhūmrākṣa's car. Seeing the crag, (Dhumraksa) upraising his mace hurriedly, leapt down in vehemence, and stood on the ground. And having shattered his car, that crag fell down to the earth. Thereat letting go the car furnished with wheels, Kuvaras and a face, as well as a banner; in which Dhūmrākṣa had left his bow, Hanuman-son to the Wind-god-laid about him right lustily for destroying the Rākşasas, with trees having branches long and short. Thereat some Rākşasas with their heads shattered, lay drenched in blood; and others, struck with trees, dropped down to the earth. Then Hanumān-son to the Wind-god-charged in full career against the Räkşasa army; and, taking a mountain-peak, he rushed against Dhumraksa. As Hanumān was descending, the powerful Dhūmrākşa, upraising a mace and giving out a shout, made towards him speedily. Then Dhūmrākṣa enraged, brought down that mace studded with innumerable pricks, on the head of Hanumān fired with wrath. Thus assailed with the mace of fearful impetuosity, the monkey endowed with he mace of fearful impetuosity, the monkey endowed with the strength of the wind without at all heeding that blow, let fall a mountain-top right against Dhumraksa's head. On being assailed with the mountain-peak, Dhūmrākşa, having his entire body mangled, suddenly fell to the earth, like to a toppling hill. Seeing Dhūmrākṣa slain, those night-rangers that survived the carnage, in extreme agitation began to pour into Lankā, attacked by the monkeys. That high-souled offspring of the Wind-god, having slain his foes, and come under the influence of fatigue incident to his slaughtering his enemies, having caused rivers of gore to flow (in the field), experienced the excess of joy on being honoured of the monkeys. Seeing Dhūmrākṣa slain, those night-rangers that survived the carnage, in extreme agitation began to pour into Lankā, attacked by the monkeys. That high-souled offspring of the Wind-god, having slain his foes, and come under the influence of fatigue incident to his slaughtering his enemies, having caused rivers of gore to flow (in the field), experienced the excess of joy on being honoured of the monkeys.