Bound up terribly with shafts, Dasaratha's sons, lying down bathed in blood, sighed hard like to serpents. All those foremost monkeys, along with Sugrīva, possessed of exceeding strength, overwhelmed with sorrow, remained surrounding those high-souled ones. In the meanwhile, the powerful Rāma, albeit fast bound by the shafts, awoke by virtue of the exceeding toughness of his person, as well as his might. Then, seeing his brother having a distressful countenance, covered with blood, feeble, and fast bound by the shafts, Rāma, greatly aggrieved, began to mourn. Of what use to me is the recovery of Sītă, or life either, when today I see my brother vanquished in fight and lying down in the field? Seeking in the world (of men), I may light upon a woman like Sītā; but never on a brother, or a helper, or a warrior like to Laksmana. If that enhancer of Sumitra's joy have met with his end, my life I must renounce in the sight of the monkeys. What shall I say to Kausalyā; and what shall I say to Kaikeyi ? And what shall I say to mother Sumitrā eager for a sight of her son? And if I go (back) without him, how shall I soothe her, like to a cow reft of her calf; and trembling; and resembling a mourning Kurari? How shall I say to Satrughna and the illustrious Bharata, 'He went with me to the forest; but I come (back) here without him "? I shall not be able to bear the rebuke of mother Sumitră. Therefore even here shall I renounce my person; for certainly I dare not live. Fie on me, who am wicked and base; for me this Lakşmaņa, brought down, leith in the field of battle, like one that is without life. O Lakşmaņa, you ever comforts me when I am dispirited. But today, having lost your life, you can not speak to me, who am afflicted. You, O hero, who had in battle slain innumerable Rākṣasa lying around, have (at length) yourself been slain in the field with shafts. And lying down in the battle-field, bleeding and covered with arrows, you appear like the Sun when he has gone up the Setting-hill. In consequence of shafts piercing your vitals, you cannot speak; but your visible expression, albeit you are dumb, betokens pain. O you endowed with exceeding splendour, even as you did follow me into the forest, will I follow you to the mansion of Yama. You having dear friends, and ever following me, has come by this plight in consequence of my reprehensible conduct. I do not remember having heard any harsh speech from the heroic Lakşmaņa, even when he had happened to be exceedingly wroth. He that could discharge at one shot five hundred shafts, that Lakşmaņa is superior to karttaviryya himself in that weapon-the bow. He that with his arms could resist the arms of Sakra himself, that one worthy of a costly couchLeith down on the ground, slain. That false babble shall now, without doubt, consume me; for by me has not Bibhishna been made monarch of the Rákşasas. Do you, O Sugrīva, this very moment retrace your steps. Bereft of your strength through me you will be worsted by Rāvaņa. O Sugriva, placing Angada to the fore, do you, taking your host as well as the equipage, in company with Nila and Nala, cross over the Ocean. By you has been achieved a mighty feat incapable of being done by another in battle. And pleased am I with the king of bears, and the lord of Golãngulas; and Angada has quit himself nobly, as also Mainda and Dvivida. And Kesarin and Sampāti have both faught terribly. Gavaya, and Gavākşa, and Sarabha, and Gaja, and other monkeys have faught as others are incapable of fighting, determined to lay down their lives (for me). But, O Sugriva, man cannot overrule Destiny. You, my friend, fearing righteousness, has done what lay in your power. And, You foremost of monkeys, you also have acted as become friends. Now, with my permission, go you whitersoever you are minded. Hearing Rāma's lament, the monkeys-those dark-eyed and others-began to shed tears from their eyes. Then Vibhisana, quieting the army, taking a mace in his hand, swiftly went to where Rāghava was. Seeing him fast making his way, resembling a mass of dark collyrium, the monkeys taking him to be Ravana's son, began to run away.