Beholding Mahodara, Mahāpäráva and the highly powerful Virūpåksa slain in the encounter Rāvaņa attained to an excess of ire. And ordering his charioteer to hurry on he gave went to the following words. All my courtiers have been slain and my city is shut up-I shall remove my grief consequent on all these by slaying Răma and Lakşmaņa. I shall destroy Rāma-like tree in the conflict whose flower is Sītā and whose branches are Sugrīva, Jāmbavān, Kumuda, Nala, Divida, Mainda, Angada Gandhamadana, Hanuman and all other leading monkeys. And resounding the ten quarters with the sound of his chariot wheels that mighty carwarrior proceeded quickly towards Rāghava. With that sound all quarters were filled, and the earth, will rivers, mountains and forests shook and all the lions, deer and birds were terrified. He created a dreadful darkness with the discharge of his sharp weapons and burnt down the monkeys who fled away to different directions. Dust was raised on the ground by those monkeys assailed and flying to various directions. They were unable to withstand the power of the weapon made by Brahmå himself. Beholding his own army, assailed and cut into hundred pieces by the excellent weapons of Rāvana Råghava dashed forward. a Assailing the monkey-host, that foremost of Rākşasas espied Rāma, unconquered at distance with his brother Lakşmaņa like to Basava with Vişņu, holding a huge bow like one painted on the sky, having expansive eyes like lotus-petals, long arms, and always subduing the enemies. Beholding the monkeys slain in the encounter and Rāvaņa approach, the heroic and highly powerful Rāma, with Sumitra's son in his company, delightedly set arrows on his bow. As if rending the whole earth with that dreadful sound he began to draw the string of his excellent bow. With the sound of Ravan's arrows and the twang of Rāma's bow hundreds of Rākşasas fell down on earth.. Coming within the range of the arrows of those two Princes, Rāvaņa appeared like Rahu in presence of the sun and the moon. And desiring to fight with him first Lakşmana setting sharp arrows on his bow, discharged shafts at him resembling the flame of fire. The highly powerful Ravana too with his arrows stopped the course of those shafts in the sky as soon as they were discharged by Laksmana, skilled in archery. And displaying his light-handedness, he with one arrow, severed Laksmana's one, with three his three and with ten his ten. Surpassing thus the son of Sumitrā Rāvana, ever victorious in battle, confronted Rāma in the encounter, standing like another hill. Approaching Rāghava, Rāvana the lord of Rakşasas, with his eyes reddened in ire, began to make a shower of arrows. Thereupon beholding the arrows shot off Ravana's bow fall on all sides, Rāma speedily took up a Bhalla.* *An arrow with a crescent shaped head. Rāghava sundered with his sharp Bhalla his dreadful flaming and resembling poisonous serpents. With various sharpened arrows Rāghava assailed Rävaņa, and he again assailed Rāma in return. And forming a circle, they passed each other by the right side. Uprooting the earth with the vehemence of their arrows, irrepressible by each other, fighting equally discharging arrows, they arrows looked dreadful like Death himself-and created terror in all creatures. The sky was filled with their various weapons like to clouds in the rainy season accompanied with lightning. The welkin appeared full of windows with that shower of arrows, shot with great vehemence and winged like vultures. The earth was stricken with darkness caused by these arrows like to clouds appearing after sunset. There took place a dreadful conflict between them desiring to slay each other, having their prowess unknown and fighting like Vitra and Vasava. Both of them were proficient in archery, skilled in the art of conflict and foremost of those conversant with the use of weapons. They began to veer round the battle-field. And wherever they went, there appeared arrows like to waves of the deep roused by the winds. Then that destroyer of creatures-Ravana, with his hand engaged in discharging shafts, shot at Rāma's forehead a network of arrows. Thereat Rāma on his head bore that shower of shafts shot from his terrific bow, having the lustre of the petals of blue lotuses; nor did he experience any pain. Then reciting a formula, the exceedingly energetic Rāma endowed with prowess, wrought up with wrath, engaged in incessantly shooting his shafts, taking his Rudra weapon and again seizing his arrows, discharged them at that lord of Raksasas. Alighting at the impenetrable mail of the Rākşasa-chief, resembling a mass of mighty clouds, those arrows did not then occasion him any pain. Again Rāma skilled in all weapons, from a powerful weapon discharged arrows at the sovereign of the Raksasas mounted on his car. And piercing Ravana, those like to fivehooded serpents, resisted by him, entered the earth, hissing. Having baffled Rāghava's weapon, Rāvana, transported with passion, took up a dreadful Asura weapon; and discharged sharpened shafts having the faces of lions and tigers and the faces of kankas and kokas,' and the faces of vultures and hawks, and the faces of jackals, and the faces of wolves, with gaping mouths, and terrific of aspect:; five-mouthed and red-hued. And that highly powerful one, enraged, sighing like a snake, by his power of illusion shot at Rāma other keen arrows having the faces of mules and the faces of bears, and the faces of dogs and cocks, and the faces of Makaras? And venomous serpents these as well as others. 1. Koka-a ruddy goose. It may also mean a lizard, a chameleon, a wolf. 2. A marine monster, generally confounded with the alligator and the shark: but really a fabulous animal. Covered with that Asura weapon that foremost of the Raghus, himself resembling fire, discharged an exceedingly vigorous weapon informed with fire; and shot various shafts having faces filled with live flames, and faces like to suns, and hued like to planets and stars, and furnished with faces resembling mighty meteors or resembling tongues of lightning. Those terrific shafts of Răvana, resisted by Rāghava's weapon, were annihilated in the sky, and destroyed (monkeys) by thousands. Seeing that weapon (of Rāvaņa) destroyed by Rāma of untiring deeds, all those heroes, the monkeys, headed by Sugrīva, capable of wearing forms at will shouted, surrounding Rāghava. The high-souled son of Dasartha-Rāghavahaving by his might destroyed that weapon discharged by Råvana's arms, was delighted; and the monkey-chiefs, filled with glee, began to emit shouts.