Seeing her husband, well the exceedingly powerful Laksmana, slain, Srta, afflicted with grief, burst into bitter lamentation. The soothsayers had said that I should have sons, and should never be a widow. But on Råma being slain, it sees now that those ones, possessed of knowledge, had spoken untruthfully. Those also, who having celebrated sacrifices and rites, had said that I should become the queen (of Rama), on Rāma being slain, seems today to have spoken a falsehood, although they are possessed of knowledge. They also asserted that I should be honoured of the wives of heroic kings as well as of my lord, but on Rāma being slain, they seem to have spoken a falsehood, although possessed of knowledge. Those twice-born ones that in any hearing had said auspicious words, on Rāma being slain, seem today to have spoken a falsehood although they were possessed of knowledge. These lotus-marks on the feet, betokening to gentlewomen possessing them, that they are to be installed in the kingdom in company with their husbands-who are kings-are on me. Those marks find I none on me by which women of rare fortune come by widowhood, but I find that in me these good tokens are nullified. Those marks that are pronounced infallible by those versed in such knowledge, on Rama being slain, are nullified in me. My hairs are fine, equal, and blue; my eyebrows touch each other; my hips are devoid of down and round; and my teeth are close. My temples, and eyes hands, feet, ankles, and thighs are equal. And my fingers are furnished with round nails, and are plump and even in the middle. And my breasts are close and firm and developed, and have their nipples sunk. And my navel is depressed, with high sides. And my chest is swelling. My complexion is like the hue of gems, and my down soft. And they said that I was furnished with twelve auspicious signs. And my hands in the middle parts of my fingers contain wheat-marks, and in the spaces between the fingers, have no uneven corners. And my feet also partake of the general complexion. And my laugh is a gentle smile. And those versed in marks of women knew that I was possessed of such marks. Those Brähmaņas skilled in telling fortune said that I should be installed in the kingdom along with my husband; but all that has been falsified. Having purified Janasthana (of Raksasas), obtained tidings of me, and crossed the Ocean* incapable of being agitated, those brothers have been slain in the footprint of a cow! *The commentator assigns a metaphorical sense to ocean-but this is hardly necessary. The descendants of Raghu had obtained Väruņa and Āgneya and Aindra and Vāyavya and Brahmasira weapons.* * And did they not remember this now? completes the sense. Through illusion have those lords of me, who am forlorn. Rāma and Lakşmaņa, resembling Vasava himself in battle, been slain. Coming in battle within ken of Raghava, a foe, even if he be endowed with the fleetness of thought, does not go back living. There is nothing which is too hard for Time; and the Destroyer is incapable of being overcome; inasmuch as Rāma along with his brother Lakşmaņa has fallen in fight. I do not so much mourn Rāma or the mighty car-warrior-Laksmana-or, for that matter, self, as I do the wretched mother-in-law of mine. She ever think of the period of the promise. "When shall I behold Sītā and Lakşmaņa with Rāghava? As she was thus lamenting, the Rākṣasai, said, O exalted lady, do not weep thus, your lord live. O dignified one, I shall unfold to you potent and probable reasons why the brothers Rāma and Laksmana live. When their leader fall, the countenances of the warriors in battle are not overspread with passion, or display cheerfulness and vivacity. O Vaidehi, if those had lost their lives, this celestial chariot, named Puspaka, would not have held you. An army that has its heroes and chiefs slainbecoming dispirited and drooping, range the field, like a vessel on water that has losi its helmsman. But, O lorm one, these troops, be trying neither agitation nor anxiety, are guarding the Kākutsthas, This I tell you of them out of affection. Do you, at this conclusion bringing in joy, take comfort; and behold the Kākutsthas unslain. This I tell you from affection. I never told you untruths heretofore; nor, O Mithila's daughter, will I tell them to you now. You by virtue of your character conducive to delight, have found an access into my heart. These even the celestials and Asuras with Indra (at their head) are incompetent to quell. Seeing such sight, I speak to you as to their being alive. And behold O Maithili, this mighty wonder! These are lying insensible with arrows; but of these Grace has not taken leave. It generally happens that the faces of persons dead and gone, are unsightly to a degree. Therefore, O Janka's daughter, leave off grief and sorrow and stupor. For the sake of Rāma and Lakşmaņa you can not today put a period to your existence. Hearing her words, Mithila's daughter-Sītāresembling the daughter of a celestial, with hands joined, said, "May this be so! Then turning away the car Puşpaka fleet as the mind, the distressed Sītā entered Lankā along with Trijata. Then in company with Trijatā alighting from Puşpaka, she along with the Rākşasis entered the asoka wood. Entering that sporting-ground of the Raksasa lord abounding in woody tracts, Sītā, having beheld those princes and reflected on them, became subject to a mighty grief.