Then the exceedingly energetic lord of monkeys, Sugrīva, said to Hanumān these words fraught with import, Inasmuch as Kumbhakarma has been slain as also the princes,' Rāvana can no longer defend the city. Now let those principal monkeys that are endowed with great strength and that are furnished with fleetness, taking fire-brands (in their hands) rapidly rush towards Lankā. Then when the Sun had set and at the terrific front of Night, those foremost of monkeys marched towards Larikā, equipped with firebrands. Charged at all points by nur bers of monkeys armed with fire-brands, those firece-eyed (Rākş asas) that guarded the gates.* suddenly fled away. *Araksasthā-according to some means gates. According to others, a gulma or division of an army. Thereat (the monkeys) delighted set fire to gates and upper apartments and spacious highways and various by-ways and edifices. The fire' burnt their mansions by thousands; and mountain-like superstructures toppled headiong to the earth. 1. Hutabhuk-lit. eater of sacrificial offspring's, a designation of fire. 2. According to the commentator this refers to the fire lighted by the monkeys. I differ. There burnt aguru, and sweet sandal, and pearls, and sheeny gems, and diamonds and corals. There burnt linen and fine silk and avikas and various kinds of woollen cloths; and vessels of gold, and weapons; divers kinds of furniture, trappings and omaments of steeds; cords for tying elephants; burnished ornaments for cars; armour of warriors; and hides of horses and elephants. Swords and bows and bow-strings and arrows and tomaras' and ankusas and darts. And blankets and chowris and tiger-skins and musk and other things. And pearls and excellent gems; and edifices all around. And there the fire burn heap of various kinds of arms. 1. An Iron club. 2. The hook used to drive an elephant. Then the fire burnt various kinds of curious structures, and the dwellings of Räkşasas and all house-holders. And there the fire flaming up again and again burnt down by hundreds and thousands the houses of the denizons of Lanka, clad in curious golden mail; and wearing wreaths and ornaments and attires; having their eyes wildly moving in intoxication; reeling in drink; those whose paramours were dressed in flowing apparels; or those wroth with their foes; or bearing maces and darts and swords in their hands; or engaged in eating or drinking; or asleep with their beloved on costly couches; or who, agitated with fright, were hastily going taking their sons with them. That fire burnt down firm-based rich dwellings furnished with innumerable apartments, and garnished with golden Moons and crescents, and mansions having graceful crests; and variegated windows and daises raised there, embellished with rubies and lapises, and seeming to touch the Sun; and piles resembling mountains in grandeur, and resonant with the cries of Krauñas and peacocks and the tinklings of omaments. The flaming gateways all round appeared like clouds in the rainy season lighted up by lightning, or like the peaks of a mighty mountain ablaze with forest-conflagration. And superb damsels asleep in lofty edifices, being burnt, cast away their ornaments and shrieked bitterly saying "Alas! Woe is me". * Vimäna, according to Rämānuja, is a sevenstoried edifice. Consumed by the fire, buildings began to drop down like the summits of a mighty mountain smite with the thunder-bolt of the thunderer. And those burning, appeared from a distance like the peaks of Himalaya aglow. In consequence of those tops of the edifices burning and of the living flames, that night Lankā looked as if swarming with flowering Kinsukas. With elephant-riders, and elephants, and steeds let loose, Lankä appeared like the Ocean at the hour of Universal tumbling, with its ferocious aquatic animals whirling in wild chaos. Sometimes, an elephant seeing a steed let loose, was flying away in fear, and sometimes a horse seeing a frightened elephant, was stopping, himself seized with fear. On Larkā burning, the mighty main with the reflection (of the conflagration) looked like an ocean of red waters. In a short time that city set on fire by the monkeys, looked like the earth glowing at the time of the Universal dissolution. The cries of the females amidst the drift of smoke, heated by the flames, could be heard from an hundred Yojanas. As Rākşasas having their bodies burnt came out of houses, monkeys eager for encounter on a sudden sprung upon them. The shouts of the monkeys and the cries of the Rākşasas made the ten cardinal quarters and the ocean and the Earth resound. On those high-souled ones both Rāma and Lakşmaņa-having been cured of their wounds, possessing themselves in calmness, took up their excellent bows. Rāma drew that best of bows. And thereat there was heard a tremendous twang striking terror into the Rákşasas, And drawing his redoubtable bow, Rāma appeared like the reverend enraged Bhava, drawing his bow having sounds, and instinct with Brahma energy. The twang of Rama's bow, drowning the roars of both the monkeys and die Rákşasas: was alone heard. The ululations of the monkeys and the cries of the Raksasas and the rattle of Rama's bowthese three filled the ten cardinal quarters. With the shafts discharged from his bow, the gieway of the city resembling the summit of 1. islās. was crushed in pieces, scattered around cr the ground. See cs Rāma's shafts in cars and dwellings, the preparations for conflict were pushed on with great viour. An' in consequence of the foremost Rakşasas preparing for fight, and emitting roars, that night appeared like the Fatal Night itself. The foremost monkeys were directed by the high-souled Sugriva, saying, “You monkeys, do you fight, approaching the gate lying at hand. But he that fly from his ranks, should be slain by main force. As the principal monkeys stationed themselves at the gate, equipped with fire-brands, wrath took possession of Rävana. And as he yawned, the wind (blowing) from his mouth), filled the ten cardinal regions; and his wrath resembled that appearing in the person of Rudra. And wrought up with a mighty rage, he sent forth Kumbha and Nikumbha-both sons of Kumbhakarna-in company with innumerable Raksasas. In accordance with Ravana's command, Yupaksa and Sonitaksa, and Prajarigha, and Kampana went with Kumbhakarna's sons. Setting up leonine roars, he commanded all those highly powerful Raksasas, saying, "Do you go this very day for battle." Thus directed, those heroic heroic Rakşasas, equipped with flaming weapons, went out, roaring again and again. The firmament was illuminated with the splendour of the ornaments of the Rakşasas and the splendour of their persons and the fire kindled by the monkeys. There the light of the moon and that of the stars and the brilliance of their omaments, combined, lighted up the welkin. The beams of the Moon and the brilliance of the ornaments and the flaming splendour of the planets emblazoned all round the forces of the monkeys and Raksasas. The light of half-burnt houses, again, falling on the restless ripples of the sea, made it wear an extremely beautiful aspect. Those dreadful Rākşasa hosts, possessed of dreadful prowess and energy, were seen-with ensigns and banners; excellent swords and parasvadhas,* (A platoon consisting of one chariot, one elephant, three horse and five foot.) terrific steeds and cars and elephants rife with paths,* (A kind of sword.) and flaming darts and clubs and scimitars and präsas and tomaras and bows; bearing blazing prāsas; ringing with the tinklings of hundreds of balls; with their arms encased in golden networks; flourishing axes; whirling their mighty weapons, fixing shafts on their bows; making the air swoon away with the perfumes of their wreaths; extremely terrific; swarming with heroes; sending out sounds like those of the sea. Seeing the army of the Räkşasas incapable of being coped with advance, the monkey-forces began to move and send up loud cheers. Thereat that array of Räkşasas vehemently sprang forward before the force of the foe, like to insects plunging into a flame. And whirling with their arms bludgeons and asanis, that army of Rakşasas appeared exceedingly grand. The monkeys, eager for encounter, darted forward like maniacs, and began to despatch the night-rangers with rocks and trees and clenched fist. Rākşasas possessed of dreadful prowess with whetted arrows swiftly cut off the heads of falling monkeys. The Rākşasas ranged there, with their ears torn with teeth, or their heads broken by blows, or their limbs crushed with the discharge of crags. In the same way other grim-visaged nightrangers slew with sharpened swords the foremost of monkeys on all sides. And one about to slay another was himself slain by the latter; and one, about to bring another down, was himself brought down (by his adversary, and one that was railing at another, was in turn rebuked by his enemy; and one who was going to bite his foe, was himself bitten by him. One was crying 'Give.'* and his adversary anon give; and another, again said, I will give. Why put yourself to trouble? Stay. *Battle. Thus there did they accost each other. And there was waged a terrific encounter between the monkeys and the Rākşasas, in which arms lay scattered about; and armour and weapons strewn around; and mighty prāsas' were upraised; and which was fought with blows and darts and swords and Kuntalas? And in that conflict the Rākşasas slaughtered monkeys by tens and sevens. 1. A bearded dart. 2. What could this be like? The commentator is mute. Wilson has Kuntalik-butter-knife or scoop. Kuntala may, however, mean a plough. Then the monkeys hemmed in the Rākşasaforces, with their apparels falling off and with their mail and standards strewn around. swords and Kuntalas? And in that conflict the Rākşasas slaughtered monkeys by tens and sevens. 1. A bearded dart. 2. What could this be like? The commentator is mute. Wilson has Kuntalik-butter-knife or scoop. Kuntala may, however, mean a plough. Then the monkeys hemmed in the Rākşasaforces, with their apparels falling off and with their mail and standards strewn around.