Mahodara being thus slain by Sugrīva, the highly powerful Mahāpäráva, having his eyes reddened with ire, looked towards him. The Rākşasa, with his weapons assailed the dreadful army of Angada as well as the leading monkeys. The Rākşasa severed the heads from the bodies of the monkeys like to the wind throwing away the fruits from trees. were He cut off, with his arrows, the arms of some and some were deprived of their sides. The monkeys thus assailed by Mahāpārsva with a shower of shafts. All the monkeys were thus stricken with grief and rendered senseless. Hearing of the anxiety of his own army thus assailed by the Raksasa, angada, gifted with great vehemence, taking his parigha made of iron and resembling the rays of the sun, dashed on like the rising deep during the lunar half of a month. And that foremost of monkeys encountered Mahāpārsva, who thus struck by the monkeys became insensible with his charioteer and fell down on the earth. Thereupon leaped on the battle-field the ! highly powerful and effulgent lord of bears, having the hue of red collyrium, with his army resembling the cloud. And excited with ire, he, taking up a huge crag resembling the summit of a mountain, speedily struck down his horses and broke down his car. And regaining his senses in a moment the highly powerful Mahāpārsva, again assailed Angada with many arrows. He struck Jambavan, the lord of bears, on his breast with three-arrows and assailed Gavākṣa with many shafts. And beholding Jämbavān and Gavākṣa overwhelmed with arrows, Angada, beside himself with ire, took up a dreadful parigha. Holding with two hands that parigha made of iron and bright like the rays of the sun, Angada, the son of Vāli, with his eyes reddened in wrath, hurled it at Mahāpārsva who was stationed at a distance, to slay him. Being hurled by the highly powerful (Angada) the parigha, struck down from his hands the bow with arrows and the helmet of the Rākşasa. Approaching him vehemently, Vali's son, gifted with great prowess, in anger struck him, with clenched fist, on his ears having excellent kundalas. Thereupon Mahāpārsva gifted with great vehemence and effulgence, highly angered, took up in his hands a huge paraśvadha, sharpened with oil, bright and hard as iron and discharged it at Vali's son, and struck him therewith on his left shoulder. And Angada baffled that parasvadha. Thereupon that hero, powerful like his own father, clenching his fist, hard as thunderbolt and resembling even Indra's asani, dealt it, in great anger, upon the Raksasa's breast. And being struck with that fist the Rākşasa' breast was shattered and he fell down on earth. He falling down on earth slain, his soldiers were greatly sorry and Răvaņa attained to an excess of ire in the conflict. The noise set up by the delighted monkeys like to a dreadful leonine roar, as if rending the city of Lankā abounding in edifices and gates, resembled the great roar of the celestials along with Indra. Hearing the noise of the celestials and monkeys, the lord of Räkşasas, the enemy of the gods, in great anger, again proceeded towards the battle field.