Seeing Sītā overwhelmed with grief, a Rākşasi, named Saramā, who was the beloved companion (of Sītā), drew near to his dear (friend), Vaidehi. The mild-speeched Saramă comforted the exceedingly distressed Sītā, who had been bereft of her senses by the lord of Rākşasas. Sītā, who was protected there (by Saramā), had been made a friend by her. And, protecting her at the command of Rāvana, that kind-hearted companion, firm in vows, saw Sītā, deprived of her consciousness. And she' comforted with a friend's affection that one of fair vows, who was rolling in the dust and rising up from it like a mare. 1. Saramă. 2. The commentator intelligently remarks. As a mare does, to remove fatigue. Having come to the solitary wood for protecting you, I, renouncing all fear of Ravana, have, remaining hid, heard everything that he addressed to you, as well as what you had replied to him. For you, O you of expansive eyes, I have no fear of Rāvana. And, O Maithili, I, coming out, have also learnt well as to why the lord of Rākṣasas has gone out hence hurriedly. Rāma, acquainted with self, is incapable of being surprised in sleep; nor does the slaying of that tiger-like one commend itself to me as probable. The monkeys fighting with trees, well protected by Rāghava, like the gods protected by the foremost of the celestials, are incapable of being slain. And, possessed of arms long and rounded; graceful, broad-breasted; powerful; accoutred with the bow; and mailed; righteous; and famous over the earth; endowed with energy; and along with his brother, Lakşmaņa, ever protecting himself and others; of noble descent; and versed in polity; the destroyer of the hostile ranks; and of inconceivable strength and manhood, the graceful Răghava, O Sītā, slayer of foes, is not slain. This illusion has been spread around you by that fierce, illusion-creating one, whose mind over runs upon improper acts and who oppose himself to all creatures. All your sorrow has departed, and your good day has dawned. Certainly Laksmi seek you. And, O lady, hearken to what is dear to you! Having crossed over the ocean, along with the monkey-host, Rāma has encamped himself on the southern shore of the sea. By me has been seen the complete Kākutstha along with Lakşmaņa, accompanied by the forces, stationed on the marge of the main, protected (by his native might). Those Rākşasas of fleet vigour who had been despatched by this one, have brought the news that Rāghava has crossed. And, O large-eyed lady, having learnt this news, Rāvaņa-lord of Rākşasas, is consulting with all his counsellors. As the Rākşasī, Saramā, was relating this to Sita, she heard the leonine roars of the army, emitted with the greatest energy. Hearing the mighty sounds of kettledrums produced by sticks struck (thereon), the honeytongued Saramā spoke thus to Sītā. These dreadful sounds of the kettledrum, O mother, call to arms. And hark to the solemn notes of the kettledrums, resembling the rumbling of clouds! The mad elephants are caparisoned and the car-horses are yoked; and thousands of warriors) are seen, mounted on steeds, with bearded darts in their hands. As waters fill up the ocean, mailed warriors of wonderful forms, vehement and roaring, by thousands rush out on all aides and fill the highways. And mark the splendour spread around by the polished arins and bucklers and mail, and by the cars, horses and elephants of the followers of the Rākşasa-chief, consisting of many hues shooting up, like to the appearance of a fire in summer, burning a forest, and also mark the excitement of the high-spirited and fast-coursing Raksasa! * *This line of verse defies all attempts to make it fall into syntactical order with the rest of the sentence. It is a hideous hiatus in the passage. And fierce is the excitement of these Raksasas— followers of the Raksasa-cheif, with their hands bearing upraised arms, capable of making people's hair stand on end. The sorrow removing Sree espouse you, and the fear of the Rākşasa is come. As Vasava did to the Daityas, the lotus-eyed Rāma, your lord-of controlled anger, and of inconceivable prowess, slaying Rävaņa in battle and thus delivering you, shall approach you. And, as Väsava put forth his prowess among his foes, in company with the foe-destroying Visnu, your lord, along with Laksmana, shall display his prowess among the Rākşasa. On the enemy having fallen, I shall behold you, devoted to your lord, with your desire attained, soon lying on the lap of Rama. And, O Janaki, embracing (your lord) you shall shed tears of joy on his mighty breast. O Sitä, soon shall the highly powerful Răma loosen this braid of your reaching to your hips, which you have been wearing for many a month. O exalted one, seeing his face like the full moon risen, you shall shed water begot of ruth, even as a she-serpent casts off her slough. O Mithila's daughter, speedily slaying Ravana in battle, that one worthy of happiness shall reap felicity in the company of you, his beloved. And, loved by the high-souled Rama, you, shall be happy, even as the Earth furnished with crops brought forth by plenteous showers. Do you, O exalted one, take refuge with him, who, going round the foremost of mountains, speedily assume a steed-like circular movement; for even the maker of day is the source of people's joy and grief.