Having in the conflict slain that conqueror of enemies, Lakşmaņa graced with auspicious marks, with his body bathed in blood, experienced delight. Then supporting himself on Vibhīşana and Hanuman, the exceedingly powerful Lakşmaņa endowed with prowess, taking Jambavan, Hanuman and all the monkeys with him, speedily went to the place where Sugrīva and Raghava were. Then going round Rāma and saluted him, Sumitra's son stood before his brother, like Indra's brother staying before Sakra. And approaching with a look which of itself was significant,* the heroic Vibhīşaņa described to the high-souled Räghava the dreadful destruction of Indrajit. *i.e. of the destruction of Indrajit. Then the delighted Vibhişaņa related to Rāma how the high-souled Lakşmaņa had cut off the head of Ravana's son. As soon as that exceedingly powerful one heard of the destruction of Indrajit by Lakşmana, he experienced a huge accession of joy, and thus delivered himself. Excellent, O Laksmana! Pleased am I (with you). You have performed a difficult feat. The son of Rävana having been slain, know for certain that we have been victorious. Then smelling the head of the bashful Laks miana, enhancer of fame, (Rāma) endowed with prowess, from affection forcibly hugged him into his lap. And making him seat on his lap, and overpowering him with embraces,* (Rama) again and again tenderly eyed his brother, Lakş imana. * Aapiritam-fac) pained. Rāmānaya says this epithet refers to Laksmana's having been wounded in the encounter. I differ from him. And moved with grief, that best of persons, Rama, smelling head of Laksmana, wounded with darts and having his person pierced (with salms, sighing and breathing hard-and nursing ms body with his hand, addressed Laksmana, soothing him. To-day his son having been slain, I deem Råvaņa himself as slain in fight. On that wickedminded enemy of mine having been destroyed, I am viciorious (in encounter). By luck, o hero, have you in conflict suvered the right arm of the fell Rävana. Verily he (Indrajit) was his stay. Both Vibhīşaņa and Hanumān have done mighty deeds in battle. In three days and nights, (my enemy) has been brought down. To-day have I been made foeless. Now Rāvana will for certain march forth, backed by a mighty phalanx. Rāvana will for certain sally out, hearing his son brought down. That unconquerable lord of Rakşasas, aggrieved for the destruction of his son, marching out, shall I slay, environed with a mighty force. O Lakşmaņa, the conqueror of Sakra having in battle been slain by you-who are my lord-Sītā and the entire) earth are not incapable of being obtained by me. Having thus soothed and embraced his brother, Raghu's son Rama highly rejoiced calling Suşeņa said. Do you so act that this highly wise son of Sumitrā, devoted to his friends, may be healed and be eased. Do you without delay heal Sumitra's son, attached to his friends, of his wounds. And do you also carefully relieve all those heroes in the army of bears and monkeys fighting with trees, as well as others, who have been wounded and have got sores (in consequence). Thus addressed by Rāma, the high-souled monkey-leader administered a potent medicine to the nose of Laksmana. And smelling the same, he got healed; he was relieved of his pain and his outgoing vitality was shut up. At the mandate of Rāghava he likewise treated his friends headed by Vibhișaņa and all the principal monkeys. And restored to his natural condition, Sumitrā's son, healed, and with his exhaustion removed, and his suffering gone off in a moment, experienced exhilaration of spirits. Rāma and the monkey-king and Vibhīşaņa! and the powerful lord of bears along with their hosts, seeing Sumitrā's son risen hale, rejoiced greatly in delight. The high-souled son of Dasaratha honoured exceedingly that exceedingly hard feat of Laks amana; and the monkey-king, hearing that the conqueror of Sakra had fallen in fight, was filled with joy.