On that furious and destructive carnage proceeding, Angada eager for encounter, approached the heroic Kampana. Thereat, challenging Angada in wrath, he assailed him with impetuosity. And Kampana dealt a blow to Angada with his mace; and thereat, wounded with it, he reeled. Then regaining his senses, that energetic one hurled a mountain-top. Borne down by the blow, Kampana dropped down to the earth. Seeing Kampana slain in the conflict, ſoņitākṣa mounted on a car, intrepidity rushed against Angada. He then impetuously pierced Angada with sharpened shafts, keen and capable of cleaving the body and resembling the fatal fire itself in appearance, with Kșuras' and Kșurapras? and Näräcas and Vatsadantas* and Silīmukhas and Karmis and Salyas and Vipathas, and countless (other) whetted arrows. And the powerful son of Vāli, Angada endowed with prowess having his person pierced with arrows suddenly smashed (his adversary's) car and arrows and dreadful bow. 1. Arrows having razor-like edges. 2. Crescent-shaped shafts. 3. Arrows made entirely of iron. 4. Arrows resembling the teeth of calves. 5. Arrows resembling the feathers of the Kanka. 6. Arrow furnished with two sides resembling cars. 7. Arrow with short leads. 8. Arrows resembling the tops of KaravīrasTirtha. Thereat, Šoņitākṣa swiftly took up his sword and shield; and without reflecting for a moment, that vigorous one sprang forward. The powerful Angada speedily bounding up, seized his enemy's sword and holding the same with his hands shouted. Then hitting at (Akampana's) shoulder-blade, that powerful monkey-Angada hewed him in twain, his blow going obliquely down like the sacred thread. Taking that terrific sword, and shouting again and again, in the field, Valr's son rushed against other enemies. Then strong and heroic Yüpākṣa accompanied by Prajangha, mounted on a car, wrathfully approached the mighty son of Vali. Taking an iron mace, that hero, Sonitaksa, adorned with a golden Angada attaining a little respite, advanced against Angada. That redoubtable hero, the powerful Prajangha, also accompanied by Yüpākşa, fired with wrath, equipped with a mace, advanced towards the son of Vāli endowed with exceeding prowess. And placed between those two Soņitākşa and Prajangha-that foremost of monkeys appeared like the full moon placed between the Visākhās.* *The asterisks so named Mainda and Dvivida defending Angada remained beside him, desirous of witnessing the encounter between those two (combatants). And fired with fury, those huge-bodied Räkş asas endowed with dreadful prowess, equipped with swords and shafts and maces, being on their guard, fell upon the monkeys. The encounter that took place between those three lords of monkeys combined (on one side), and the three redoubtable Rākşasas (on the other), was dreadful and capable of making people's down stand on end. They, taking up trees, hurled them in the conflict (against their antagonists); and the powerful Prājantha resisted all those with his swords. And (the monkeys) in the contest showered rocks and trees on the cars (of their) enemies; and the exceedingly strong Yūpākşa cut them off with vollies of arrows. The powerful Sonitaksa, endowed with prowess, with his mace severed in the middle the trees which Dvivida and Mainda had uprooted and discharged. And summoning speed, Prajangha darted against Väli's son, upraising a huge scimitar capable of piercing into the vitals of trees. Seeing him approach, that lord of monkeys possessed of exceeding strength and great prowess struck him with an Aśvakarņa tree; and with a blow smote his antagonist on his arm holding a nistringa. Seeing the sword resembling a mace dropped to the earth, that exceedingly mighty one clenched his fist into a blow like to the levin; and that one, endowed with wondrous energy, smote in the forehead that foremost of monkeys possessed of redoubtable prowess. And thereat he for a moment was staggered. Then recovering his senses, the energetic and powerful son of Vālī by means of his clenched fist severed Prajangha's head from his body. Thereat Yüpākşa, seeing his uncle slain in battle, with his eyes filled with tears, finding his shafts exhausted, swiftly descended from his car and took a sword. Finding Yūpākṣa charge, Dvivida, waxing wroth, speedily smote him on the breast; and that powerful one also seized him. And finding his brother taken, the highly energetic Soạitākṣa then dealt the mighty Dvivida a blow in the chest. And overcome by that blow, that one endowed with great sirength, shook; and Dvivida seized his antagonist's upraised mace. In the meanwhile Mainda came to the side of Dvivida. And śoṇitākṣa and Yüpākşa, bestirring themselves, began to vehemently and forcibly drag and pull those (two) monkeys. And Dvivida with his nail tore ſoņitākşa's face; and that powerful one violently bringing him down to the earth, pressed him with might and main. And fired with wrath, Mainda-foremost of monkeys-grasped Yupaksa with his arms; and that one dropt down dead on the earth. Thereupon the force of the lord of the Rāks asas, having its foremost heroes slain, and aggrieved thereat, went to where Kumbhakarma's son was. Then cheering up the flying forces, that best (of Raksas)-the energetic Kumbha-seeing that Rakşasa host with its mighty herocs slain by highly powerful monkey crowned with success, began to perform difficult feats in the encounter. And heedfully taking his bow, that first of bowmen discharged shafts resembling venomous serpents capable of piercing the body. And his excellent bow with shafts shone resplendent like the very bow of Indra himself affluent with the splendour of Airāvata and lightning. Then drawing his bow to its utmost bent, he hit Dvivida with a feathered shaft knobbed with gold. Suddenly wounded with it, that best of monkeys having the splendour of Trikūța, fell down senseless to the earth, stretching his legs wide. Mainda, seeing his brother, broken in mighty encounter, furiously rushed forward, taking a gigantic crag; and that one possessed of great strength, hurled it at the Raksasa. And thereat Kumbha "severed that crag with five shafts discharged (from his bow). Then aiming other fair-headed arrows resembling venomous snakes, that exceedingly energetic one smote Dvivida's elder brother in the chest. And struck (with those arrows), that leader of monkey-bands, Mainda, with his marrow pierced therewith, fell down to the earth, deprived of his senses. Angada seeing his uncles* endowed with exceeding prowess, overpowered, darted vehemently at Kumbha staying with bow upraised. *Maternal uncles. As he descended, Kumbha pierced him with five shafts; and as one pierce an elephant with tomaras, he also pierced (Angada) with three other arrows. And the powerful Kumbha pierced Angada with a great many arrows, sharppointed, whetted, keen and ornamented with gold. Vāli's son Angada albeit pierced all over in his person, did not shake; and he kept showering on his* head stones and trees. And the graceful son of Kumbhakarņa cut off and cleft all those (stone and trees) discharged by Valr's son. *Kumbha's. Seeing him spring up, Kumbha pierced that monkey-leader on the ground with shafts, even as one assail an elephant with fire-brands. And blood gushed out of his closed eyes. And then covering his eyes with his hand, Angada with another took a Sala that was hard by. And placing on his breast the Sala furnished with shoulders, and pulling its branches and bending its top, he cleared it of its foliage, in that mighty encounter. Then in the sight of all the Rākşasas he violently discharged that tree resembling the very banner of Indra and appearing like Mandara itself. Thereat he* severed it with seven sharp shafts capable of piercing the body. And Angada experienced a sharp pang and fell down deprived of his senses. *Kumbha. Seeing the invincible Angada down like ebbing sea, the foremost monkeys informed Raghava of it. Rama, hearing that Vali's son had come to grief in terrific fight, directed the principal monkeys, headed by Jambavan. And hearing Rama's command, the monkeys, fired with wrath, charged Kumbha, staying with his bow upraised. Those powerful monkeys, with their eyes crimsoned with choler and bearing rocks and trees in their hands, were engaged in defending Angada. Jāmbavān and Suşeņa and the monkey, Vegadarsi, wrought with wrath, darted against that hero-son to Kumbhakarma. Seeing them spring forward; he covered up those exceedingly mighty lords of monkey, with showers of shafts, even as a crag obstruct the course of a current. Even the great deep cannot see his own shores, those high-souled lord of monkeys, coming within the range of his arrows, could not even see. Seeing those monkeys sore distressed by the shafts, the king of the monkeys, Sugrīva, in that conflict taking his brother's son on his back, rushed against the son of Kumbhakarna, even as a powerful lion rush at an elephant ranging on the slopes of a mountain. That mighty monkey, uprooting many an asvakarna and other mighty trees of various kinds, discharged them (at the foe). By means of his sharp arrows the graceful son of Kumbhakarņa cut off that down-pour of trees covering the welkin; and incapable of being resisted. And being beffled those trees looked like sataghnis. Seeing that shower of trees riven by Kumbha, the graceful lord of the monkeys endowed with exceeding strength and prowess, did not feel any mortification. Suddenly attacked, he bearing those arrows, seized Kumbha's bow resembling in resplendence the very bow of Indra. And swiftly bounding up and performing that feat difficult of being achieved, he, exceedingly enraged, addressed Kumbha resembling an elephant shorn of his tusks, saying. O elder brother of Nikumbha, marvellous are your might and the force of yourself as well as the modesty and prowess that are your and Ravana's. And, o you equal to Prahrada or Vall or the slayer of Vặtra or Varuņa or Kuvera! You alone walk in the wake of you yet mightier father. As mental anguish does not dog one that has controlled his senses, the celestials cannot cope in conflict with you alone, O repressor of foes, O of mighty arms, bearing your dart in your hand. O you of high intelligence, put forth your prowess! and do you also witness my work. It is only by virtue of the boon he has received, that your uncle can bear the deities and the Dānavas. But Kumbhakarņa cop with the immortals and Asuras by means of his native might. And in the bow equal to Indrajit himself and in power equal to Rāvana, you now in might and energy are the foremost of Räkşasas. Today let all creatures witness the mighty and wonderful encounter in conflict between you and me, like to the meeting of Śakra and Sambara. Unparalleled is the feat you have performed; and you have displayed your skill in weapons. And heroic monkeys endowed with dreadful vigour, have been brought down by you. O hero it is only because of the apprehension* of censure of the people that I do not slay you who are fatigued in consequence of the acts that you have performed. And reposing from fight, do you see my strength! *i.e. Lest people should censure me, saying, Sugrīva slew Kumbha when he was fatigued in fight. Being thus honoured (by Sugrīva) with fair speech, (Kumbha) flamed up like a flame into which oblations have been poured. Then Kumbha seized Sugriva by the arms. And like two elephants in rut, they sighing momentarily, fastened on each other's person, and possessed each other, and from fatigue emitting from their mouth flames mixed with vapour. And with the stamping of their feet, the earth was rent into rivers, and the main was waxed, with its billows surging furiously. Then Sugrīva lifting up Kumbha clean, violently plunged him into the salt wash, making his eyes acquainted with the locality of the deep. And in consequence of Kumbha's plunge, the waters heaving up, rolled on all sides like the Vindhya or Mandara. Then springing up, and bringing Sugriva down, Kumbha, transported with wrath dealt a blow on his chest, like to the levin. Thereat his skin was rent, and blood began to gush out, and the impetus of that blow broke Sugriva's bones. The vehemence (of the blow) caused a great fire to blaze up at that spot, even as the thunderbolt smiting the mountain Meru, make place blazed. The mighty Sugrīva foremost of monkeys-sorely handled by him, fastened his fingers into a box resembling the thunder-bolt, and furnished with all the effulgence of the solar disc having a thousand rays. Then that powerful one made that blow descend right on on Kumbha's breast. And agonised with that stroke, Kumbha reft of his senses, dropped like to a fire that has lost its brightness. And overpowered by that blow, the Rākṣasa anon dropped down, like to the bright Lohitānga dropping from the firmament urged on by Destiny. The aspect of the falling Kumbha with his breast broken by the blow, appeared like that of the Sun routed by Rudra. On his being slain, in encounter, by the foremost of monkeys endowed with terrific strength, the earth with her hills and woods, shook; and a mighty fear took possession of the Raksasas.