Having desisted on hearing the words of Angada those huge-bodied ones, regaining calmness, became (again) intent on fight. Attaining energy at the exhortation (of Angada), and summoning up their prowess, they stayed in the field agreeable to the words of the powerful Angada. Inspired with spirits, the monkeys, determined to face their fate, rushed into the conflict, and, casting away all care for their lives, entered into a furious fight (with the foe) And speedily upraising trees and gigantic crags, the huge-bodied monkeys charged Kumbhakarņa. Thereat the mighty Kumbhakarņa possessed of a prodigious person waxing wroth taking up his mace let the same alight on the enemies. Attacked by Kumbhakarma, seven, eight hundreds and thousands of monkeys measure their lengths on the earth. Casting about his arms, he rush on, devouring sixteen, eight, ten, twenty or thirty. And he devoured (the monkeys) like Garuda swallowing up serpents. Then cheered up with much ado, the monkeys meeting together, and taking trees and rocks in their hands, stood their ground in the van of battle. Then uprooting a crag, Dvivide-foremost of monkeys-resembling an extended mass of clouds rushed against (Kumbhakarņa) having the aspect of a mountain-summit. And uprooting it, the monkey hurled it at Kumbhakarņa. And without descending on him, the crag fell down amidst the army, and smashed steeds and elephants and cans and choice chargers. Then taking another mountain top, Dvivida hurled it at other Rākşas. And smite with the impetus of the peak, Kumbhakarna had his chargers and his charioteers slain; and the terrific field overflowed with the blood of Rākşas. And Räksasa car-warriors by means of arrows resembling the Destroyer himself, cut off the heads of the foremost monkeys who had been setting up roars. The high-souled monkeys also, uprooting gaints trees, destroyed cars and horses and elephants and camels and Raksasas And remaining in the sky, Hanumān discharged at Kumbhakarņa's head mountainpeaks and rocks and various trees. And all those mountain-tops he cut off with his dart; and the mighty Kumbhakarņa also baffled the shower of trees. Then grasping his sharpened spear, Kumbhakarņa darted against that terrific array of monkeys. And as he charged them, Hanuman armed with a mountain-peak, stood before him. Waxing enraged (Hanuman) vehemently smote Kumbhakarņa with a gigantic crag. And overpowered by that, Kumbhakarna experienced great torments, and his body was covered with fat and blood. Then as Guha had pierced Krauñca with his fierce dart, Kumbhakarna the mountain-like smote the Wind-god's son in the chest with his dart resembling lightning or like a glowing mountain-summit. And having his mighty chest pierced in the mighty encounter, Hanumān, overwhelmed, and vomiting blood-transported with wrath, set up roars resembling the roaring of the clouds at the universal disruption. Then, beholding him in torments, Raksasas suddenly rejoiced, emitted shouts; and the monkeys aggrieved and overcome with fright, began to fly Kumbhakarna in battle. Then the powerful Nīla, arranging his forces, discharged a mountain-peak at the intelligent Kumbhakarma. Seeing it descend, he dealt it a blow; and struck by the blow, the mountain-top was shattered in pieces; and dropped to the earth glowing and shooting living flames. Then Rşabha and Sarabha and Nīla and Gavākṣa and Gandhamādana, these five terrific monkeys, rushed against Kumbhakarņa. And in the encounter those mighty monkeys began to sorely assail the huge-bodied Kumbhakarma with crags and trees and slaps and kicks and blows. But those blows seemed to him like touches* and did not at all pain him. Then he fastened the vehement Rşabha with his arms. *Like the feel, remarks Rāmánuja, of wreaths, unguents, etc. blows Agonised on being fastened with Kumbhakarma's arms, that foremost of monkeys, the dreadful Rşabha, fell down to the earth, vomiting blood by his mouth. Then the enemy of Indra smite, Sarabha with blow, and Nila, in the conflict with his thigh, struck a slap at Gavākṣa. Then he speedily hit by his feet with wrath Gandhamadana. Suffering great . pain in consequence of the (dealt by Kumbhakarņa those monkeys), deprived of their senses and bathed in blood, dropped down to the earth like Kinśukas that have been cut down. On those high-souled and mighty monkeys falling down, thousands of monkeys rushed at Kumbhakarna. Ascending a mountain-summit, those foremost of monkeys, possessed of the splendour of a mountain-peak, sprang upon him and tore him with their teeth. And those foremost of monkeys attacked the long-armed Kumbhakarma with their claws and teeth and blows and arms. Then with thousands of monkeys on him that extraordinary onethat fearful Raksasa-resembling a hill, looked like a mountain with trees on it. Like Garuda eating up serpents, that wondours strong one, wrought up with rage, devoured those monkeys, seizing them with his arms. And cast by Kumbhakarņa into his mouth resembling the nether regions the monkeys emerged from his nose and ears. And eating up the monkeys, that foremost of Raksasas resembling a hill, growing worth, and fired with rage, began to break the monkeys down. And transported with passion, that Raksasa, making the earth miry with flesh and blood, spread among the monkey-ranks like to the fire at the time of the Universal dissolution. In that encounter, Kumbhakarņa armed with his dart in his hand, resembled the thunderhanded ſakra, or the noose-handed Destroyer himself. As a conflagration burn up a withered forest in the summer, Kumbhakarna burnt that host of the monkeys. Thus beaten (by Kumbhakarna), those monkeys, with their ranks destroyed, the monkeys, racked with anxiety, began to cry in unnatural tones. Having innumerable monkeys slain by Kumbhakarņa, the monkeys, aggrieved and their hearts riven with sorrow, sought the shelter of Raghava. Seeing the monkeys broken in the terrific encounter, the son of the thunder-handed, darted impetuously against Kumbhakarņa. Taking up a mighty crag, he momentarily setting up roars, and thereby terroizing all the Raksasas-followers of Kumbhakarma, he discharged the mountain-peak right against Kumbhakarma's crown. And struck with that mountain-peak, Indra's enemy-Kumbhakarņa-flamed in fierce wrath. And the loud-throated Kumbhakarņa, terrifying all the monkeys vehemently darted against the enraged son of Vāli; and then that wondrous strong one hurled his dart at Angada. As the dart descended, that foremost of monkeys endowed with strength. and skilled in battle, evaded the weapon from his fleetness. up Then swiftly springing up, the slapped (his antagonist) in the chest. And thereat that one resembling a hill, lost his senses. Recovering his senses, that exceedingly strong Räksasa, dealt a blow at Angada; and the latter dropped down senseless. On that powerful monkey falling down insensible, Kumbhakarma, taking his dart, rushed against Sugriva. Seeing the exceeding stout Kumbhakarņa approach, the heroic king of monkeys-Sugriva-sprang up; and taking a mountain-top that one possessed of great strength darted against the mighty Kumbhakarņa. Seeing that monkey, Kumbhakarņa, stretching his limbs, stood before the lord of monkeys. Seeing Kumbhakarņa, with his body laved in the blood of monkeys; and eating up mighty monkeys, Sugriva addressed him, saying. You have felled heroes done deeds difficult of being performed, and have devoured the warriors; and you have thus attained renown. But let go now the monkey-army. What shall you do with the ignoble? Do you, O Raksasa bear the descent of this mountain. Hearing those words of the monkey-king instinct with strength and fortitude, that terrible Raksasa-Kumbhakarna-said. O monkey, you storm, because you are the grandson of Prajāpati and the son of the king of bears; and because as such you are endowed with fortitude and prowess. Hearing Kumbhakarna's speech, Sugrīva whirling that mountain-peak, suddeniy let it go; and with that rock resembling Vajra or the thunder-bolt, smote Kumbhakarņa in the chest. On coming in contact with his wide breast, that mountain-peak was at once shattered in shivers, And thereat the monkeys grew dispirited and the Raksas's ranks shouted in joy. And struck with the mountain-summit, Kumbhakarna was fired with wrath; and roared, expending his face. And then, whirling his dart resembling lightning displayed, he hurled it for compassing the destruction of the master of monkeys. Then swiftly bounding up, the Wind-god's son, resisting that whetted dart fastened with golden chains, with his hands violently snapped it in twain. And placing the same on his thighs, (Hanuman) snapped that ponderous and terrible dart composed of black iron, and thereat the monkeys waxed delighted. Seeing the dart severed by Hanumān, the monkey-army, growing delighted, set up countless shouts and rushed in all directions. The Rākşasa was seized with fear and turned away (from the field.) And the monkeys excessively delighted, set up loud shouts, and finding the dart broken, poured forth thanks to the Wind-god's son. Then the mighty-minded lord of Rákşasas seeing the dart thus severed, uprooted a peak from the Malaya and with it smote Sugrīva. The king of monkeys struck with the mountain-peak fell senseless upon the field, and the demons finding him in this plight shouted out in great joy. Then Kumbhakarna coming to the wonderfully mighty master of monkeys, took him up and stole away from the field, as a violent gust of wind steal away a patch of cloud. Kumbhakarņa, who resembled a mountain in loftiness of stature, while taking him away like a mass of cloud appeared like Sumeru overtopped with lofty peaks. Thus the lord of Rākşasas went on hearing thanks (from the Rākşasas) and shouts from the lords of the heavens, wondered at the capture of the foremost of monkeys. Thus taking him captive, that mighty one resembling Indra in puissance, thought his death would destroy the entire host of the opponents together with Rāghava. Then Hanumān, the shrewd son of Maruta, finding the whole host of monkeys scattered in all directions, as well as Sugrīva captured by Kumbhakarņa bethought himself—“What ought to be done by me now that our king has been captured? I will doubtless do as befits me now let me assume the shape of a mountain and kill the Raksasas. Let me kill the mighty Kumbhakarņa, splitting his body with my strong fist and thus relive the master of monkeys—thus let the whole host of monkeys become delighted. Or, even when captured by the whole host of gods or Asuras or serpents he is mighty enough to extricate himself. Meseems, the lord of monkeys struck with dart in battle by Kumbhakarna has not yet recovered his senses. Else in a moment he would do the needful for himself as well as the monkeys. Should the relief of the mighty-minded Sugrīva come from me, I should be incurring his displeasure and it would certainly lead to the loss of his reputation for ever; then I must wait a moment and see his own mighty displayed by himself when relieved. Meanwhile let me cheer up the monkey-host. Thinking thus within himself, Hanumăn, that son of Maruta, began to stay the mighty host of Monkeys. In the meantime Kumbhakarņa entered Lankā with Sugrīva trembling, being honoured with the showering of beautiful flowers from the sky, the buildings on the main roads and the town-gate. Then the mighty one (Sugriva) slowly recovered his senses with the shower of fried paddy and sweet scent and the sprinkling of water as well as with the coolness of the streets. Then that mighty-minded (Sugriva), caught in the arms of the powerful Räksasa, having with difficulty come to his senses and surveying around him the streets of the town bethought himself. When thus within the grasp of the enemy how can I take revenge? Or let me do what will be acceptable and advantageous to our army. Then advancing all on a sudden, he with his nails and sharp teeth cut off the ears and nose of that lord of the enemies of the gods and split both his sides with the blow of his feet. Kumbhakarņa losing his ears and nose and having his sides split with nails and teeth grew angry, and becoming all covered over with blood, threw Sugrīva to the ground and pressed him. Thus pressed upon the ground with main force and severely struck by the enemies of gods, he flew to the skies like a ball-rolling, and once morejoined Rāma. The mighty Kumbhakarna having lost his nose and ears and drenched in blood, appeared like a mountain covered all over with streamlets. That huge-bodied Rākşasa, younger brother of Ravana, terrible in appearance, resembling a mass of deep black collyrium, and covered all over with blood, appeared like an evening cloud; and (once more) made up his mind to appear in battle. Sugrīva having thus escaped, that dreadful enemy of the king of the celestials in wrath again rushed to battle; and finding himself destitute of arms took up a fearful mace. Then that mighty-minded one, the Raksasa Kumbhakarņa, issuing out of the city began to devour the terrific host of monkeys, as do the mighty fire eat up people at the end of a Yuga. On entering the mighty host of monkeys, the hungry Kumbhakarna, hankering after flesh and blood, ate up the monkeys and with them, devoured many a Rākşasa and Piśāca by, mistake. Thus, as Death devour creatures at the end of a Yuga, he destroyed the mighty monkeys. He in wrath, taking up with one hand the monkeys along with the Rākṣasa, hurriedly threw them into his mouth, one, two three, or many at a time. And blood and fat flowed copiously down his body; and though struck by the monkeys with peaks of mountains, the mighty one devoured all those monkeys. The monkeys as they were being devoured, saught the shelter of Rāma. And Kumbhakarna wrought up with wrath, chased a main hundreds of monkeys, eating up seven, eight, twenty, or thirty. And fastening (the monkeys) with his arms, he, devouring them, rushed on. Resembling the Destroyer of prodigious dimensions at the end of a Yuga, that one furnished with extremely sharp teeth, having his body covered with far, marrow ind blood, and coiling entrails about his ears, began to discharge darts. At this moment, that subduer of hostile hosts and captor of the capitals of foes-Sumitra's son-Laksmana, growing enraged, entered on an encounter with the enemy. Lakşamna endued with prowess shot seven shafts at Kumbhakarma's body; and next, taking up other arrows also discharged them (at his antagonist). Thereat that Rākṣasa, smarting under the wounds inflicted by that weapon cut it off (by means of a weapon). Thereupon grew enraged the powerful Lakşmaņa-enhancer of Sumitrā's joy. Then as the wind overspread evening clouds, he with his shafts covered his shining and graceful mail entirely made of gold. And smite with arrows dight with gold, that one resembling a mass of dark-blue collyrium appeared beautiful like the ray-furnished Sun surrounded by clouds. Then that dreadful Rākṣasa voiced like masses of clouds, scornfully addressed the enhancer of Sumitra's felicity, saying. By dauntlessly fighting with me, who have without ado brought down the Destroyer himself in battle, you have established you heroism. Even by staying before me, who am equipped with arms in this encounter, and who in mighty conflict resemble Death himself, you deserve to be honoured. What shall I say of you fighting? Not even that lord-Sakra himself-mounted on his Airāvata, and engirt by all the immortals, had ever before stayed before me in the field. But today, O Sumitra's son, albeit a boy, you have gratified me with you prowess. Now taking your leave, I wish to go to Rāghava. As I have been well pleased in battle with your vigour and strength and enthusiasm, I now wish to slay Rāma alone, who being slain, all are slain. On Rāma being here slain by me, the rest remaining in the encounter-them shall I undertake with my all-crushing vigour. When that Rākşasa had spoken thus, (Lakş mana). Sumitrā's son, present in that contest, answered him laughing in terrible words, saying. That your prowess is incapable of being borne by Sakra and other celestials-is true. It is not otherwise, O hero. To-day I myself have witnessed your prowess. Yonder is Dasaratha's son Rāma, staying like a moveless mountain. Hearing this, that night-ranger Kumbhakarna, possessed of immense might, disregarding Laks maņa and passing beyond Sumitrā's son, rushed against Rāma, making the earth tremble. Thereat Dasaratha's son, Rāma, employing a terrific weapon, discharged sharpened shafts at Kumbhakarņa's breast. Thereat flames mixed with live embers shot out from the mouth of that enraged one suddenly rushing (against Răma), as Rama pierced him (with his arrows). On being frightfully pierced by Rāma's weapons, that foremost of Rākşasas roaring wrathfully darted against Rāma, and pursued the monkeys in the conflict. Those shafts adorned with peacock's plumes, alighting on (Kumbhakarna's) chest, his mace, escaping his hand, dropped to the earth; and all his (other) arms also were scattered on the ground. And when that exceedingly powerful one saw himself deprived of all his arms, he began to spread a huge havoc by means of his clenched fists and hands. With his body entirely covered with arrows and bathed in blood, he began to bleed like a hill overflowing with fountains. And fired with wrath and maddened with blood, he rushed on, devouring monkeys and Rākşasas and bears. That redoubtable one possessed of dreadful prowess, resembling the Reaper himself, whirling a mighty mountain-peak, hurled it aiming at Rāma. Thereat Bharata's elder brother, the righteous Rāma, ere that prodigious peak had alighted, severed the same by means of seven straightspeeding shafts wrought with gold. Then that crag, like a peak of mountain Meru and shining with its radiance, falling on the earth knocked down two hundred monkeys too. Intent on finishing Kumbhakarņa, the virtuous Laksmana, revolving many a means, (at last) spoke to Rāma. O king, this one know not monkeys and Rākşasas, maddened with the smell of blood, he eat up his own as well as his enemies. Now let the foremost monkeys, putting forth their best mount on him; and let the leaders of bands according to their rank, stand surrounding him. Then today this wicked-minded Rākşasa, oppressed with a mighty weight, will no longer be able to eat up any more monkeys. Hearing the words of the intelligent prince, those exceedingly powerful monkeys with alacrity ascended Kumbhakarņa. Kumbhakarna mounted by those monkeys, waxing exceedingly enraged, shook them vehemently, even as mad elephants shake the drivers thereof, Rāghava seeing them shaken, and concluding the Rāksasa to be wroth, furiously sprang forward, taking his bow. With his eyes crimsoned with choler, the gentle Rāghava, as if burning up the Räkşasa with his eyes, rushed forth vehemently, summoning up all his impetuosity, thereby cheering up the leaders of bands that had been sore tried by the might of Kumbhakarma. And equipped with an excellent quiver and arrows, Rāma checring up the monkeys sprang forward, taking a bow, resembling a serpent; terrific; having a stout string; and embellished in gold. Then surrounded by exceedingly invincible monkey-bands, that highly powerful hero, followed by Laksmana, marched forth. He saw the redoubtable and high-souled Kumbhakarņa, with his body drenched in blood, and with blood-shot eyes; rushing against all, like to an infuriated elephant of the cardinal points; pursuing the monkeys; wrought up with wrath; environed by Rakşasas; appearing like the Vindhya or the Mandara; decked with golden angadas; bleeding from his mouth; like clouds pouring showers; licking at the corners of his mouth laved with blood; smashing the monkeyranks; and resembling Yama the Destroyer. That best of persons, seeing that foremost of Rākṣasas having the splendour of a living fire, stretched his bow to its full bent. And fired with wrath at the twang of his bow, that foremost of Raksasas, inflamed with wrath, not brooking that report, rushed against Rāghava. Thereat, the gentle Rāma, endowed with arms resembling the body of the sovereign of serpents, in that encounter addressed Kumbhakarņa, like to an elevated cloud and possessed of the splendour of a mountain, as he darted forward, saying. Come, O king of Rākşasa! Let no grief be your! Here I stay, taking my bow in my hand. Know me for the destroyer of the race of the Rākṣasas—you who in a moment shall be deprived of your senses. Kowing that this was Rāma, (Kumbhakarņa) laughed in frightful accents; and then, wrought up with wrath, rushed against the monkeys in the encounter. As if riving the breasts of all the monkeys (present) the exceedingly energetic Kumbhakarņa, laughing frightfully and in a terrific manner, resembling the rumbling of clouds, addressed Rāghava, saying, “Take me not for Virādha, or for Kabandha, or yet for Khara. I am not Vāli or Mārīca. I am Kumbhakarma, that am come. Behold my dreadful and mighty mace entirely made of iron. By help of this I had formerly brought down deities and Dänavas. It does not behove you to scorn me in that my nose has been severed. I do not feel any the smallest torment in consequence of my ears and nose having been cut off. O tiger of the Ikşvāku line, O sinless one, do you witness the prowess that is in my frame. And thereafter, when you shall have displayed your prowess and power, shall I devour you up. Hearing Kumbhakarna's words, Rama discharged (at him) shafts furnished with knobs. And smite with these having the impetus of the thunder-bolt, the foe of the celestials did not feel any pain or sinart. Those shafts which had severed the seven stately salas, and, to boot, had slain Vāli—best of monkeys, they resembling the thunder itselfcould not impart any pain to Kumbhakarņa's body. Drinking up in his body those arrows resembling a shower, the enemy of the great Indra whirling his mace possessed of fierce ventinence, put out the arrowy discharge of Rāma. Then that Rākşasa whirling his mace washed in blood, capable of striking terror into the mighty hosts of gods and Dānavas, and possessed of fierce impetus, made the monkeyarmy take to its heels. Then Rāma, taking a trighty Vāyavya weapon, used the same against the night-ranger; and cut off his arm with the mace. And having his arm cut off, he set up tremendousrears. And his arm with the mace, resembling a mountain-peak, cut off by Rāghava's arrows, fell in the midst of the army of the monkey-king, and destroyed that army,* * This, or course, is not to be taken literally. Thereat the monkeys remaining after those broken and slain, dispirited, and having their limbs wounded, moving aside, looked on the dreadfiil encounter between the Rākşasa and the lord of men. Then Kumbhakarma, having his arm severed, resembling the foremost of mountains with its crest hewn away by a mighty sabre, tore up a tree with his (remaining) arm and in the conflict rushed against the monarch of men. Thereupon with a shaft plated in gold, set upon a weapon of Indra, Rāma cut off his uplifted arm with a palm tree, looking like the body of a pannaga. That arm of Kumbhakarma, being severed, dropped inert on the earth, like a hill, and crushed trees and rocks and crags and monkeys and Raksasas. Rāma, seeing that one shorn of his arms suddenly spring up, roaring, took up two whetted crescents, and in the contest cut off the legs of the Rākşasa. Thereupon those legs (of his), making all sides and quarters and rocks and caves and the mighty main and Lankā herself and the army of the monkeys and the Rākşasas, resound, dropped down (on the ground). Having his arms cut off and his legs also severed, (Kumbhakarma), opening wide his mouth resembling in sheen the mouth of a mare, roaring swiftly darted against Rāghava, even as Rāhu pursue the Moon in the firmament. Then Rama stuffed his mouth full of sharpened shafts having their feathered parts furnished with gold. And having his mouth filled, he could not articulate; but with extreme effort uttered indistinct accents and swooned away. Then Rāma took an arrow of Indra, whetted and knobbed, impetuous as the wind, resembling the effulgence of the Sun, and like to the very banner of Brahmā, or the destroyer himself; and fatal to foes. And then Rāma hurled it at the ranger of the night. Thereat that weapon hurled by Rāma's arm, resembling a smokeless flame, lighting up the ten cardinal points with its own glory, saught him that was possessed of the dreadful energy of Sakra's thunder-bolt. Therewith he (Rāma) cut off the head of the lord of Räkşasa resembling a mountain-summit, furnished with prominent teeth, from which the ear-rings had fallen off, even as formerly Purandara had cut off the head of Vſtra. Then Kumbhakarņa's huge head deprived of the ear-rings appeared like the Moon seated in the midst of the heavens) on the rising of the Sun in the morning.* *This Sloka is wanting in many texts. And struck with Rāma's arrow, the head of the Rākşasa resembling a hill fell down to the earth; and (in its fall) crushed edifices on the highways and gateways; and elevated walls also it bore down to the ground. Then that Rākşasa of gigantic proportions and vast to the view plunged into the deep; and crushing huge and mighty fishes and serpents, saught the depths. On that enemy of the Brāhmanas and gods, endowed with immense strength, having been slain in battle, the earth shook and the mountains also; and from excess of joy the celestials shouted aloud. Those deities and saints and Maharsis and Pannagas, and celestials and (other), beings and birds and Guhyakas, together with Yakşas and Gandharvas, all these who had stationed themselves in the welkin, were rejoiced at the prowess of Rama. At his (Kumbhakarna's) great destruction, the intelligent adherents of the king of Nairtas, aggrieved exceedingly, began to cry at the sight of that best of the Raghus, even as mad elephants cry at sight of a lion. Like to the Sun emerged from the mouth of Rāhu, and destroying the darkness of the celestial fields, shone Rāma in the midst of the monkey-army having slain Kumbhakarņa in battle. And countless monkeys experienced the very height of delight; and on (their) foe of terrific strength having been slain, they with countenances resembling awaked lotuses paid homage to the king's son-Rāghava—the sharer of good fortune. As the monarch of the immortals had rejoiced on slaying the mighty Asura Vrtra-Bharata's elder brother rejoiced on having in battle slain that smiter of celestial hosts, Kumbhakarna in mighty conflict, never (before) vanquished in renowned encounters.