Hearing Vibhisana's words, the son of Ravana, deprived of his senses by passion, spoke harshly, and rushed forward in wrath. With upraised weapons and scimitars, he, resembling the Destroyer himself, was mounted on a mighty car yoked with black steeds, and ornamented (on all sides). That one endowed with terrific strength upraised a huge, gigantic, strong and powerful bow, and shafts capable of destroying foes. That mighty bowman and slayer of foes-the powerful son of Ravana, adorned (with ornaments, and mounted on his chariot, saw him dight (with his own splendour). And fired wrath (Indrajit) addressed Sumitra's son, who, mounted on Hanumān's back, like to the risen sun in splendour-accompanied Vibhīşaña; and he also addressed all those principal monkeys saying, "Do you behold my prowess! today do you in the conflict bear my arrowy shower shot from my bow, incapable of being approached, and resembling the down pour in the sky. fo-day my shafts discharged from my mighty bow shall mangle your limbs, even as fire burn up a heap of cotton. To-day with your persons pierced with sharp shafts, with darts, and javelins, and Rstis and arrows, Shall I despatch you all to the abode of Yama. Who shall stay before me, fleet-handed, creating an arrows shower in the field, and roaring like to clouds? Formerly in a night-engagement, with my shafts resembling the thunder-bolt and Vajra, you two along with your foremost adherents, were rendered insensible and laid down on the earth by me. But, perhaps, you have forgotten it. As you have presented yourself for battle before me, fired with wrath and resembling a venomous serpent, it is evident you will go to the region of Yama. Hearing the vaunt of the Rākşasa-chief, Rahgu's son, inflamed with rage, with an undaunted countenance, spoke to Ravana's son. O Rākşasa, hard is the achievement of the task that you have mentioned. He that compass business by act is alone intelligent. He that compass business by act is alone intelligent. But you, O wicked-minded one, incompetent as you are to bring about your end, attaining your arduous aim by words only, deem yourself as crowned with success. That your had rendered yourself invisible in the field of conflict, was the work of a thief, and not the way of a hero. Coming within the range of your shafts, I stay here, do you display your prowess. What did you say in words.? Thus addressed, the mighty IndrajitConqueror of enemies-stretching his dreadful bow, showered sharpened shafts. And discharged by him, those exceedingly impetuous arrows, resembling the venom of serpents, hitting Laksmana, fell down like to hissing snakes. In that encounter, Rāvana's son-Indrajit, possessed of eminent impetuosity, pierced Laksmana, graced with auspicious marks, with vehement shafts. And pierced with those arrows and bathed in blood, the graceful Lakşmaņa appeared like a smokeless fire. Seeing his own feat, Indrajit, coming forward, and setting up a tremendous cry, said. O son of Sumitrā, my feathered and sharpedged shafts shot from my bow, capable of destroying life, will today finish you up. To-day, O Laksmana, swarms of jackals and hosts of hawks and vultures shall alight on you lying lifeless, having been slain by me. This very day shall the exceedingly wicked Råma behold you, who are the friend of Kș atriyas and devoted to your brother, and who ėver bear yourself ignobly, slain by me; today see you, O Sumitra's son, slain by me, with your armour fallen off your person, your bow broken, and your head severed. As Ravana's son was speaking thus harshly, Lakşmaņa conversant with the import of words, replied in a reasonable speech, saying. Leave off your strength of tongue, O you of perverse sense, O Räkşasa, O you of crooked ways! Wherefore did you speak thus? Bring all this to pass in worthy deed. Why, O Raksasa, without doing (what you say), did you simply say it? Do the deed, so that I may have regard for your utterances. Mark! without speaking anything harsh, without censuring you in the least, without venting any brag, shall, I, O cannibal, slay you. Saying this, Lakşmaņa drawing his bow to its full bent, hit at the Raksasas chest five nārācas, wondrous impetuous arrows. Those arrows resembling flaming serpents, with their velocity accelerated by the feathers (with which they were furnished), blazed on the Nairta's breast like the rays of the sun. And wounded with those shafts, Ravana's son, fired with wrath, pierced Lakşmaņa with arrows discharged (from his bow). And exceedingly dreadful was the encounter that took place between those leonine man and Rākşasa, each eager to conquer the other. Both powerful, and both endowed with strength and possessed of prowess, and both exceedingly invincible; and both having unparalleled might and energy, those heroes faught like two planets in the welkin; or like Bala and Vộtra, irresistible in conflict; and those high-souled ones faught like two lions. And showering countless shafts and displaying many manoeuvres, that foremost of men and that Rāks asas, faught on cheerfully, Then sighing like an enraged serpent, that chastiser of foes, Dasaratha's son, setting shafts (on his bow-string) showered them on the Raksasa-chief. And hearing the twang of his bow-string the lord of Rākṣasas, with his countenance fallen, gazed at Laksmana. Then Vibhīşaņa spoke to Sumitrā's son as he was fighting, “I find (inauspicious) signs in Rāvana's son. Do therefore hasten on, broken he is, without doubt. Then fixing arrows (on his bow) resembling venomous snakes, he let go those keen shafts, like to serpents furnished with poison. And smite by Lakşmaņa with arrows having the touch of the levin, (Indrajit) for a while was stupefied and had his senses overwhelmed. And eyeing that heroson to Dasaratha-present in the encounter, (Indrajit) with his eyes crimsoned on choler, drew near Sumitrā's son. And coming up to him (Laksmana), he again addressed (that hero) in a harsh speech, saying. Did you not remember my prowess at that first encounter, when you along with your brother was bound up, that now you are discharging arms (at me)? Forsooth you two in mighty encounter, with shafts resembling the thunder-bolt and vajra, by me were first laid down on the ground, deprived of your lives, along with your principal adherents. Either this has escaped your memory or I fancy, you plainly act to go to the abode of Yama, inasmuch as you have set your heart on beating me. If at the first encounter you have not witnessed my prowess, today shall I show it to you. Do you now stay, summoning your attention. Seeing this, he pierced Lakşmaņa with seven shafts, and Hanumān with ten keen-edged excellent shafts. Then, fired with double fury, that powerful one pierced Vibhīşana with an hundred arrows, powerfully discharged (from his weapons.) Seeing this act of Indrajit, that foremost of men, Rama's younger brother, Laksmana, with an undaunted countenance, fired with wrath without minding the same, and saying with a laugh, this is nothing.' Taking dreadful arrows, in the conflict, discharged them at the son of Ravana. "O nightrangers, heroes, coming to the field never discharge (such shafts as these). These arrows of your are light and of slight strength, and they conduce to my comfort. Heroic warriors eager for encounter, do not fight thus. Speaking thus, (Laksmana) accoutred with his bow showered vollies of shafts (on his adversary). And at his arrows (hitting), (Indrajit's) mighty golden mail fell off his person, and dropped to the platform of his car like a cluster of stars dropping from the welkin. With his armour dropping off, that hero— Indrajit was wounded with nárachas, like the Sun at dawn. That hero, Ravana's son endowed with dreadful prowess, in that conflict, pierced Lakşmaņa with a thousand shafts. Thereat Lakşmaņa's gorgeous and mighty mail was rent in pieces. And each rushing forward was engaged in dealing blows and harrying them. And sighing again and again, they faught furiously. And with their persons cut all over, and laved in blood, for a long while the heroes kept cleaving each other with sharpened shafts. And those high-souled ones versed in warfare, and endowed with terrific prowess exerted their utmost in securing victory. And covered with vollies of shafts, with their armour and banners rent, they drew each other's warm blood flowing like water from a fountain. They discharged dreadful showers attended with tremendous sounds, like the sounds of black clouds at Dooms-day* pouring torrents in the sky. * Kalameghayo (gen). The commentator says the word means (black clouds; but I prefer the sense given. A long time went by as they faught. Not did they turn away from the encounter, or know fatigue. Those foremost of those acquainted with weapons repeatedly displayed their weapons; and their long and short shafts enveloped the welkin. The skill that they displayed was perfect, and showed lightness, variety and grace; and both man and the Rākşasa carried on fearful and terrible conflict. The dreadful and tremendous roars of each were audible (at that place); and terrific like the levin, they made the hearts of hearers tremble (in terror). As they faught with might and main, the sounds that they sent resembled the deep rumbling of clouds in the sky. And pierced with närâchas knobbed with gold, those-powerful and illustrious (warriors) with their hearts set on celebrity, bled profusely. in that engagement gold-knobbed shafts hitting each other's person, pierced the same and covered with gore, entered the earth. And other shafts were resisted in the sky by sharpened weapons, and some were snapped, and thousands of their arrows were cleft (in the sky). In that field, the vollies of their shafts were dreadful to behold like to a heap of Kusa aflame in a sacrifice. The wounded frames of those high-souled ones appeared beautiful like a leafless flowering Kinsuka and Sālmali in wood. Each eager to vanquish the other, Indrajit and Lakşmaņa momentarily discharged tremendous and terrific showers (of arms). Laksmana smiting Ravana's son, and Ravana's son smiting Lakşmaņa, they did not experience any fatigue. With net-works of arrows deeply entering their persons, those vehement and exceedingly powerful ones resembled mountains topped (with trees). All their limbs, drenched in blood and covered with arrows, looked like a blazing fire. A great while did they fight; yet they neither turned away (from the fight), nor did they experience any exhaustion. Then to remove (Laksmana's) fatigue from fight, the high-souled Vibhisana, working the weal of Laksmaņa staying in front of the field, came forward in the encounter and took up his post.