Seeing Narāntaka slain, the foremost of Naiſtas-including the three-headed Devāntaka and Pulastya's descendant, Mahodara, began to cry (in chorus). Then the vehement Mahodara, mounted (on horseback), rushed against Vali's son endued with energy. Aggrieved in consequence of the calamity that had befallen his brother, the strong Devāntaka grasping a dreadful bludgeon, darted against Angada. Ascending a car resembling the Sun yoked with superb steeds, the heroic Triģiras rushed against Vali's son. Then charged by those three powerful Räkş asas-crushers of the hauteur of immortals, Angada uprooted a tree furnished with gigantic branches. And as Sakra hurl the mighty flaming thunder-bolt, that hero-Angada, at once hurled against Devāntaka that mighty tree having giant branches. Trisiras cut off that tree in pieces by means of shafts resembling serpents. And seeing the tree severed, Angada darted up; and then that foremost of monkeys showered crags and trees. And all those Triſiras wrought with wrath cut off by means of whetted arrows; and Mahodara snapped those trees with the end of his bludgeon. And then Trisiras rushed against that hero-Valr's son-with shafts; and Mahodara chased him, mounted own an elephant; and struck Angada in the chest with Tomaras resembling the thunder-bolt. 1. The text has Angada avoided for euphony. 2. The text has Vali's son. Devantaka, enraged advancing, hit Angada with his bludgeon, and then, endowed with velocity, he swiftly turned away. Attacked simultaneously by those three powerful Naiſtas, the exceedingly energetic son of Vali's possessed of prowess, did not feel any pain. That impetuous one incapable of being conquered, summoning his utmost vehemence, rushing on, pealt a slap at his* mighty elephant. *Mahodara's. Thereat in the conflict the king elephant fell down in his very sight and expired. Then pulling out his tusks, the highly powerful son of Vāli, darting against Devāntaka, dealt him a blow therewith in that encounter. Thereupon that strong one overwhelmed like a tree buffeted by the wind, began to discharge blood profusely, looking like the hue of lac. Then cheering him, the exceedingly energetic and powerful Narāntaka, violently whirling his bludgeon with might and main, hit Angada with it. And albeit struck with the bludgeon, the son of the lord of monkeys, going down on his knees, again darted up. As he sprang up, Triśiras hit at the temples of the son of the king of monkeys with three straight-speeding terrific shafts. Seeing Angada assailed by the three redoubtable Rakşasas, Hanumān and Nila proceeded (to his rescue). Then Nila hurled a mountain-top at Trisiras; and thereat that son of Rāvaņa severed it with sharpened arrows. That mountain-top on being riven, dropped down, aflame and shooting out sparks of fire. Seeing him* yawning in joy, the stalwart Devāntaka in that encounter pursued the windgod's son with his bludgeon. *Triśiras. As he rushed on, that foremost of monkeysHanuman-~-dealt on the crown of his head, a blow resembling the thunder-bolt itself. The mighty and heroic son of the wind-god hit (at his antagonist); and that redoubted monkey also with his roars made the Raksasas tremble (in fear). Thereat with his head crushed and cleft, and his ieeth and eyes falling out, and his tongue hanging down, that son to the sovereign of the Rākşasas suddenly dropped to the earth, deprived of life. On that fierce and mighty Rākşasas warriorthat foe of the immortals— having fallen in fight, the three-headed one, waxing wondrous enraged began to shower terrific sharpened shafts on Nila's chest. Mahodara, getting enraged, again swiftly mounted an elephant like the ray-furnished (Sun) mounting Mandara. Then even as a mass of roaring clouds poured down showers enwheeled with levin on a mountain, he showered arrows right on Nīla's breast. Threat showered with those shafts, that leader of monkeys Nīla with his person pierced, had his body riven and was stupefied by that exceedingly powerful one. Then that (monkey) possessed of tremendous vehemence, having regained his senses, uprooting a crag with a whole tract of trees, struck it at Mahodara's head. Struck by that mighty enemy, Mahodara, broken down by the impetus of that rock, deprived of his senses, dropped down dead on the ground, like a cliff smite with the thunderbolt. Seeing his uncle slain, Triſiras took up his bow; and inflamed with fury pierced Hanumān with whetted arrows. Thereat the wind-god's son, enraged, hurled a mountain-peak (at his adversary). And Trisiras by means of keen arrows severed the same in shivers. Seeing the mountain-peak baffled, the monkey in the encounter began to shower trees on Ravana's son. Trisiras endowed with prowess by means of sharpened shafts cut off that descending arrowy shower in the sky and shouted (in delight). Then Hanumān flying into a fury, bounding to the welkin, with his nails ript the steed of Triớiras, even as a lion cleave a powerful elephant. Then taking a dart even as the destroyer employ the fatal night, Ravana's son, TriSiras discharged it at the offspring of the wind-god. Thereat catching the dart of resistless course as it descended from the sky, the powerful monkey snapped it and then shouted. Seeing that dreadful dart broken by Hanumān, the monkeys, transported with delignt, sent up shouts, even as clouds rumble. Then upraising his sword, that foremost of Raksasas-Trisiras-brought it down on the breast of the monkey-chief. Overpowered with the sword-blow, Hanumān son to the wind-god, endowed with energy, dealt the three-headed one a slap on the head. And smitten with that slap, the highly powerful Triśiras, with his hands and attire dropping off, fell down to the earth, deprived of consciousness. Then that mighty monkey-resembling a hill broke his sword as he fell, and roared, terrifying all the Raksasas. But not brooking that uproar, that night-ranger sprang up; and springing up, he dealt a blow at Hanuman. At that blow, the redoubtable monkey was wrought up with wrath; and inflamed with rage, he smote that foremost of Räkşasas about his diadem. Then with a sharp sword the wind-god's son cut off his heads decked with diadems and furnished with ear-rings; even as Sakra had severed the heads of Tastri' son.* *Visvarupa. Thereat even as burning stars, loosened, drop down from the course of Indra, the large organs of sense, and eyes flaming like glowing fire, and heads of that foe of Indra, dropped down to the ground. On Trisiras, enemy of the immortals-having been slain by Hanuman endowed with the prowess itself of Sakra, the monkeys shouted, the earth shook, and the Rākṣas began to fly on all sides. Seeing Triſira and Yuddhonmatta slain and seeing also the irrepressible Devāntaka and Narāntaka slain (in the encounter), that highly irascible and powerful Räkşasas-Matta, was transported with passion, and then took up a flaming mace entirely wrought with iron inlaid with gold; frothy with flesh and gore; mighty to behold; gratified with the blood of foes; with its end flaming in splendour; decked with red wreaths; and capable of striking terror into Airāvata and Mahāpadma and Sárvabhauma.* And flaming up like the fire arisen at the end of a Yuga, that foremost of Raksasas-Matta, wrought with fury, rushed against the monkeys. *Elephants of the cardinal points. Then the mighty and powerful monkey Risabha-springing up before Ravana's son, stood before the hosts of Matta. Seeing that mountain-like monkey staying before (him), Matta, enraged, dealt him a blow on the breast. And smite with the mace, that foremost of monkeys, with his breast riven and trembling, began to bleed copiously. And regaining his senses after a long while, Risabha-lord of monkeys-inflamed with wrath pouting out his upper lip, gazed at Mahāpārsva.* *Otherwise, called Matta. Then impetuously approaching the Räks asas, that foremost of heroic monkeys resembling a hill, endowed with vehemence, clenching his fist, suddenly smote him with a blow on his breast. Thereat like a tree whose roots have been severed, he suddenly dropped on the ground, covered with blood. And thereupon, (Risabha) swiftly snatched his dreadful mace resembling the rod of Yama himself; and shouted. Only for a moment did he remain like one dead. Recovering his senses, the enemy of the immortals, looking like evening clouds in hue, suddenly springing up, attacked the son of the king of waters. Thereat, the dropped down to the earth, senseless. In a moment regaining his consciousness, he again bounded up, and whirling the mace resembling a peak of the foremost of mountains, in that encounter dealt (Matta) a blow therewith. And descending on the body of that dreadful one-the enemy of deities, sacrifices and Vipras-that terrific mace rived his breast; and the began to bleed profusely, even as the lord of mountains discharges minerals and water. And taking the terrific mace of the highsouled (Matta) and swinging it again and again, (Risabha) rushed (against the Raksasas). And that high-souled one began to slaughter Matta's forces in the field. Broken down by his own mace, Matta dropped down like a hill, with his teeth and eyes shrivelled up; and he dropped to the earth deprived of strength and life, with his eyes paling. And on that Räkşasas falling, the Raksas forces began to fly. On that brother of Rāvaņa having been slain, that host of Nairtas appearing like the ocean in grandeur, leaving its arms behind, solely for life rushed away, like to the deep riven (by the winds).