Beholding Makarākṣa out for battle, those foremost monkeys leaping on a sudden, addressed themselves for fight. Thereupon ensued a terrible conflict, capable of making one's down stand on end, between the right-rangers and the monkeys like to one between the celestials and Dänavas. Those monkeys and night-rangers crushed each other down with trees, darts, maces and parighas. Those night-rangers began to assail those foremost of monkeys with sakti.' swords, maces, kuntas, tomaras, pattisas, Bhindipālas, arrows, nooses and clubs. 1. A short arrow thrown from the hand or shot through a tube. 2. An Iron spear or dart. Being thus assailed with fearful arrows by Khara's son, those monkeys, stricken with fear, fled away. Beholding those monkeys fly away, all the victorious Rakşasas began to roar like excited lions. The monkeys thus flying away to all quarters, Rāma with a downpour of shafts assailed the Räkşasas. Beholding the Rākşasas thus overpowered, the night-ranger Makarākşa, excited with the flame of ire, said. Stay, O Rama, let us both fight with each other; I shall take your life with sharp arrows discharged off my bow. You did slay my father in the forest of Dandaka. Remembering your action and finding you before, my ire is excited. O Raghava! O Vicious souled one! My limbs are being burnt (with wrath) for I did not see you then in that mighty forest. O Rāma, by my good luck, I have got you today, like to a hungry lion desiring to have other animals. Being despatched by my arrows to the world of devils, you shall live with those heroes, who had been killed by you before. What is the use of speaking more, O Rāma, do you hear my words. Let all the people behold your as well as my prowess in the battle-field. Either with weapon or with clubs, in whatever you are expert, do you fight .with me in the battle-field, O Rāma. Hearing the words of Makarākşa, Rāma, Dasaratha's son, smiling, replied to the words of the babbler. O Rākşasa, what is the use of idle prating? None can achieve success in a battle with idle words—but with fighting. I slew in the forest of Dandaka your father with fourteen thousand Räksasas, Trisira and Duşana. O vile one, you being slain to day, with your flesh, vultures and crows, having sharp beaks and nails, and jackals shall be satisfied.* [*Here is another śloka, which is to be found in all N.W.P. texts and in one or two texts published in Bengal-but it has been omitted by many for it conveys the same meaning as the previous ſloka; the meaning is-And the birds drinking your blood shall fly away to various quarters.] Being thus addressed by Rāghava, the mighty Makarākşa, began to dart sharp arrows towards him in the battle-field. And Rāma, with his shafts, sundered into several pieces, those arrows. And being thus rendered useless those arrows, feathered in gold, fell down on the earth. Then there arose a terrible conflict between the Raksasa Khara's son and Dasaratha's son. There were audible in that battle-field, the outcry of the heroes and the twang of the bows stretched by their hands, like to the muttering of the clouds in the sky. To see that wondrous conflict, the celestials, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras and the mighty serpents stationed themselves in the sky. They were wounded with the discharged by each other and their strength was doubled. And they began to fight in that battlefield one attacking and the other withstanding the attack. And in that conflict the Rākşasa artOWS sundered the shafts discharged by Räma. And likewise Rāma severed into several pieces the arrows shot by the Räksasa. All the quarters were covered with arrows and nothing on earth or in the sky was visible. Thereupon being excited with ire, Rāghava of long arms sundered his (Raksasa's) bow in conflict and with eight Näräcas pierced the charioteer. And with arrows Rāma sundered the chariot and killing the horses brought them down. And the night-ranger Makarākṣa was brought down on the earth from the chariot. He then again rose up with a dart in his hand creating terror to all creatures and resembling the Fire of Dissolution in resplendence. It was a terribly huge dart conferred on him by Śiva, shining in the sky in its native brilliance and like to another weapon of destruction.* *This refers to the weapon used by Śiva for destruction-for Siva, according to the Hindu Mythology is the God of destruction. Beholding which dart even the celestials fly away in fear to different quarters. And taking up that huge flaming dart, the night-ranger, being excited with ire, hurled it at the high-souled Rāghava. Rāghava, with four shafts, sundered that dart, in the sky, flaming and hurled at him by the son of Khara. That flaming dart, feathered in gold, being splintered into several pieces by Rāma's arrows fell down on earth like a huge fire-brand. Beholding that dart beffled thus by Rāma of unwearied actions all those, stationed in the welkin began to shout, “Well done! Well done!" Beholding his dart thus sundered, the nightranger Makarākșa clenching his fist spoke to Kakutstha, saying, "Stay! Stay!" Seeing him advance thus, the descendant of Raghu, smiling, fixed a fiery arrow on his bow. With that arrow the Räksa was slain by Kākutstha in battle. And having his heart pierced he fell down and died. Beholding Makarākṣa thus slain all the Rāks asas, being afraid of Rama's arrows, proceeded towards Lankā. Seeing that night-ranger, the son of Khara, slain by Rāma's arrows, like to a mountain clept by a thunder-bolt, the celestials were greatly delighted.