As you look on, I shall describe to you those leaders who shall put forth their prowess for Rāghava, and lay down their lives in his behalf.) That one of dreadful deeds the long hairs on whose long tail, coppery, and yellow, and black, and white, thrown up, look like the rays of the Sun, and are trailing over the ground, is the monkey, named Hara; whom follow hundreds and thousands (of monkeys) desperately upraising trees, intent upon (scaling) Lankā-the leaders of the monkey-king and his servants present (in this conflict.) These whom you behold present, resembling mighty masses of sable clouds, like to black collyrium, of genuine prowess, countless and incapable of enumeration, dwelling in mountains, provinces, and rivers, terrible bears-approach you, O king. In their amidst is their king, grimeyed and of fierce appearance, like to Parjanya* encompassed by clouds, who dwell in that best of mountains, Rikkhavān, drinking of the Narmadā. *Indra Behold this one resembling a hill-younger brother of Dhūmra, lord of all the bears. He is equal to this brother in beauty, and of superior prowess. This leader of redoubtable leaders is named Jämbavān. He is mild, obedient to his superiors and fierce in fight. The intelligent Jāmbavan assisted Sakra signally in the war of the gods and Asuras, and he has won many boons (in consequence). Ascending the tops of mountains, these hurl down gigantic crags huge as colossal clouds, for does (the fear of)-death (ever) disquiet them. And their bodies covered with hair, they resemble Raksasas and ghosts (in their conduct). This one one of immeasurable energy has innumerable troops going about, who behold this leader of leaders under unusual excitement leaping and resting (by turns). This lord of monkeys dwell near the thousand-eyed Deity; and this leader of hands, gifted with strength, is named Rambha. He that going touch with his side a mountain situated at the distance of a Yojana, and, rising up, measurə the same length, and whose beauty is surpassed by none among quadrupeds, is known under the name of Sannādana, the grand father of the monkeys; this intelligent one battlºd did he meet with discomfiture. This is that general of the forces. *There is a word, rane, in battle-in this line, left out on the ground of pleonasm. He whose prowess is like that of Śakra, is this one begot by Fire on a Gandharva's daughter, for assisting the celestials on the occasion of the nor war of the gods and the Asuras. And this graceful and powerful one-best of monkeys-disport in that sovereign of mountains inhabited by numbers of Kinnaras, where king Vaiśravaņa eate rose apples, and which, O lord of Raksasa, ever conduce to the pleasure of your brother. And this one who never , extoll himself in battle, is named Krathana-leader of hosts. Surrounded by a thousand Koti (of troops), and stationed in the midst of the monkeys, he hope to subjugate Lankā with his own troops alone. And he that roam about the Gangā, terrifying leaders of elephant-herds, remembering the former hostility of the monkeys and the elephants, is this leader of bands, who, roaring, oppose wild elephants in mountain-caverns and crush trees, and forernost of monkeys, and chief of the monkey-forces like Sakra himself in heaven, sport, resorting to Uciravija pertaining to Mandara, best of mountains, on the golden river.* A thousand lacs of monkeys, elated with vigour and prowess, setting up roars and furnished with (long) arms follow him; and this one is the leader of those high-souled monkeys. And, o king, he whom you see resembling clouds uplifted by the winds, is a leader named Pramāthi. And his fleet-coursing soldiery are fiery, and volumes of red-hued dust are scattered about him profusely on all sides. *Ganga. These wondrous strong and dreadful Golāngülas* numbering hundreds and hundred thousands, seeing the building of the bridge, surrounding, O mighty monarch, the leader named Gavākṣa—a Golāngūla-set up shouts, intending to demolish Lankā with their prowess. *Vide anti. Where the trees bring forth fruits of every season and the black bees resort, in the mountain furnished with solar splendour, which the Sun circumambulates, by whose radiance ever beam beasts and birds with like hue, whose table-lands are never forsaken by magnanimous Maharșis; where the trees yield every object of desire and all are fraught with fruits; in which best of mountains excellent honey is founds, there in the charming Golden hill, O king, sport this one—the foremost of the principal monkeys, Kaśarī by name, a leader of bands. There are sixty thousand charming Golden hills. In their midst is that best of mountains,* even as you, O sinless one, are among the Raksasa. *Savarni Meru. There in the inmost hill dwell (monkeys) tawny-hued; and white, with coppery faces; yellowish like honey; sharp-toothed; having nails for their weapons, and four teeth like lions; irresistible like tigers all equal to Vaicawānara, and resembling flaming venomous snakes; furnished with long tails; like to mad elephants; seeming like gigantic hills; roaring like mighty clouds; with eyes tawny and round; of terrific mien; and emitting sounds, and these are gazing at Lankā, as if devastating her. This powerful one staying in their midst, is their leader, eager for victory; and the puissant (monkey) always look like the Sun himself; and this one, o king, is famed on earth by the name of Satabalr. This heroic one, powerful and mighty, established in his own prowess, hope to devastate Lankā with his own forces. And for compassing Rāma's desire, the monkeys does not cherish and kindness for his life. Gaya, Gavākşa, Nala, and the monkey Nīlaeach of these is encompassed by ten koțis of warriors. (Besides these), there are other choice monkeys dwelling in the Vindhya mountain, but I cannot enumerate these (monkeys) possessed of fleet vigour, in consequence of their vast number. All these, O mighty monarch, are of exceeding prowess, all possess persons resembling mighty mountains; and all are competent in a moment to remove and scatter the Earth with them.