They were rendered inert in the field; and the army of the monkey-leaders was stupefied, with Sugrīva and Nīla and Angada and Jāmbavān, and they did not show any signs of activity. Thereupon, seeing them dispirited, that foremost of intelligent persons, Vibhisana, cheering them up with his peerless speech, said. You heroes of the king of monkeys, do not give way to fear. This is not the time to indulge in grief at this place; for the sons of that noble one,' inactive and depressed, and seeming to be wounded with the showers of Indrajit's shafts, are in reality in this plight, for showing reverence to the words of the self-sprung one. 1. Dasaratha. 2.Mantra. On him the self-sprung has conferred the mighty Brahmă weapon of unfailing power; and the king's sons are doing honour to it by lying down on the field of battle. Why then do you grieve now? Hearing the words of Vibhisana and honouring the Brahma weapon, Hanumăn spoke as follows. The host of the quick-paced monkeys has been slain by this weapon. Let us go and console them who are still living. Those two great heroes— Hanumān and that foremost of the Rakşasas, with fire-brands in their hands, began to range to and fro in the battle field. They beheld there the earth strewn on all sides with monkeys lying down like so many hills and various shining weapons. And some of these monkeys were deprived of their tails, some of their hands, some of their thighs, some of their legs, some of their fingers, and some of their heads. And blood was gushing out from the persons of some, and others were urinating out of fear. Vibhīşaņa and Hanuman beheld there Sugriva, Angada Nila, Gandhamādana, Jambhavan, Susena, Vegadarshin, Mainda, Nala, Jyotimukha, and the monkey, Dvivida, almost slain. Vibhișana and Hanuman saw in the field seven and sixty kotis of fleet-footing monkeys slain (in battle) at the fifth part of the day by the darling of the self-sprung. And surveying that host worsted, dreadful like the surges of the sea, Hanumăn and Vibhīşaņa began to search for Jāmbavān. Finding that heroic son of Prajāpati, afflicted with natural decrepitude, aged, and resembling smouldering fire, wounded with hundreds of shafts, Pulastya's son said, “O noble one, has not your life been destroyed with those sharp shafts?" Hearing Vibhisana's words, Jambevan, best of bears, evoking utterance with extreme effort, said. O foremost of Naiſtas, endowed with exceeding prowess, I know you by your voice. Having my person pierced with sharp shafts, I cannot see you with my eyes. Does he through whom Añjanä as well as Mātariśvan* are blessed with fair offspring, does that prince of monkeys-Hanumān, live? *The wind-god. Hearing Jambavan's speech, Vibhisana said, “Why, passing by the son of the high and mighty,* did you enquire after the wind-god's offsprmg? *Vide Hamlet. O noble one, you did not show that overflowing affection either for king Sugrīva or Angada and Raghava that you show for the son of the wind-god. Hearing Vibhisana's words, Jambavan said, "Hear, O foremost of Raksasas, why I enquire after the wind-god's son. While this hero is alive, this force, albeit destroyed, live; but if Hanumān is reft of life, although living, we are destroyed. O child, if the wind-god's offspring, resembling his sire himself or (the deity of) fire in prowess, is alive, there is hope for our lives. Then approaching that aged one, Hanumanson to the wind-god-saluted him humbly, holding Jāmbavān's feet. Hearing Hanuman's voice, that foremost of monkeys with his senses sorely smarting, deemed himself as having regained his life. Then that exceedingly energetic Jåmbavān addressed Hanumān, saying, “Come, O powerful monkey, It behove you to rescue the monkeys." There is none else. Endowed with profuse prowess, you are the greatest friend of these. This is the hour when you should display you might. Any other see I not. Do you cheer up this host consisting of bears and monkeys; and do you also heal the wounds of these two tormented by them. Bounding sheer over the main, you, O Hanumān, should repair to the Himavānforemost of mountains. There you will see that best of mountiansthe golden Rşabha of terrific aspect, and, O smiter of foes, the peak also of Kailāśa. Lying in the lap of these two, you, O hero, O powerful monkey, will see the mountain of medicines, fraught with healing herbs of all kinds. On its summit you will find four medicinal herbs flaming and illumining the ten cardinal quarters-viz., Mſtasanjivani,' Višalyakarani, Suvarnakarani, and the mighty medicine, Sandhănī. 1. Lit. reviving the dead. 2. Lit. healing wounds inflicted by darts. 3. Lit. transmuting any thing to gold. O Hanumān, providing yourself with these, you should come here without delay. Do you, O offspring of the wind-god* bringing back lives to these monkeys, cheer them up. *Gandhavahātanaya-lit., son to the bearer of smell-a designation of the wind in Sanskrit. Thereat hearing the words of Jāmbavān Hanumān, son of wind-god filled himself with energy, even as the Ocean heave with the force of the winds (blowing on its breast). Ascending the summit of that mountain,* and hurting it with his tread, that hero-Hanumanappeared like a second mountain. *Trikuta. Crushed under the tread of that monkey, the mountain was dispirited; and sore distressed, it could hardly contain itself. The trees on it began to topple to the earth; and on account of the vehemence of the monkey, they flamed up. And smitten by Hanumān, its peaks were scattered around. And monkeys could no longer dwell on that fore. Most of mountains, which being hard pressed (by Hanumān), was trembling all over, with its slopes covered with broken trees and rocks. With her giant gateways shaking, and the doors of her edifices broken, that night Lankā, over-whelmed with fright, seemed to be dancing. The offspring of the wind-god, resembling a mountain itself, bringing that mountain to sore straits, agitated the entire earth with her oceans. And hurting the mountain with his tread, he, opening wide his mouth resembling that of a mare, sent up loud shouts, terrifying the nightrangers. Hearing those tremendous roars as he kept emitting cries, the powerful Rākṣasas were quite stupified. Bowing down to the Ocean, that subduer of enemies, the Wind-god's son, endowed with dreadful prowess, began to ponder over the mighty mission with which he had been entrusted in the interests of Rāghava. Then upraising his tail resembling a serpent, bending his back, contracting his ears, and opening his mouth looking like that of a mare, that one possessed of terrific impetuosity, bounded into the sky. With the vehemence of his rush, he carried away in his wake whole tracts of trees, and rocks, and crags, and inferior monkeys;* and after having been carried away some distance by the vehemence of his arms and thighs, they, at length losing their velocity, fell into the waters (of the Ocean.) *Residing in the Trikuta mountain. Stretching his arms resembling serpents, the son of the Wind-god endowed with the prowess of Garuda* coursed on towards the monarch of mountains, as if making all the quarters tremble. *The text has, the foe of serpents—an appellation of Garuda Seeing the sea with its hosts of billows rolling furiously and with the confederacies of aquatic animals bewildered by the angry waters, he coursed on rapidly, like the discus discharged by the hand of Vişnu. Surveying hills and birds and pools and rivers and tanks and splendid cities and flourishing provinces, that one equal to his sire himself in celerity, held his way. That hero Hanuman—like to his father in prowess, and incapable of being fatigued, vigorously proceeded along the orbit of the sun. That powerful monkey possessed of the speed of the Wind itself, and having mighty impetuosity, careered, making all sides resound with his roars. Remembering Jāmbavān's words, that redoubtable monkey, son to the Wind-god, possessed of terrific prowess, and resembling a mountain, suddenly saw (before him) the Himavān; furnished with countless cascades and numerous caves and rivulets; with splendid summits appearing like massess of pale clouds, and graced with various trees. Arriving at that lord of mighty mountains, furnished with excellent towering golden summits, he saw the great sacred asylums (of the ascetics), inhabited by the flower of celestial saints. He beheld Brahmakosa (a) Rajatalaya (b) Śakrālaya (c) Rudraśarapramokṣa (d) Hayānana (e) and the flaming Brahmasiras (f) and the servants of Vaivasvata (g). (a) The place of Hiranyagarbha (b) The place of Rajatanăbha— silver-neededanother from of Hiranyagarbha (c) The abode of Sakra. (d) The place where from Rudra discharged his arrow on the occasion of the destruction of Tripurā (e) Theplace of the horse-necked. (f) The place of the deity presiding ever the Brahma-weapon. (g) An appellation of Yama. He saw the abode of the Fire-god, and the abode of Vaiśravana and the effulgent suryyanivandhana, (h) and the abode of Brahmă, (i) and the bow of Sankara, and the navel of the Earth. (j) And he saw Kailasa of terrific aspect, and the stone, (k) of Himavăn, and that bull, (1) and the golden mountain, and that foremost of mountains furnished with all medicinal herbs, flaming, and illuminated with every kind of medicinal plants. (h) The spot where the suns meet. (i) The place of the four-faced Brahmă. (i) The spot of Prajāpati. (k) On which Rudra sat when engaged in asceticism. (1) Which had been mentioned by Jambavan. Beholding that flaming mass of fire, the offspring of Vasava's* emissary wondered. And bounding up to the lord of medicinal mountains, he fell to searching for the drugs. * The emissary of Vāsavain his cloud-from is the wind driving the cloud; and the passage refers to Hanuman, That mighty monkey-the Wind-god's son-leaving behind a thousand Yojanas, began to range the mountain containing the divine remedies in its entrails. Those potent medicines, in that foremost of mountains, knowing (before-hand) that one was coming seeking for them, rendered themselves invisible. And not seeing them, the high-souled Hanumān was angered; and from wrath he set up roars. And not brooking that, (Hanumān) with eyes resembling glowing fire, addressed that foremost of mountains, saying. What is ihis that you have decided on, that you show no compassion for Rāghava? But, O lord of mountains, today witness yourself, overpowered by my arms and torn in pieces! And (anon) on a sudden, he violently rooted up its summit with trees and elephants and gold, and furnished with thousand varieties of ore, having its tops torn and its slopes aflame. And uprooting it, he sprang into the bosom of the air), terrifying the worlds containing celestials and the lords thereof. And hymned by countless rangers of the air, that one endowed with the terrific impetuosity of Garuda himself, taking that summit furnished with the splendour of the Sun, went along the orbit of the Sun. And near the Sun, that Sun-like one seemed to be another sun. With that mountain, the offspring of the bearer of perfumes appeared surpassingly grand, like very Vişņu equipped with the flaming discus having a thousand edges. Seeing him, the monkeys shouted, and he also, seeing them, shouted in delight. And hearing their tremendous cheers, those residing in Lankā shouted still more dreadfully. Then the high-souled one dropped on that best of mountains in the midst of the monkey-forces; and, bowing down to the principal monkeys there, he embraced Vibhisana. Then those sons of that king of men, smelling the perfume of that mighty medicine, were then and there healed of their wounds; and the heroic monkeys also sat up. And all the heroic monkeys were instantly healed and cured; and those also that were slain (in battle), through the smell of that best of drugs, sat up, like persons risen after sleep at break of day. Even since the monkeys and Rākşasas had began to fight; for maintaining honour, all those Rākşasas that were slain there by the mighty monkeys, were thrown into the sea. Then that monkey, the offspring of the bearer of fragrance, endowed with terrific speed, took that medicinal mountain (back) to Himavān and again presented himself before Rāma.