Then, anxious to ascertain his* course, the king's son possessed of prowess, and endowed with exceeding strength, Rāma, ordered ten of the monkey-leaders. * Indrajit's. The repressor of foes ordered Väli's sonAngada, the vigorous Śarabha, Dvivida, Hanumān, the mighty Sānuprastha, Rşabha and Rşabhaskandha. Thereat with alacrity those monkeys, wielding mighty trees, shot up into the sky, and began to scour the ten cardinal points. And Ravana's son, skilled in arms, resisted the impetuous march of those vehement ones by means of a powerful weapon as well as arms more forceful (than the force of their rush). The exceedingly vehement monkeys, cut and mangled with Nărăcas, saw him in the dark like the sun enveloped in clouds. That conqueror in battle, Ravana's son, with shafts sorely pierced the persons of Rāma and Laksmana. And both Rāma and Lakşmaņa had their bodies entirely covered by the angry Indrajit with shafts turned into serpents. And from their wounds blood began to gush out in streams; and they looked like flowercrowned Kinsukas. Then that one having red corners to his eyes and resembling a mass of crushed collyrium, Rāvana's son, said to the brothers, as he vanished. When I fight remaining invisible, even Sakrathe lord of the celestials-cannot see or approach me, and who are you? And I, with my soul surcharged with wrath, shall, assailing them with showers of weapons furnished with Karka feathers, send Raghu's sons to the abode of Yama." Having spoken thus to the brothers-Rāma and Laksmana, cognizant of righteousness-(Indrajit)pierced them with sharpened shafts, and shouted in joy. And stretching his large bow, that one sable like to a mass of crushed collyrium again discharged terrific shafts in battle. That one versed in the inner sense of things, with whetted arrows pierced the vitals of Rāma and Lakşmaņa and shouted momentarily. And fast bound by the shackles of shafts on the edge of battle, they* could not attain respite for a moment, *i.e. Rama and Laksmana. Then with their persons pierced with shafts and darts, and resembling the flags of the Great Indra let loose from the cords and trembling (in the air), and with their bodies bristling with arrows, those heroes and mighty bowmen-lords of the earth-tormented in consequence of their vitals having been pierced, dropped down to the earth. Those heroes, bathed in blood and their persons covered with arrows-pained and suffering terribly, lay down as became heroes. There was not so much room unpierced in their persons as could be measured by a finger; and they were wounded with arrows up to the fore-parts of their hands. They being wounded by that fell one capable of assuming shapes at will, blood violently gushed out of their bodies like water from a spring. Rāma fell first, pierced in the vitals with the shafts. And the same Indrajit who had formerly wrathfully routed Śakra, (now) pierced (Rāma) with Närācas knotted with fold, and having polished heads; swift-speeding; and resembling dust carried about by the wind; and halfNārācas; and darts resembling anjalis;' and Vatsadantas; and simhadamstras; and razors; and, resigning his stringless bow decked in gold and curved in three places, with its part for grasping shattered-he lay down like a hero. 1. The hands joined at the lower sides, with the palms hollowed. 2. Weapons resembling the teeth of a calf. 3. Weapons resembling the lion's teeth. 4. Rāma. Seeing Rāma, the foremost of men-down within arrow-range, Laksmana despaired of his life. Seeing his brother, Rāma having eyes resembling lotus petals and ever delighting in battle, himself the refuge of others, lying down in the field; (Laksmana) began to weep. The monkeys also seeing him, were plunged in sorrow; and they, their eyes flooded with tears, began to cry in grief of heart. When they had been bound and had laid themselves down as become heroes, the monkeys stood around them-and, conversing with one another, they, headed by the son of the Wing, were seized with extreme sorrow.