Seeing that head and that excellent bow, and (remembering) the union of (Rama) and Sugriva related by Hanumãn, and (seeing) those eyes, and the complexion of that face, and that countenance like to that of her lord, and that hair and that forehead; and that beautiful jewel forming the crest; and recognizing (Rāma) by all these tokens combined, (Sītā), exceedingly aggrieved, rebuked Kaikeyī, lamenting like a female osprey. O Kaikeyſ, have your wishes attained. Slain has been the son of the race; and the entire race is exterminated by you, partial to dissension. What evil had been done to Kaikeyi by the revered Rāma, that along with me, he had been banished into the woods, with rags given him (for his covering)? Having said this, Vaidehi, forlorm and trembling (all over), dropped to the earth, like a plantain cut off. Then, recovering after a while, and having regained her consciousness, the large-eyed one, placing the head in her front, gave way to grief. Ah! I am undone, O mighty-armed one! ) you that did follow stern vows! From your (death), I have come by this final plight, having been rendered a widow. The greatest calamity (that can befall a woman), is said to be the death of her husband. And, possessor of an excellent character, you have departed before me, who have ever trod the path of the righteous; but who have come by a mighty grief and am plunged in a sea of sorrow. And you, who was engaged in delivering me, have yourself fallen! And my mother-in-law, Kausalyā, attached (to you), through the death of you, her son, at the hands of Raksasas, has been reduced to the condition of a cow that has been deprived of her calf. O Rāghava, even the astrologers had predicted long life for you. But their words are false, you, O Rāghava, wast short-lived. me Or did your wisdom, wise and good as you were, come to naught? For God, who is the origin of all beings, make (every one) reap the fruit of his own acts. And why, versed in polity as you wast, did you come by death, unforeseen? You were acquainted with the means of warding off misfortune, and skilled in doing so. Having been brought hither by representing the Fatal Night, fierce and fell, after (being) embraced, and by force, the lotus-eyed one has met with his death. Here lie you, O longarmed one, leaving me lone, and embracing the Earth like your beloved fair. Ever carefully worshipped with perfumed wreaths, this bow of your, O hero, embellished with gold, is dear to me. O sinless one, you have surely gone to heaven, and (are there) in the company of your sire and my father-in-law, Dasaratha, and all your ancestors. You have become a star of the firmament as the fruit of your great act.* You have disregarded your righteous race of Rājarşis. *The carrying out the command of your sire. O king, why do you not look at me? And why is it that you do not answer me, who am a girl, hardly arrived at youth, and who am your wife and companion? That you at the time of your espousing my hand had vowed, I will practise (righteousness) with you, do you, O Kakutstha, recollect the same, and take me, who am overwhelmed with distrees. Why, O best of goers, have you gone from this world to that other, leaving behind me, overwhelmed with distress? That person of your which, decked out with auspicious things, I used to embrace, beasts of prey will for certain tear the same. Having performed the Agnishtoma and other sacrifices with Dakşinăs (dispensed, why had not you attained purity by means of the sacrificial fire? Kaucalya, over-whelmed with sorrow, shall only behold one of the three that had gone away to distant lands, come (back)-Laksmana. On being asked by her, he shall relate your as well as the deaths of your friend's troops over night at the hands of the Rākṣasas. O Raghava, hearing you slain while asleep, and me staying in the abode of the Rākşasa, she with her heart cleft (in twain), shall cease to exist. And for the sake of me, abject that I am, that sinless son of the king, Rāma, possessed of prowess, having crossed the ocean, has been slain in the footprint of a cow. I, the befouler of my line, who had been wedded by Dasaratha's son through want of discretion, becoming the wife of the revered Rāma, was (in reality) his Death. Without doubt, in another birth I had abstained from choice gifts, and therefore it is that I sorrow today, albeit being the wife of one that (ever dear) to guests. Do you, O Ravana, speedily slay me upon Rāma; and, bringing the wife to the husband, compass my best benefit. Do you join my head to his and my body to his body. I will, O Rāvana, follow the way of my high-souled lord. Thus, burning in grief, did that large-eyed one indulge in lamentations; and Janaka's daughter kept fast gazing at the head and bow of her lord. As the Rāksasa was by while Sītā was thus bewailing, there appeared before his lord, with joined hands, the warder, saying. May the worshipful one be victorious! And saluting and propitiating him, (Ravana), he told him that Prahasta, general of the forces, had arrived. Prahasta has come to you, surrounded by all the courtiers. And, O lord, I was despatched by him, desirous of seeing you. O mighty monarch, surely there is and you are forgiving from your regal sentiment some work which is momentous; and do you see them. Hearing these words of the Rākşasa, the Tennecked one, leaving the Asoka wood, went to see the counsellors. Having decided his entire course of action in consultation with his competent advisers, (Ravana), entering his court, well knowing Rāma's prowess, set about his work. As soon as Rāvaņa left that place, that head and that bow vanished. And in company with the councillors of dreadful power, (Ravana) decided his course with reference to Rāma. Then the lord of Raksasas, Ravana, resembling the day of doom, addressed his generals, all well-wishers-staying hard by, saying. Do you speedily summon my forces with the beat of drums—not do you give out the reason (of the summons). Then assenting to his speech with So be it, the envoys immediately summoned that mighty force; and, when in had arrived, they informed their master, eager for conflict, of its arrival.