Hearing Atikāya slain by the high-souled Lakşmaņa, the king was filled with exceeding great anxiety and spoke thus. Dhūmråkșa exceedingly wrathful-best of those equipped with all arms—and Akampana and Prahasta and Kumbhakarņa-all these exceedingly mighty heroes— Räkșasas ever seeking warfare, conquerors of the forces of foes, and never defeated by antagonists, have together with their hosts been slain by Rāma of untiring feats. Other Rākşasas having gigantic bodies and skilled in various arms, countless high-souled heroes—have also been brought down. These brothers were formerly bound by my son Indrajit of renowned strength and prowess with terrific shafts, obtained as boons. And I do not know by what power or superhuman virtue stupefying energy did those brothers, Rāma and Lakşmaņa-liberate themselves from those dreadful bonds, which could be loosed neither by celestials nor the highly powerful Asuras combined Yaksas, Gandharvas and Pannagas. All those heroic Rākşasa warriors that marched forth at my bidding, have been destroyed by monkeys of marvellous might. Him see I not that can now slay Rāma with Lakşmaņa, that hero together with his forces and Sugrīva and Vibhīşana. Alack! mighty must be Rāma and wondrous is or nor his strength of weapon-he coming in contact with whose prowess, these Rākşasas have met with their deaths. Now let this palace be everywhere guarded by a vigilant garrison, as also the Asoka wood where Sītā is being guarded. We should always be acquainted with the ingress and egress (of every person). And do you, surrounded by forces, remain where there are garrisons. And the night-rangers should in the evening at midnight and in the morning always watch the movements of the monkeys. The monkeys should by no means be slighted. And you should know whether the enemy put forth (fresh) efforts, and whether they advance or remain stationed where they at present are. Thereupon hearing from the lord of Lankā those exceeding mighty Rākşasas did as they hat been desired. Having directed them, Ravana, lord O Rākşasas, bearing the dart of ire (in his heart), i forlorn guise entered his own mansion. With the fire of his rage blazing up, th exceedingly powerful sovereign of the nigh rangers, absorbed with the danger that ha befallen his son, began to sigh momentarily.