The rangers of woods, gazing at the earth and the sky, at length cast their eyes on the brothersRāma and Lakşmaņa covered all over with arrows. And after that Rākşasa had gone away having performed his work, like the God* going away, after having showered, there came to that place Vibhīşaņa with sugrīva. *Indra. And mourning Raghu's sons, there also came in all haste Nila and Dvivida and Mainda and Sușeņa and Kumuda and Angada in company with Hanuman. And moveless; breathing covered with bloodpierced all over with net-works of shafts; dumb; they* were lying on the field. *Rama and Laksmana. They were sighing like serpents; and were inert; and deprived of prowess; and washed in blood; and looking like to golden standards. And as they lay moveless, as become heroes, the leaders of monkeys environed them with tear-charged eyes. Seeing the sons of Raghu lying, covered with showers of shafts, the monkeys, with Vibhisana, were pained (exceedingly). The monkeys, Surveying the sky as well as all directions, could not see Rāvana's son in battle enveloped with illusion. Then Vibhīşaņa by means of illusion saw his brother's son staying before, hidden by illusion. And Vibhīşaņa saw that hero of incomparable deeds, who had no compeer in the field and who had energy, fame and prowess-as he remained invisible in consequence of the boon received from Brahma. And Indrajit, seeing his own feat and them lying at length, spoke in excess of joy, gladdening all the Rākşasas. The brothers-Rāma and Lakşmaņa, possessed of great strength, who had slain Khara and Dūşaņa, are themselves slain with my shafts. All the celestials and Asuras assembled together with the saints, are incompetent to emancipate these from the fetters of my shafts. He for whom my father was exercise with anxiety and tormented by grief, for whom my sire used to spend nights without pressing his bed, for whom this entire Lankā had resembled a river turbulent in the rainy reason, that same evil sticking by the root of all, has been dispensed his quietus by me. And like clouds of autumn, the prowess of Råma and Laksmana as well as that of all the rangers of the woods, has been rendered useless. Saying this in the presence of all the Raksasas, Ravana's son-destroyer of foesfencing the monkey-leaders, hit Nila with nine arrows, and hurt Mainda and Dvivida each with three powerful shafts. And piercing Jāmbavān with an arrow in the chest, that mighty bowman discharged ten at Hanumān. And ravana's son possessed of exceeding impetuosity, pierced in the conflict with two shafts each Gavākşa and Śarabha of immeasurable vigour. And Rāvana's son, summoning celerity, pierced the king of Golangulas and Vāli's son, Angada, with innumerable arrows. The powerful son of Rāvana, endowed with might, piercing the foremost monkeys with shafts resembling tongues of flames, set up shouts in the field of battle. And tormenting the monkeys with volleys of shafts and striking terror into them, that mightyarmed one. bursting out into a laugh, said. “Let the Raksasas behold these brothers lying fast bound with dreadful arrows in front of the forces." Thus addressed, those Rākşasas-wily warriors all-resembling masses of clouds, witnessing that deed (of Indrajit), struck with wonder and rejoicing (greatly), set up tremendous roars. And thinking that Rāma was slain, they honoured Ravana's son. Seeing the brothers-Rāma and Laksmanamotionless, and lying inert on the ground, they took them for slain. And, experiencing excess of joy, Indrajitconquerer in conflict-entered the city of Lankā, rejoicing all the Nairtas. Seeing the bodies as well as the limbs of Rāma and Lakşmana, covered entirely with arrows, fear took possession of Sugriva. Thereat Vibhīşaņa said to that lord of monkeys, staying in woe-begone guise, with a tearful countenance, and his eyes wild with wrath, "Do not give way to fear, O Sugriva. Restrain your rising tears! This is the way of warfare: victory is not (always) sure But, O hero, If Fortune ultimately smile upon us, this stupor shall go off from these high-souled and exceedingly powerful ones. therefore, O monkey, do you cheer me, who am forlorn. Saying this, with hand Vibhīşaņa washed Sugriva's graceful eyes with water. And taking water, the righteous Vibhīşaņa by means of his knowledge, washed Sugrīva's eyed there with. And washing the face of the intelligent monkey-monarch, Vibhisana spoke these words, seasonable and sedate. O foremost of monkey-kings, this is no time for being overcome with stupor. At this hour, even immoderate affection may lead destruction. Therefore, casting off stupor, which tends to mar all work, do you bethink you how you may serve this army headed by Rāma. Or do you protect Rāma so long as he does not regain consciousness; and when the Kākutsthas shall have regained consciousness, all our apprehension shall vanish. This is nothing to Rāma is not dying. And Lakşmi* who is incapable of being attained by those that are doomed, shall not forsake this one. *The goddess of prosperity. to Therefore do you comfort yourself, do you also cheer up your own forces, while I am engaged in composing all the troops. O best of monkeys, these with distended eyes, come under the governance of terror, are, stricken with panic, whispering into each other's ears. But seeing me, let the forces rushing about, cheered up, as well as the monkeys, cast off all fear, like a wreath that has been used before. Thus comforting Sugriva, Vibhisana-lord of Rākṣasas-again instilled spirits into the flying forces of monkeys. And Indrajit, worker of mighty illusionsaccompanied by his troops, entered the city of Larkā and presented himself before his father. And approaching Rāvana and saluting him with joined hands, he informed his sire of the welcome tidings that Răma and Lakṣmaṇa had been slain. And hearing that his foe had fallen, Rāvana springing up in the midst of the Rākşasas, With great joy embraced his son. And scenting the crown of his head, (Rāvana) with a delighted heart, asked (Indrajit as to all that had taken place). And on being asked, he (Indrajit) truly related to his sire how (Rāma and Lakşmaņa) had been rendered senseless and lack-Lustre by being fastened with shafts. Thereat, with rapture surcharging his inmost soul, Rāvana, hearing the speech of the mighty car warrior, banished his fear of Dasaratha's son, and rising up, honoured his son with glad words. that had taken place). And on being asked, he (Indrajit) truly related to his sire how (Rāma and Lakşmaņa) had been rendered senseless and lack-Lustre by being fastened with shafts. Thereat, with rapture surcharging his inmost soul, Rāvana, hearing the speech of the mighty car warrior, banished his fear of Dasaratha's son, and rising up, honoured his son with glad words.