Then early in the morning, like the fiery and refulgent sun entering a mighty mass of clouds, Vibhisana, fast to virtue and interest, heroic and possessed of exceeding splendour, playing a perilous part, * entered the apartment of his elder brother, resembling an assemblage of mountain summits and elevated like the peak of a mountain, orderly, divided into spacious rooms, the resort of the great-inhabited by august and intelligent persons attached (to Răvaņa); guarded around by lusty Rakşasas in limited numbers; having the air agitated by the breath of mad elephants; with loud blares of conchs, and resounding with trumpets; with loud blares of conchs, and resounding with trumpets; embosoming numbers of beautiful damsels, with its high-ways (overflowing with talk); furnished with doors of polished gold; embellished with excellent ornaments; resembling the abode of the Gandharvas, or the mansion of the Maruts; containing heaps of gems; like to the dwelling of serpents. *The project he had conceived, viz., converting Rāvana to his own polloy of pacification, was fraught with peril to himself, considering his brother's fierce temperament. That one of exceeding energy heard sacred and holy sounds uttered by Veda-versed Brāhmaṇas celebrating the victory of his brother; and that highly powerful (hero) acquainted with Mantras and the Vedas saw Vipras worshipped with vessels of curds, clarified butter, flowers and fried paddy. The mighty-armed (Vibhisana) saluted the younger brother of the bestower of riches, * seated there. *Kuvera-Ravana was Kuvera's younger brother. That one acquainted with manners, after proper courtesy, sat him down on a seat decked in gold, which was pointed out (by a royal glance). In retirement as also in presence only of his counsellors, Vibhīşaņa spoke to the high souled Rāvana words backed by reason, and greatly fraught with his welfare. And having, with soothing speech, pacified his elder brother and extended towards him the due civilities, that one, who through height of sentiment had noted excellence and the want of it, addressed (Vibhīş aņa) in words befitting the occasion and the place. Ever since, O subduer of enemies, Vaidehi has come hither, are seen inauspicious omens. Fire, enveloped in smoke at the time of its being ignited, and thereafter throwing out scintillation's, with its brightness obscured by vapour, does not increase adequately even n oblations being poured into it with Mantras, Reptiles are discovered in kitchens, sacrificial fire-chambers, and the places of Vaidika recitations; and ants (are found) in clarified butter. The milk of the kine has been dried up; and the nobler elephants are without the temporal juice. And horses, albeit they have feasted on feasted on fresh grass, neigh distressfully.* *The commentator remarks, evidently with justice, "That is, the horses, having eaten their fill, still hunger." Asses, camels and mules, O king, with their hair standing erect, shed tears; and although they are ministered to medically, they do not return to nature. And crows in numbers emit harsh cries on all sides, and are seen in swarms at the tops of edifices. Vultures sit sadly and distressed upon the roofs of houses. During the two twilights, the jackals, coming in sight, utter ominous howls. Wolves and other (ferocious) animals, as well as deer, approaching the gate of the palace in swarms, are heard to set up loud roars resembling the thunder. Things having come to this pass, even this expiation, I fancy, is capable of removing the evil omens. Do you render back Vaidehī to Raghava. If I have said this through ignorance or covetousness, you ought not, O mighty monarch, criminate me. All Rākşasas and Rākşasis, as well as those belonging to palace and the inner apartmentshall have to experience the even consequence (of this act of your). All the counsellors have refrained from tendering this counsel to you; but surely I must tell you what I have seen or heard; and adopting proper measures, it behove you to act so.* *In accordance with my suggestion. (Ravana's) brother, Vibhisana, thus spoke, to his brother, the chief of Rākşasa, in the midst of counsellors, these words fraught with his good. Hearing this beneficial, mild and pregnant speech, fortified by reasons and capable of compassing (his welfare) for the present, past and the future, (Rāvaņa) who had conceived a passion (for Sītā), getting into a rage, replied, Fear find I none whatever. Rāghava never shall have Mithila's daughter. Even if Laksmana's elder brother should be supported in battle by the celestials with Indra (at their head), how can he stay before me (in the field)? Having said this, that destroyer of celestial hosts, the Ten-necked one, possessed of mighty strength and of terrific prowess in battle, then dismissed his brother Vibhīşaņa, who had spoken truth.