Vibhīşaņa addressing him with these excellent and auspicious words, fraught with high sense, Rāvaņa, impelled by Death, again spoke in harsh accents. It is better to live with open enemies or enraged serpents than with those who pass for friends but are in reality foes. I know well the nature of kinsmen, in all the worlds, O Raksasas, one takes delight in another's misfortune. The kinsmen, O Raksasa, generally disregard him who is their king, * protects the kingdom, educated and pious-and they always try to discomfit him, if he be a heroe. *On account of the priority of his birth, These terrible enemies-the kinsmen, hypocrite as they are, always take delight in one another's calamity. Hear, I shall relate what elephants, in yore, spoke beholding some persons with noose in hand-We do not fear, fire, weapons, or even the terrible noose-we fear only the dreadful kinsmen, blinded with selfishness. They alone unfold the means of our detection, there is not the least doubt about it. Fear from kinsmen is therefore known as the worst of all fears. In kine there is milk, in kinsmen, there is fear, in women there is fickleness, and in Brahmanas, there is asceticism. It does not please you, I fancy, O gentle one, that I am honoured of the three worlds, the lord of riches, and the subduer of my foes. As the drops of water do not last long on the leaves of lotuses, so is the friendship with unworthy persons. As the autumnal clouds, albeit muttering, do not pour forth water, so is the friendship with unworthy persons. As a bee flies away after sucking up the honey so is the friendship with unworthy persons. As a bee, after feeding uport the Kāśa flowers, does not get honey so is (fruitless) the friendship with unworthy persons. As an elephant, after being bathed, covers its body again with dust, taking it with its trunk, so is the friendship with unworthy persons.* *They afterwards forsake their former friends. Fie you, O night ranger, O you that bring disgrace on the family. Had any one else spoken thus he would have ceased to live by this time. Being thus accosted harshly, Vibhisana, speaking truth, rose up along with four Rākṣasas having maces in their hands. There upon, rising up in the welkin, the graceful brother Vibhisana, worked up with ire, addressed the lord of Rāshasas. You are mistaken, O king. Do you speak what you wish, you are my elder brother, adorable like to father-you did not follow the track of virtue. I cannot tolerate the harsh accents of you, my elder brother. For your welfare I spoke those w ell-meaning words, O Ten-necked one, but you did not pay heed to them being brought under the control of Death. O king, many are the persons who speak sweet words. hit rare are they who can speak and near anpalatable but well-meaning words. How can I disregard your death like to a burning house bound as you are by the noose of Death, the destroyer of all creatures. I do not wish to behold you slain by the well sharpened shafts of Rāma, feathered in gold and resembling the flaming fire. Even the heroic and powerful persons, well versed in the use of weapons, wear away like sands in battle, being attracted by Death. You are worshipful to me, do you forgive me for what I have said for your welfare. Do you protect yourself and this city, abounding in Raksasas. May good betide you! I am going away and do you be happy without me. What, I spoke to you, O ranger of the night, to prevent you, for your welfare, did not please you. Persons, whose lease of life is well-nigh expired, do not pay heed to the well-meaning words of their friends.