Having spoken thus to Sumitra's son, Vibhișaņa experienced delight, and taking (Laksmana) bearing a bow in his hand, hurriedly went off. Proceeding some way and entering the mighty wood, Vibhīşaņa pointed out to Lakşmaņa the place (of sacrifice). The energetic brother of Rāvana showed to Lakşmaņa the Nyagrodha, dreadful to behold and resembling a mass of sable clouds. Here offering presents to the ghosts, the powerful son of Răvaņa afterwards engages in conflict. Then the Rākşasas becomes invisible to all beings; and he slay his enemies in battle and fastens them with excellent shafts. Do you, ere he has passed beyond the Nyagrodha, with flaming arrows destroy the powerful son of Rävaņa along with his car and steeds and charioteer. Thereupon saying, 'So be it,' the exceedingly energetic son of Sumitrā-that delight of his friends, took up his post there stretching his variegated bow. Ravana's son Indrajit, endowed with strength, mailed, and armed with a sword, and furnished with a banner, was seen mounted on a fire-hued chariot. The highly powerful Lakşmaņa addressed Pulastya's son never knowing defeat, saying, I challenge you to the encounter. Do you give me battle, exerting your utmost. Thus addressed, the exceedingly energetic and intelligent son of Rāvana, seeing Vibhīşaņa there, spoke to him harshly, thus. Born and bred in this Rākşasa race, you are the very brother of my father Why, O Rākşasa being my uncle, did you range yourself against your son? But neither kinship, nor emity, nor race, O wicked-minded one, nor co-birth, can, destroyer of righteousness, avail to make you discern your duty. O you of perverse understanding you are indeed to be pitied; as you are worthy of being reproached by the virtuous; since, renouncing your own, you have espoused servitude under another. Neither by your character nor yet your understanding did you perceive the mighty difference that Leith between living with one's own kindred, and taking refuge with the base. If one that is not our own, be furnished with every grace, and if one's own be void of all merit, one's kindred, albeit unworthy, is preferable; and he that is not ours, is even always such. He that, forsaking his own party, serve that of another, is destroyed even by the latter, when his own party is destroyed. O night-ranger, such is this your relentlessness, that, O Ravana's younger brother, you being a kindred, are capable of displaying your manliness (as no other person can do so). Thus addressed by his brother's son, Vibhis ana answered, “O Raksasa, why did you speak as if in ignorance of my character? O impious son of the Rākşasa chief, do you for ego the roughness which you assume on behalf of my dignity.* *Or, on account of your heroism. Albeit born in the race of Rākşas of cruel deeds, yet having regard to the first of principles pertaining to men, my character is not that of a Rākşasa. I do not take pleasure in the terrible; not do I revel in unrighteousness.” But how can a brother, although differing from his brother in character, be renounced by the latter?* *Some read Vişamasilena. Then the sense would be: 'How else could a brother bearing a difference in character, renounce his brother' meaning Ravana. One renouncing a person, lapsing from virtue and bent on sinful acts, attain happiness, even as one does by shaking off a venomous snake from his hand. The wise have called that impious cne given to stealing others goods and violating others wives, as worthy of being forsaken, even like a house that is aflame. Robbing others property, outraging the wives of others, and inspiring fear among friends, these three vices lead to destruction. The dreadful slaughter of sages, rebellion against all the gods, overweening conceit, anger long-continued enmity, and running amuck of counsel, these sins are sapping the life and fortune of my brother; and they have hidden his virtues even as clouds cover a mountain. It is on account of these vices that my brother, your sire, has been deserted by me. And this city of Lankā will not be, nor you, nor your father. You are proud, and haughty, and a boy, O Raksasa. You are fettered by the noose of Fate. Do you say to me whatever you like. To-day you have addressed harshly me, who have fallen on evil days; but, O worst of Raks asas, you cannot pass this Nyagrodha. Having smitten the Kākutstha, you cannot live. Fight with that man-god, Laksmana, in encounter. Being slain, you shall serve the deities in the abode of Yama. Displaying you own prowess, do you spend all your weapons and all your shafts. But coming within the ken of Laksmana's arrows, your will not today go hence, living with your forces.