Hearing that dreadful uproar resembling the sound of Indra's thunder-bolt, the monkeys, casting their looks on all sides fled away. Thereupon Hanumān, the son of Maruta, spoke to them, poorly, terrified and of a sorrowful countenance, saying. O monkeys, why do you look so melancholy and why are you flying away? Why have you renounced your earnest desire for fight? And where is your heroism gone? Do you remain behind me, I shall go first in the battle. It is improper for heroes of noble descent to escape from battle field. Being thus addressed by that highly intelligent son of the Wind-god, they were greatly excited with wrath and being pleased took up trees and। crags in their hands. Roaring thus the leading monkeys advanced towards the Rākşasas and stood encircling Hanumān in the battle-field. Being surrounded on all sides by leading monkeys, Hanuman began to burn down enemy's host like to fire spreading its flames. Being encircled by monkey-hosts that mighty monkey resembling death himself began to grind the Rākşasas. Being overwhelmed with grief and wrought up with ire, that monkey Hanumān, threw a huge crag on the car of that son of Rāvana. Beholding that crag about to fall down on the car, the charioteer moved his horses and it was speedily brought at some distance. And not reaching Indrajit stationed on the car and the charioteer, that crag, uselessly hurled, fell down on the earth. As the crag falling down the army of the Rakşasas were violently crushed. Thereupon hundreds of huge-bodied monkeys, emitting cries and taking up crags and trees proceeded towards him (Indrajit) and hurled them at him. The monkeys gifted with dreadful prowess began to make a down-pour of crags and trees. They thus assailed the enemies and frequently emitted cries. The grim-visaged night-rangers were assailed with trees in that field by the terrible monkeys. Beholding his army thus distressed by the monkeys, Indrajit, excited with wrath, and taking up his dart, proceeded towards the enemies, and encircled by his soldiers showered terrible shafts upon them. And that one of dreadful prowess slew many a leading monkey by means of darts, Asanis, swords, pattisas and clubs. The highly powerful monkeys destroyed his retinue, with crags, stones and trees having strong trunks. And Hanumān thus crushed many a Rākşasa of terrible deeds. Obstructing the Rākṣasas (for some time) Hanumān spoke to monkeys, saying, “Stay, we should not fight now. That daughter of Janaka has been slain, for whom we have engaged in fight, renouncing all hope of life and desiring to accomplish Rāma's satisfaction. Let us now go and inform Rāma and Sugrīva of it. And we shall do as we shall be commanded by them. Saying this and desisting all the monkeys from encounter that foremost of monkeys proceeded undaunted and heroically. Beholding Hanumăn proceed thus where Rāghava was that wicked-minded one (Indrajit) with a view to offer oblations to fire entered the sacrificial altar Nikumbhila. Reaching there Indrajit lighted up fire and began to pour oblations therein. And the fire blazed up receiving oblations of blood, and being satisfied assumed the appearance of the setting sun. Indrajit conversant with all ceremonials, offered oblations in due form for the welfare of the Rākşasas. And they all stood there watching the result and desirous of ascertaining the success of the battle.* *This Sloka has been left off in some editions.