Then Rāma, accompanied by the monkeyleaders, along with Sugrīva, ascended the top of Suvela, measuring a circumference of two Yojanas. And staying there for a while and looking at the ten cardinal points, he saw Lankā finely placed on the charming summit of Trikūța, graced with elegant groves; and (he also saw) the unconquerable lord of Räksasas, stationed at the top of the gateway, fanned with white chāmaras; graced with the umbrella betokening victory; smeared with red sandal; adorned in red ornaments; resembling masses of sable clouds; and apparelled in golden attire, his breast bearing scars from the tusk-ends of Airavata; covered with a sheet hued like the blood of hares; and appearing like clouds lighted up by the evening sun. On seeing the Raksasa-chief, Sugriva suddenly rose up in the sight of the lords of monkeys as well as Rāghava. And influenced by wrath, he, mustering strength and vigour, rising from the brow of the mountain, bounded to the gateway. And pausing for a while and eyeing the Rāks asa intrepidly, he, slighting the Raksasa, addressed him in harsh speech, saying. O Rākşasa, I am the friend as well as the slave of Rāma-lord of men. Me, backed by the energy of that king of the Earth, shall you not escape today. Saying this, he, suddenly springing up, descended on him; and snatching away his variegated crown, let it fa}l on the earth. Seeing his come abruptly, the night-ranger spoke to him thus, Thus that were Sugrīva beyond my ken, shall be neckless near me. Having said this, be rose up swiftly and dragged him down to the earth. Thereat springing like pith, the monkey pushed down his antagonist with his arms. Each having his body bathed in sweat and his person covered with blood each choking and annulling the efforts of the other, and resembling a Sālmali or a Kinsuka, and dealing blows and slaps, and hitting with his arms and hands, those exceedingly strong ones, the lord of the Rākşasas and that of the monkeys, fought wonderfully. And having for a long time encountered each other in combat on the dais belonging to the gate, they, now lifting up their persons and now lowering them, went down, each felling the other with his legs. Smiting each other, they, their bodies fastened together, went down between the wall and the moat, and again stood upon the ground. Having breath, they, resting for a space, grappled with each other; and they fast bound each other with their arms serving for ropes. And each fired with wrath, and each having both strength and skill, they now bore themselves in the lists like a tiger and a lion, furnished with teeth; or like the young of the foremost elephants engaged in encounter, and restraining and pushing each other with their arms, they simultaneously both came down to the ground, Then starting again to their feet, they, vituperating each other, ranged the lists, displaying feats expressive of skill and strength. Nor did those heroes speedily come by fatigue. And resembling mighty elephants, they, resisting each other by means of their powerful arms like to the trunks of elephants, fought for a long while, swiftly wheeling about the arena. Approaching each other, they strove to slay each other, like to two cats seated, momentarily encountering each other over some food. The lord of monkeys and Ravana, accomplished in fight, coursed the arena, displaying wonderful Mandalas, various sthānas, (a) curious gomutrakas, (b) gatapratyagatas, tirascinagatas, Vakragatas, parimoksas, varjanas, paridhāvanas, abhidravaņas, (c) aplavanas (d) savigrahāvasthānas, (e) paravrttas, (1) apavrttas, (g) apadrutas, (h) avaplutas, (i) apanyastas, (j) and upanyastas (k). In the meanwhile the Rākşasa attempted to put forth his power of illusion. Knowing this, the king of monkeys shot into the sky. And Rāvana, overpowered by fatigue and out of breath, thus baffled by the monkey-king, stood where he was. Thus the master of the foremost monkeys, securing fame in fight, beat the night-ranger, causing him to experience fatigue. And bounding beyond the spacious sky, the offspring of the Sun came to the side of Rāma in the midst of the monkey-forces. Having done that deed, the son of the Sun, lord of monkeys-with his heart surcharged with rejoicing, entered that host having the speed of the wind; enhancing the martial ardour of the son of the foremost of the Raghus, and honoured by the monkeys.