Having read the intention of that high-souled Raghava, he retired from the battle-field and entered into the city of Lankā. And remembering the destruction of many a। quick-paced Raksasa, his eyes were rendered coppery with ire; and that hero, the son of Ravana, issued out of the city again. That highly powerful, Indrajit, a descendant of Pulasta and an enemy of the celestials, issued out, encircled by the Rākşasas, by the western gate. Then beholding the heroic brothers Rāma and Lakşmaņa prepared for fight, Indrajit spread illusions. Placing an illusory figure of Sītā on the car, encircled by a huge army he began to make arrangements for her destruction. Desiring to charm all with his illusions, that one of wicked intent, preparing himself to slay Sītā, proceeded towards the monkeys. Beholding him thus proceed, the monkeys, inflamed with ire, desirous of fighting and with crags in their hands, moved on. And preceded them all, Hanuman, the foremost of the monkeys, with a huge mountaintop in his hand. He beheld there, on Indrajit's car, Sita, deprived of all joy, poorly, greatly reduced with fasts and wearing a single braid. Rāghava's beloved spouse wore a piece of soiled cloth, and though highly beautiful, the grace of her person was greatly spoiled with dirt. That daughter of Janaka, was not seen by him for a long time. And beholding her and deciding instantly that she is the daughter of Mithilā, (he became greatly sorry). Seeing her on the car, innocent, poor, deprived of joy and brought under the influence of the son of the lord Rākşasas that great monkey thought within himself— 'What must be the intention of Indrajit?' and accompanied by heroic monkeys advanced towards the son of Ravana. Beholding that monkey host, Ravana's son became beside himself with ire and unsheathing his weapon Nistrinsha, caught her by the hair. The Räkşasa addressed himself to strike her in the presence of all those monkeys and that illusory figure of Sītā began to bewail saying, “O Rāma! O Rāma!” Seeing her thus caught by the head, Hanumān, the son of Maruta, greatly sorry, began to shed tears. Beholding that beloved spouse of Räma, having a tender and beautiful person, he addressed angrily the son of the lord of Rākşasas with harsh words. It is for your destruction, O Vicious-souled one! that you have touched her hair. Being descended from that great Brahmă ascetic you are born as a Rākşasa. O! cursed are you, since you have cherished such a desire and engaged in such a vicious deed. O vile! O wicked! O! cruel and dishonourable wight! O you having vice for your prowess! O shameless! Are you not ashamed of perpetrating such an inhuman deed. What has Maithili done by you, O cruel one! that you are ready to slay her—She has been banished from her home, territory and has been separated from her lord. O you worthy of being slain, destroying Sītā, you shall not live long as you have been brought under me. You shall after the death reach the place which is occupied by those who murder women, a place which is avoided even by those who commit every sort of crime punishable by law. Saying this Hanuman, accompanied by monkeys armed with weapons, and excited with ire, proceeded towards the son of the lord or Raksasas. Beholding the highly powerful monkeys advance thus the Rākṣasas, inflamed with wrath, obstructed them. Assailing the monkey-hosts with thousands of arrows, Indrajit spoke to that foremost of monkeys, Hanumān, saying. Today I shall slay before you all Vaidehī, for whom you, Sugriva and Rama have come. Slaying her, O monkey, I shall afterwards kill you, Rama, Laksmana and Sugriva and the dishonourable Vibhişaņa. O monkey, about not destroying women, of which you were speaking (I might say) that we must always do what pains our enemies."* *There is one śloka intervening according to some texts, but it has been omitted by many. The reasons for this omission are best known to them. The purport is:-"Why did Rama slay Taraka before? And I shall therefore slay his spouse the daughter of king Janaka.” Hear in Indrajit attempts to justify himself and wants to prove that Räma is equally blameable for this.) Saying this, Indrajit with a sharp sword, himself killed the illusory Sitā thus bewailing. Being sundered by him obliquely in a way in which a sacred thread lies on one's own person, the innocent (Sitā) having beautiful countenance fell down on the earth. Slaying her Indrajit spoke to Hanumān,“Behold I have slain (before you) with my sword Rāma's beloved. And Vaidehi being thus slain, all your labours have been rendered useless." a Destroying her with his own hand by means of a huge sword, Indrajit, greatly pleased ascended his car and began to emit dreadful roars. The monkeys stationed near heard that terrible roar and saw him enter the castel.* *The castle built by Indrajit by means of his illusory power in the air. And slaying Sītā that wicked-minded son of Rāvana became greatly pleased. And beholding him thus delighted the monkeys being greatly sorry fled away.