Hearing Dhūmrākṣa slain, Rāvana-lord of the Raksasas-overwhelmed with a mighty rage, began to sigh like a serpent. And collide with passion, and sighing hot for a long time, he addressed a cruel Rākşasa-the exceedingly strong Vajradanșrta. *Lit-the thunder-toothed. Go you, O hero. Go out, environed by the Rākşasa. Slay Daśaratha's son-Rāma and Sugrīva along with the monkeys. Thereupon hastily answering “So be it,” that foremost of the Rákşasas skilled in illusion, marched forth surrounded by many a leader* of armies, furnished with elephants and steeds, mules and camels, with his mind concentrated; and adorned with innumerable variegated flags and banners. *Valai-forces-is interpreted leaders by the commentator. Then decked out with curious keyūras and a tiara, and wearing armour, he rushed out with his bow in his hand. Then going round his flaming vehicle, adorn with pennons and garnished with gold, the king* ascended the same. *Vajradanstra. And equipped with slender swords and curious Tomaras and smooth maces and bhindipālas and bows and darts and pattiśa and scimitars and discuses and clubs and sharpened axes, the multiform infantry march bearing arms in their hands. All those powerful and flaming Rākşasas wore variegated raiments. And heroic elephants in rut resembling mountains in motion, marched, being led by those well-skilled in battle carrying Tomaras and hooks in their hands. And mighty steeds bearing auspicious marks, marched ridden by heroes. That entire Rākşasa army. as it marched forth, resemble clouds in summer roaring with lightning. And (the Raksasa) sallied forth through the Southern Entrance, where that leader of herdsAngads-was stationed. And as they went out, evil omens appeared. From the cloudless yet fierce sky meteors began to shoot. and throwing up flames from their mouths, dreadful jackals began to emit cries. And frightful beasts betokened the destruction of the Räkşasa in battle. And warriors began to tumble down in an ominous way. Witnessing these evil omens, the exceedingly powerful and energetic Vajradanșțra, assuming patience, set out, eager for encounter. Seeing them flee away, the monkeys burning for victory, set up tremendous shouts, filling all the ten cardinal points. Then there came on a terrific encounter of the monkeys and the Räksasas, dreadful, of terrific deeds, and wishing for each other' death. And warriors fraught with high spirits, springing up, dropped down to the earth their bodies and hands riven and all their person bathed in blood. And some approaching each other, with bludgeons in their hands, with turning away from the field, discharged various weapons at each other. There were heard sounds of trees and rocks and weapons, mighty and dreadful and capable of striking terror into the heart. And dreadful and mighty were the sounds of car-weapons, mighty and dreadful and capable of string terror into the heart. And dreadful and mighty were the sounds of car-wheels, and conchs and trumpets and drums. Some, casting off weapons, engaged in a hand to hand combat by means of slaps, and kicks, and bones, and trees. And some Raksasa, having their bodies broken, were killed by means of thighs. And some were crushed with crags by Dänavas invincible in battle. Vajradanșțra, resembling the noose, handed Destroyer, frightening the monkeys, ranged in that field fatal to people. Raksasas, possessed of strength; equipped with various weapons, transported with passion, slew the monkey-forces. Then in the conflict the proud Wind-god's son, influenced by twofold wrath, spread havoc among the Rākşasa ranks, like the Fire at the universal dissolution. The energetic Angada possessed of the prowess of a lion, with his eyes coppery with wrath, upraising a tree, began to spread terrible destruction among the Rākşasa, even as a lion destroys tiny deer. And attacked by Angada there, the Raksasas of dreadful vigour, with their heads riven, fell down like to trees that have been uprooted. The earth became frightful (to behold), being covered with variegated cars and standards and steeds and the bodies of monkeys and of Rāks asas and streams of blood. And adorned with chains, and Keyūras, and attires, and umbrellas, the field of battle looked like an autumnal night. And agitated by Angada's impetuosity, that mighty army of Rākṣasas began to shake, even as water tremble, moved by the wind.