On Dasaratha's son, Rama, having crossed the Ocean with his forces, the graceful Răvaņa addressed his two counsellors, Suka and Sarana, saying. The crossing the entire ocean incapable of being crossed, by the monkey-forces, and the building over the sea of the bridge by Rāma, all this had never happened before. The construction of a bridge over the ocean cannot at all command credence. But (however it be), I must enumerate the monkey-hosts. Entering the monkey-army unobserved, it behove you to ascertain the magnitude thereof, its strength, who are the foremost monkeys, who are the councillors assembled there of Rāma, and who of Sugrīva, who range at the head, who among the monkeys are heroic; how they have constructed the bridge over the water of the ocean; how the high-souled monkeys stay there; Rama's as well as Laksmana's purpose, prowess and the arms (they fight with). And who is the commander of those magnanimous monkeys? Having learnt all this truly, you ought to return speedily. Being thus commissioned, these heroes, the Raksasas, Suka and Sarana, assuming monkeyshapes, entered into the hosts of monkeys. But Suka and Sāraṇa could not number that army of monkeys, incomprehensible and capable of making people's hair stand on end. The forces were on mountain-tops, by fountains and in caves. And those rangers of the night beheld those forces, some having already crossed, and some crossing, and some intent on doing so, and some having sat down and some sitting that mighty army sending terrific roars, that ocean of hosts incapable of being disturbed. As they remained thus disguised, they were discovered by Vibhisana. Thereat, taking them captive, he unfolded (the fact) to Rama, saying. These are the counsellors of the lord of Raksasas-Suka and Sarana. O captor of hostile capitals, they have come as spies from Lankā. Seeing Ráma, they were greatly afflicted, and, despairing of their lives and exercised with fear, with joined hands, said. O placid one, commanded by Ravana, we have come here, O son of Raghu, for the purpose of gathering information concerning this army. Hearing their speech, Rāma, son to Dasaratha, ever engaged in the welfare of all beings, laughing, remarked. If you have heedfully noted this entire array, or if you have done what you had been commanded to do, return in peace. If aught remain unseen, do you see it anew. Or Vibhīşaņa will again fully show it to you. Having been taken, you need not fear on the score of your lives. Even if envoys happen to be taken who are equipped with weapons, they should not be slain. And albeit these night-rangers have come as spies in disguise, with the view of creating division among their foes, yet, O Vibhisana, let them off. Entering the extensive Lankā, you should say to the king-younger brother to the Dispenser of riches-the words which I utter. That force relying on which you have carried away my Sita, do you as you wish, along with your forces and friends, display the same. On the morning of the morrow behold the city of Larikā with her wall and gates, as well as the hosts of Räkşasas, destroyed by me with my shafts. As Väsava equipped with the thunder-bolt hurled the same amidst the Dänavas, will I, O Rāvana, on the morning of the morrow pour down my dreadful ire upon you along with your forces. Thus directed (by Rama), those Raksasas, Śuka and Säraņa, having saluted the righteous Raghava with 'Victory!,' came (back) to Lanka and spoke to the lord of Rākşasas, saying. O lord of Rākşasas, having been taken by Vibhīşaņa for the purpose of being slain, we came to be seen by the righteous-souled Rāma of immeasurable energy, and (finally) were liberated (by him). As these four persons have combined—like to the Lokapālas, heroic, accomplished in arms, and of steady prowess-viz., Dasaratha's son, Rama, the graceful Laksmana, Vibhisana, and the highly powerful Sugrīva, resembling the great Indra, these are capable of uprooting the city of Larkā—walls and gateways-and replacing her (on her former site), leave you the monkeys aside. Such is Rāma's figure and arms that he shall alone demolish Lankā, leave the other three alone. That host protected by Rāma, Lakşmaņa and Sugrīva, shall become exceedingly hard to combat even by the Asuras and gods. The army of the high-souled rangers of the woods, eager for encounter, contains warriors bursting with high spirits. No use of dispute. Be you intent on pacification. Do you render back Maithili to Dasaratha's son.