Beholding Kumbha and Nikumbha slain, Rāvana was excited with ire like to flaming fire. Being beside himself, simultaneously with wrath and grief Rāvana* spoke to Makarāksa, Kahara's son, having spacious eyes, saying, O child, do you proceed at my command with the army and destroy Rāghava and Laksmana with all the monkeys. *Nairta is another name of Ravana. Hearing the words of Rāvana, Khara's son, Makarākşa, proud of his own own prowess, delightedly spoke to the night-ranger, saying, “Be it so." And saluting and circumambulating the ten-necked one, that hero, at Ravana's behest, issued out of the house. Khara's son spoke to the commander who was near him, saying, “Do you speedily bring the chariot here and all the soldiers." Hearing his words, that commanding nightranger, soon let before him the army and the chariot. And going round the chariot and addressing the charioteer that night-ranger (Makarāksa) said, O charioteer, do you soon drive the chariot. Thereat Makarākṣa addressed those Räkşasas, saying, O Raksasas! do you all fight before me. I have been commanded by the high-souled Rāvana, the lord of Räksasas, to slay both Rāma and Lakşmaņa in conflict. I shall slay to-day, O night-ranger, with my excellent arrows, Rama, Laksmana, Sugriva and all other monkeys. Like to fire consuming dry fuel, shall I today slay the host of monkeys with my darts. Hearing those words of Makarākşa, the mighty night-rangers, (addressed themselves for fight). They were armed with various weapons, cautious; assuming shapes at will, crooked, having fearful teeth, coppery eyes; roaring like elephants, having dishevelled hair and terrible. And encircling the huge-bodied son of Khara, those gigantic (Raksasas) began to proceed, delighted and moving the earth (with the weight of their persons). There arose a terrible noise on all sides from the sound of conches, and thousands of bugles, and from the moving of the arms of the heroes. And all on a sudden the reins slipped off (the hands of) the charioteer and the flag of the Råkşasas dropped down. The course of the steeds was thus slackened and they began to move slowly and poorly with their heads drooping down. There blew a terribly rough wind mixed with dust when the fearfully wicked-minded Makaraksa's issued out for battle. Those powerful Rākşasas neglecting those bad omens proceeded towards where Rāma and Laksmana were. They were all black like to clouds, elephants and buffaloes, and had marks of swords and maces on their persons. And all those nightrangers were skilled in the art of warfare and began to range to and fro (in the battle field) saying, “I shall to first.”