When Rāvana's son entered Lankā, after having accomplished his purpose, the foremost monkeys protected Raghava, surrounding him on all sides. And Hanumān, and Angada, and Nīla, and Susena, and Kumuda, and Nala, and Gaya, and Gavākṣa, and Panas, and Sānuprastha-a mighty monkey-and Jämbavān, and Rishava, and Sunda, and Rambha, and Satabali, and Prthu, all forming them selves into array, and equipped with trees on all sides, and remaining vigilantthe monkeys kept gazing at all sides, awry and upwards; and even when a straw stirred, they thought it to be a Rākşasa. Rāvana, on his part experiencing the height of exaltation, summoned the Rākṣasais engaged in guarding Sita. Thereat the Raksasi-Trijata and otherspresented themselves at his command. And then the lord of Rākşasas, delighted addressed then the Raksasis, saying. Tell Vaidehí that Rāma and Lakşmaņa have been slain in battle by Indrajit. And taking her on Pushaka, show her (Rāma and Lakşmaņa) lying slain on the field of battle. That one depending on whom she had proudly set her face against me, that husband of hers, along with his brother, has been slain in conflict. Then methyl's daughter, her fear gone off with her anxiety, and herself losing all support, Sītādaughter to methyl-decked out in all ornaments, shall seek me. And today beholding Rāma with Lakşmaņa, come under the away of Time, she, finding no other way, shall desist from her present course. And seeing no other resource, that one of expansive eyes shall of herself seek me. Hearing those words of the wicked-minded Rāvana, the Rākşasais, saying, “So be it,” went to where Puspaka was. Then taking Pușpaka, the Rākşasis at Rāvana's command went to Maithilī staying in theasoka wood. Then, taking Sītā, who was overcome with grief for her lord, the Raksasais, placed her on the car, Puspaka. Placing Sītā on Puşpaka along with Trijatā, Răvana took her all round (Lankā) crowded with ensigns and standards. And the lord of Rākşasas jubilantly proclaimed in Lankā, Rāghava as well as Lakşmaņa have been slain by Indrajit in battle. And going about with Trijatā Sītā saw all the monkey-troops slain. She found the flesh-eaters elated in spirits, and the monkeys afflicted with extreme grief at the side of Rāma and Lakşmaņa. Then Sītā beheld both Lakşmaņa and Rāma lying in the field, senseless and bound with arrows. Those heroes were lying on the earth, their mail torn, their bows cast off their bodies mangled all over and thickly pierce with shafts. Seeing those brothers, foremost of heroes and best of men-having eyes resembling white lotuses, and them selves like to Kumāras, lying in the field,* the fire sprung one, Sītā stricken with grief, beg a to weep piteously. *Virān narashabhān-heroes and best of menoccurs again, left out on the score of redendancy. That black-eyed one of an excellent person, Janaka's daughter-seeing them roll in the dust, broke out into lamentation. With her eyes shedding plentiful tears, she seeing those brothers, endowed with god-like prowess, concluded them to be dead; and overwhelmed with grief, spoke as follows. as as