Thus addressed, Kumbhakarņa rebuking Mahodara, said to that foremost of Rākşasa-his brother-Ravana. Even I shall remove your great fear by slaying the wicked minded Råma. On your foe having been slain, attain you ease. It is not for naught that the heroes roar, like to clouds containing no rain. Behold you their, like roaring resulting in action in the field! Heroes do not vaunt: but without boasting of their prowess in speech, they perform feats difficult of being achieved. O Mahodara, what you say is ever acceptable only to kings that are incompetent, and foolish, pluming themselves on their knowledge. All the affairs of the monarch have been wrecked by you-cravens in fight, sleek-tongued, following the king (fawning) you have made Lankā contain only the king, the treasury is lean; and the forces have been slain. By the king you have done like foes in the guise of friends. For repairing in mighty conflict the wrong that you have perpetrated, I am about to set out for battle for routing the enemy. Thus addressed by the intelligent Kumbhakarna, the lord of Raksasas, laughing answered. Sure this Mahodara is affrighted at Rāma. Therefore, my child, O you versed in warfare, he does not relish battle. Like you have I none either in friendship or strength. Therefore, O Kumbhakama, go for destroying the foe and securing celebrity. I have waked you up that wast lying down, in order that you mightst destroy the enemy. O subduer of foes, perilous is the time for the Rāks asas. Go forth, grasping your spear, like the noosehanded Destroyer himself. Do you devour up the monkeys as well as the princes possessed of the energy of the Sun himself. On seeing your form the monkeys shall flee away; and the breasts of Rāma and Lakşmaņa shall be riven. Having spoken thus to Kumbhakarna endowed with prodigious might, that foremost of Rakşasas-the exceedingly energetic Rāvaņa-felt as if he had received life over again. And well acquainted with Kumbhakarņa's might, and knowing his prowess, the king felt delighted, like the cloudless Moon. Having been thus accosted, that highly powerful one, went out cheerfully. And hearing the king's speech, he made ready for fight. He took a whetted dart, destructive to foes on account of its impetuous vehemence; entirely made of black iron; flaming: decorated with garniture, of shining gold; looking like Indra's asani; ponderous as the thunder-bolt; capable of destroying gods and Dānavas, Gandharvas, Yakşas and Pannagas, adorned with festoons of crimson flowers; and belching forth flames. And taking that huge dart decked with the blood of foes. The wondrous energetic Kumbhakarna spoke to Ravana, saying, I shall go alone; let this mighty host remain here. Today hungry and enraged, I shall devour up the monkeys. Hearing Kumbhakarma's words. Rāvana said. Go you surrounded by the forces bearing darts and maces in their hands. The monkeys are highsouled, heroic and well-skilled in battle; and if they find you alone or unwary, they may slay you with their teeth, Therefore do you exceedingly irresistible, go, environed by the forces; and destroy the entire party of the foes, who are bent upon doing harm to the Rākşasa. Then starting up form his seat, the exceedingly energetic Rāvana hung on Kumbhakarņa's neck a wreath stringed with gems in the centre. Rāvaņa also decked that high-souled one with Angadas, and finger fences and noble ornaments, and a chain resembling the Moon. Rāvaņa adorned his person with garlands gorgeous and fragrant, and set ear-rings to his ears. And adorned with golden Angadas and Keyūras and other ornaments of gold, the largeeared Kumbhakarņa appeared like a fire fed full of sacrificial libations. With his great dark girdle he seemed like the Mandara fastened by the serpent on the occasion of the churning of the sea. Donning on his impenetrable golden mail, splendid like lightning, and shining in its own brilliance, Kumbhakarņa appeared like the monarch of mountains enveloped with evening clouds. Having all his limbs adorned with ornaments and bearing a dart in his hand, the Rakşasas resembled Nārāyaṇa in elation of spirits, when he covered heaven and earth and the nether regions with three paces. Then embracing his brother and going round him and bowing down the head to him, that exceedingly powerful one went out. Rāvana sent him with choice benedictions, while he caused kettle-drums and conchs to be sounded and force equipped with excellent weapons, to accompany Kumbhakarņa. And high-souled mighty warriors followed that foremost of heroes with elephant and steeds and chariots sending out rattle resembling the rumbling of thunder. And mounting serpents and camels and asses and lions and leopards and deer and birds, (Rāks asas) followed the grim Kumbhakarņa endowed with tremendous strength. And strewn with blossoms, and, with an umbrella held over him, that exceedingly terrible enemy of the Deities and the Dănvas, wielding a dz.: in his hand-went out maddened with the smell of blood. Countless footmen wondrous powerful and mighty and dreadful and fierce-sighted Räksasas, carrying weapons in their hands, went in his wake. The Räkşasa measuring each many a vyama and red, eyed, and resembling masses of darkblue collyrium, went out upraising darts and swords and sharpened axes and bhindipälas and parighas and maces and huge talaskandhas and irrisistible Kșepaņis. The exceedingly energetic Kumbhakarna endowed with prodigious strength sallied forth, assuming another form terrific and dreadful to behold. And the gigantic huge-faced and fierce Kumbhakarņa, measuring an hundred bows in breadth and six hundred in altitude, having eyes resembling car-wheels, and resembling a towering hill, or a mountain burnt, marshalling the Raksasa, said with a complacent countenance, “Like fire consuming insects, shall I today, wrought up with wroth, burn up one by one the bands of the flower of the monkeyforces. But the wood-ranging monkeys have not transgressed anywise to the like of us. That species is the ornament of the gardens attached to our residences. The cause of the siege of the city is Rāghava along with Laksmana. He being slain, all are slain. Therefore shall I slay him in battle. As the Rākşa—Kumbhakarņa—was speaking thus, the Rākşasas sent up terrific shouts, as if making the very sea shake. As the intelligent Kumbhakarņa sallied out speedily, dreadful were the omens that presented themselves on all sides. Clouds containing meteors and lightning looked dark like asses. And the earth shook with her oceans and woods. And fierce jackals began to cry, opening their fiaming mouths. And birds began to wheel at the left. As he marched a vulture alighted on his dart. And his left eye throbbed and his left arm shook. A meteor dropped down with a tremendous crash. And the sun was bedimmed, and the air did not blow, enhancing pleasure. But without heeding these mighty omens that took place, capable of making people's down stand on end, Kumbhakarna went out, urged on by the force of the Finisher. And leaping over the wall with his legs, that one resembling a mountain saw the wonderful array of the monkeys, resembling clouds. Seeing that foremost of Rākşasas resembling a hill, the monkeys began to disperse in all the ten cardinal directions like clouds driven by the wind. Seeing that terrific host of monkeys scattering in all directions, like clouds broken through (by winds), Kumbhakarņa possessed the splendour of clouds, from joy, emitted roars like clouds. Hearing those terrible shouts like to the roaring of clouds in the welkin, innumerable monkeys dropped to the earth even as sāla trees that have their roots severed. And issuing forth for destroying the foe, the high-souled Kumbhakarņa, equipped with a tremendous bludgeon, struck extreme terror into the monkey-ranks, like to the Lord armed with the Fatal rod at the Universal wreck.