Hearing carefully the words of Vibhīşaņa, gifted with the intelligence of the lord of speech, the high-souled Indrajit, the leader of demons, spoke, saying. Why are you, O uncle, speaking these useless words like one terrified? He even, who is not born in this race, cannot speak or act in this wise. Only one man in this family, my uncle Vibhisana, is weak in energy, strength, prowess, patience, heroism and vigour. Why are you O timid one, afraid of them since any one of these Rākṣasas is capable of slaying those two princes, human beings as they are? The master of the three worlds, the lord of the celestials, has been brought down by me as captive on this earth. And all the celestials smitten with fear fled to different quarters. I brought down on earth the loud-roaring celestial elephant Airavata and uprooted by force its tusks. And all the celestials were terrified at this. Am I not, who have shattered the pride of the celestials, afflicted the leading Daityas, and am gifted with excellent prowess, capable of discomfiting these two princess-very ordinary mortals as they are? Hearing the words of (Indrajit) gifted with high energy irrepressible and resembling the lord of celestials, Vibhisana, the foremost of those using weapons, addressed him with words, fraught with high import. O my son, you are a mere child and of unripe intellect and hence you are not capable of as certaining the propriety and impropriety of counsels. You are therefore speaking thus like a maniac for your own destruction. You are known as a son to Ravana, O Indrajit, but in sooth, you are his foe in disguise, since knowing of his destruction from Rāghava, you did not prevent him. You are brave, childish and have been impelled by your silly understanding. You shall be slain along with him who has brought you in this counsel chamber. You are, O Indrajit, foolish, imprudent, devoid of humility, of an irritable temper, of feeble sense, vicious-minded and of a silly understanding. And you did speak so, being impelled by childishness. Who shall withstand in battle, the shafts, shot by Raghava, resembling the rod of Death, the stick of Brahmā, flaming like the Fire of Dissolution. Do you render back Sītā, O king, to Rāma, with riches, jewels, excellent ornaments, clothes and jems and we shall then be able to live here void of grief. Do you render back Sītā, O king, to Rāma, with riches, jewels, excellent ornaments, clothes and jems and we shall then be able to live here void of grief.