Having addressed Rāvana with these harsh words, his younger brother, reached in no time, where Rāma along with Lakṣmaṇa was. The leading monkeys, stationed on earth, espied him on the welkin, resembling in size the summit of the mount Meru, and burning like lightning in the effulgence of his own person. And his four attendants of terrible prowess were adorned with excellent ornaments and armed with armours and maces. He was like to a collection of clouds, powerful as the thunder-bolt, holding an excellent mace, heroic and embellished with excellent ornaments. Beholding him along with four counsellors, the highly intelligent Sugrīva, the lord of monkeys, engaged in meditation along with them. And meditating for a while, he spoke to the monkeys headed by Hanuman the following excellent words. Behold, there comes a Rākşasa, armed with various weapons and followed by four demons to slay us and there is not the least doubt about it. And hearing the words of Sugrīva, the excellent monkeys, taking up huge trees and crages, bespoke him. Do you order us, O king, to destroy these vicious-souled demons. These shall crush them to death, limited as is the tenure of their life. They addressing each other in this wise, Vibhīşaņa descended from the sky on the northern shore. And beholdings Sugrīva and all others stationed near him, the highly intelligent Vibhīşaņa accosted them, at the highest pitch of his voice, saying. There lives a Raksasa, named Ravana, the lord of demons, and perpetrator of many iniquitous deeds. I am his younger brother known as Vibhişaņa. By him, slaying the vulture Jatayu, was carried away Sītā from Janasthana. She is imprisoned, brought under his sway, poorly, and being well guarded by the Rakşasees. With various well meaning words and reasonings I pointed out to him, the necessity of rendering back Sītā to Rāma. And Ravana, possessed by Death, paid no heed to my well-meaning words, like to one, lying on the brink of death, neglecting the administration of medicine. Being reviled by him and treated harshly like a menial, I have come to seek Rāghava's shelter, renouncing my children and wives. Do you soon mention to the high-souled Rāghava, the refuge of all creatures, that Vibhīşaņa has arrived. Hearing those words the quick-paced Sugrīva, excited with ire, spoke to Rāma, before Laksmana, saying. Forsooth has an enemy entered secretly in our midst and he shall slay us getting an opportunity like to an owl killing the crows. O slayer of foes, it now behove you to be particularly careful about the counsels, arrangement of soldiers, polity-civil and military and spies of our own party as well as those of the enemies. These Rākşasas are heroic; they assume shapes at will, always lie in ambush and secretly bring about others' ruin-we should not therefore place confidence in them. This must be the emissary of Rāvaņa-the lord of Raksasas. Entering in our midst, he shall, in sooth, sow dissensions in our camp, or he shall slay us when we are careless, confiding in them. Avoiding the enemies, we should now collect the forest-rangers our friends and servants. O lord, this man is a Rākşasa by birth and the brother of our foe and so is he our enemy, how can we trust him? Ravana's younger brother, known Vibilisana, uc come here with four Raksasas, to seck your shelter. O you the foremost of forgiving persons, I consider this Vibhīşaņa, who has been despatched by Ravana, worthy of being slain. as Being impelled by his wicked intention and commissioned by Rävaņa, this Rākşasa has come here and secretly by virtue of his illusive powers he shall slay you, O innocent one, when you shall place confidence in him. Having thus accosted Rāma, skilled in the are of speech, that lord of the army, Sugriva, well versed in speech, became silent. And hearing the words of Sugrīva, the mighty Rāma spoke to the monkeys, near him, headed by Hanumān, saying. You have all heard, the words well grounded in reason, the lord of monkeys has said, regarding Rāvana's younger brother. It behove him, who desires for perpetual wealth, and is intelligent and capable of giving sound counsels, to advise his friends in difficult matters. Being thus addressed by Rāma (to minister to him best counsels) all those monkeys, intent upon encompassing his well-being, gave out their respective opinions. O Rāghava, there is nothing beyond your knowledge in the three worlds. It is only to show your respect towards us; O Răma, that you did accost us in this wise. You are of truthful vows, heroic, pious, of firm prowess, discriminating, recollecting and having implicit confidence in your friends. Let the intelligent and capable counsellors deliver their reasonable opinions to you. They speaking thus to Rāghava, the intelligent monkey Angada, spoke as follows for sounding the intention of Vibhīşaņa. We should always suspect him since he has come from the side of our enemies, and should not, all on a sudden, place confidence in him. The wicked-minded always move about hiding their real self, and bring about peoples' calamity, taking advantage of their weak points. And great is the disaster thereof. It is always proper to engage in actions, considering what is right and what is wrong. Virtues should always be gathered and vices abondoned. Do you renounce him unhesitatingly, if did you find in him a source of a great calamity and do you embrace him if did you find him crowned with many virtues. There upon followed Sarava with words fraught with high import, best of men, do you speedily despatch emissaries to sound Vibhis ana. If did you, sounding him well through the instrumentality of sharp spies, find him friendly, do you win him over to your side. There upon the wise Jāmbavān, arriving at conclusions by virtue of his knowledge of Šāstras, began with words, void of defects. Surely does Vibhīşaņa come from the vicious lord of Räkşasas, dead set against us and has arrived at such a bad piace and in such a bad hour. We should always fear him. There upon followed Mainda, conversant with what is right and wrong, after due deliberation, with words pregnant with words pregnant with reason. He is Rāvana's younger brother, by name Vibhīşana. Let the lord of men ask him every thing at first in sweet words. Do you first ascertain, O foremost of men, with what intention he has come evil or good and then settle what course to adopt. There upon spoke Hanumān, the foremost of the counsellors and well versed in Šāstras, in accents sweet, glorious and fraught with a high value. Even Brhaspati, (the lord of speech) cannot excel you, capaable,* gifted with the best of intellect and foremost of those skilled in the are of speech, as you are. *Capable to ascertain the truth of all Sastras. And what I know I speak, o king. I do so, in the interest of Rāma's work and not impelled by my skill in the are of speech, by the pride of being a counsellor, by the vanity of being gifted with a high intellect or by the desire of speaking for its own sake. What your counsellors have said for ascertaining the good or evil intention of Vibhīş aņa appear to me as most defective and productive of no consequence whatever. It is impossible to sound him without any command.* *To command to relate for what he has come. And even to command him now for the same appears to me as improper. And as regards the despatch of spies, anent what you have been advised by your ministers, I do not observe any utility. And what little I have thought of, I have something to say (regarding Jambaban's proposal) that Vibhīşaņa has arrived at such a bad place and in such an evil hour. He has really come to a very good place and in a very good hour. And truly has he performed a becoming and sensille action by coming here after duly ascertaining that Rāvana is a vicious wight and you are a pious person-he is full of vices-you are gifted with many virtues-he is tyrannical and you are powerful. And what they have said, O king, as regards sounding him through secret spies, appear to me as one requiring great wisdom. An intelligent man, when questioned by any suddenly, suspects many things. And if the newcomer be a friend and has come here for his own happiness, how greatly shall his mind be changed by such a course? Besides by a sudden questioning it is impossible to ascertain the intention of a foreigner. Do you therefore yourself accost him and determine, by his voice, his secret motive. I did not however mark anything of his wickedness while he spoke; rather I did observe signs of gladness on his countenance. So I do not suspect him. The wily can never come fearless and undisturbed. Nor were his words cunning. So I do not suspect him. It is not very easy to hide one's real nature. It manifests itself by force. So this action of Vibhīşana is not out of place or season. When accomplished it shall redound to his own interest. Considering well your preparations for war and Ravana's vain conduct, hearing of Vah's destruction and Sugrīva's installation on the throne he has, impelled by his good sense, come here, desirous of gaining the kingdom. Taking these into account, it seems prudent to take him to our side. O you the foremost of the intelligent, I have spok thus considering him sincere. It now behove you to perform what you think proper.