There on the northern shore of the ocean the army was encamped and arranged in order by Nila. The two leading monkeys Mainda and Dvivida patrolled about on all sides to protect the monkey host. The army being encamped on the shore of the lord of streams and rivers, Rāma, beholding Laksmana by his side, spoke, saying. I know that grief abates as time passes by, but my sorrow arising from the separation of my spouse, is increasing day by day. I am not sorry that she has been stealthily taken away by the demon-but my sorrow is that her end is drawing high. O Wind, do you go there where my dear spouse is, and touching her person, do you touch me, for I shall then be happy stationing my looks in the Moon and being touched by you. Alas! my dear one cried 'O lord, O lord' when she was taken away. Those words, revolving burn me like poison. I am now being burnt down day and night by the fire of desire, having separation from her for its fuel and her thoughts for its flame. Leaving you, O Son of Sumitrā, I shall jump into the deep and then shall not this fire burn me any more. This is my only consolation, for which I draw my vital breath-that myself and she breathe on the same earth. Like to a dry land drawing water from a watered ground, I do live, hearing that Janaki still survives. When shall I, discomfiting my enemies, behold Sītā, having a beautiful waist and eyes resembling lotus-petals, as a victorious hero behold the royal Grace. Like to the sick drinking the elixir of life, when shall I, raising a little her lotus-like countenance having graceful teeth and lips, imprint kisses thereon? When shall she, laughing, embrace me with her rising breast resembling the palm fruit? Alas that chaste dame having scarlet corners of the eye, being encircled by the demons, is wishing for a protector like to one having no husband, albeit having a husband in me. How fare in the midst of the shc-demons, that daughter of the king Janaka, my beloved spouse, and the daughter-in-law of king Dasaratha? And having those Rākṣasas, hard to repress, slain by me, truly shall she appear like to the rays of the Moon extricated from sable autumnal clouds. Sītā is constitutionally slender, and forsooth, she has been greatly reduced by sorrow, fasting and calamities touching time and place. When shall I, piercing with my shafts the breast of the lord of Raksasas, renounce my mind's grief? When shall my devoted Sītā resembling the daughter of a celestial, fling herself anxiously around my neck and shed tears of joy? When shall I renounce this my sorrow arising out of Maithili's separation, like to one casting off his soiled clothes? The highly intelligent Rāma bewailing thus, the day passed away and the Sun, decreasing gradually, disappeared at last. And consoled by Laksmana, Rama, stricken with thought touching Sītā having eyes like lotus-petals, engaged in rites relating to the worship of Eve.