Then Rāvana heard the tumult raised by the highly energetic monkeys roaring in company with the Rākşasas. Hearing that low and solemn noise-that prodigious uproar-Rävaņa said in the midst of his counsellors. From mighty roars that are heard of in innumerous delighted monkeys, resembling the roar of couds, it is evident, beyond a doubt, that there is great rejoicing there. And the salt Ocean is vexed with these thundering noises. The brother-Rama and Laksmana-have been fast bound with sharp shafts, and here this uproar is exciting my alarm. Having spoken thus to his ministers, the lord of the Rākşasas addressed the Naiſtas present there, saying. Do you speedily acquaint yourselves with the cause of rejoicing that has arisen of these monkeys on this mournful occasion. Thus accosted, they hurriedly mounting up on the wall, surveyed the forces maintained by the high-souled Sugrīva as well as those exalted ones-Raghu's sons-emancipated from their terrific arrowy fetters and arisen (now). Thereat, with their hearts wrought up, grimvisaged Rākşasas descending from the wall appeared before the Rākşasa-lord with pale faces. Then with woe-begone faces, those Raksasas, skilled in speech, faithfully informed Rāvana in full of that unfortunate circumstance. Those brothers-Rāma and Lakşmaņa-who had in battle been bound up in arrowy fetters by Indrajit, and whose arms lay moveless, having been emancipated from the arrowy bonds, are seen in the field of battle; and those ones like to the foremost of elephants in strength, seem like elephants that have snapped their fetters. Hearing those words of theirs, the exceedingly powerful lord of the Raksasas was wrought up with anxiety and anger, and his countenance lost its complexion. Indrajit, having routed them in conflict, had bound them by means of irresistible and terrible arrows, resembling venomous serpents, and like to the Sun himself, which had been conferred on (Indrajit) as boons. But if my enemy having actually been bound by the weapons, can have been liberated, all this strength of mine I see placed in peril. And those shafts resembling Fire in fierceness, which had in battle deprived my foes of their lives, have forsooth been rendered fruitless. Having said this in high rage Rāvana, sighing like a serpent, addressed a Raksasa, named Dhūmrākṣa, seated in the midst of the Rākşasa. O you of dreadful prowess, surrounded by a mighty force, do you march forth to compass the destruction of Rāma along with the monkeys. Thus accosted by the intelligent lord of the Raksasas, Dhumraksa, turning about, issued out of the abode of the king. And speedily sallying forth from the gate of (Ravana's residence, he said to the general of the forces, “Do you speedily move off your forces. why should a warrior linger?” Hearing Dhumraksa's words, the general of the forces, following them, at the command of Rāvaņa forthwith made the army ready. And those powerful and dreadful nightrangers, bursting with high spirits, with bells tied to their arms, set up shouts, and surrounded Dhumraksa. And bearing various weapons in their hands, and wielding darts and clubs, and equipped with maces and bearded darts and rods and iron bludgeons and parighas and bhindipālas and lances and nooses and axes, those terrific Rāks asas sallied out roaring like to clouds. And others, accoutred in armour, with cars; adorned with banners; furnished with golden networks, and mules having various faces, and extremely swift steeds, and lusty elephants in rut, tiger-like Naiſtas incapable of being subdued even as tigers-sallied out (thereafter). Then Dhūmrākṣa himself ascended a superb car, bearing faces of deer and lions decked with gold, and sending forth a loud clatter. The highly powerful Dhūmrākşa, surrounded by Rākşasas, cheerfully issued out of the Western Entrance, where Hanumān was posted. Thereat, fell fowls of the air forbade that exceedingly dreadful Räksasa of a fearful form, as he went out ascending an excellent car joked with mules, and sending sharp sounds. And an exceedingly terrific vulture alighted at the crest of the car and forming themselves into lines, vultures began to drop down about the top of the banner. And emitting a frightful cry, (a headless trunk) dropped down before Dhumraksa. That god* showered down blood; and the earth shook. And the wind blew awry with a sound resembling thunder. And every side, covered with darkness, appeared dim. *Indra-cloud compeller. And witnessing those dreadful inauspicious omens at the outset, fraught with fear to the Räkşasas, Dhūmrākṣa was greatly aggrieved; and the Räksaşas marching before him, were stupefied. Then as that strong and fearful one, eager for encounter, surrounded by in numerable nigh rangers, issued out (of the city), he beheld that monkey-host, protected by the arm of Rāghava, resembling the deep at the time of universal dissolution.