Hearing Vajradanștra slain by the son of Vāli, Rāvaņa said to the general of his forces, standing before him with joined hands, Let invincible Rākşasas of dreadful prowess, march forth, placing before them Akampana, skilled in all weapons and arms. He is capable of chastising foes as well as of protecting his own and leading them; and he is excellent in warfare. And he is always desirous of my prosperity, and always love warfare. He will conquer the Kākutsthas, as well as sugrīva endowed with exceeding strength, and, without doubt, slay all the other dreadful monkeys. Taking Rāvana's command, that highly powerful one endowed with fleet vigour, marshalled those forces. Then equipped with various arms, the foremost of Rākşasas, having dreadful eyes (in their heads, and of dreadful forms, marched forth, urged on by their general. Ascending a large car, adorned with burnished gold, Akampana, possessed of the splendour of clouds,* and cloud-hued, and furnished with a voice resembling the roar of clouds, went out, environed by Rākașasas of terrific forms. *There is a pun here on the word Akampana-lit.one incapable of being shaken. Akampana, resembling the sun in power, was incapable of being shaken in fight by the very gods, and of being beheld by them. 1. Possessed of a person measuring, according to the commentator, a mass of clouds. I give the apparent sense, which answers. 2. Monkeys. And as, burning for battle, he rushed out in wrath, the steeds drawing his car suddenly lost their energy. The left eye of that one delighting in encounter, began to throb. And his continence grew pale, and his voice faltered. In a fair day, it looked foul with the wind breathing roughly. And fierce and frightful beasts and birds began to emit cries. That lion-shouldered one like a tiger in prowess, without heeding these ominous occurrences, marched forth into the field. As that Rākşasa was setting out along with the Rākṣasas, he set up mighty roars as if agitating the deep. The mighty army of monkeys was seized with trepidation at that sound. And then there took place a mighty encounter of the Rākṣasas and the monkeys equipped staying in fight with trees and rocks, who had given up all concern for their selves in behalf of Rāma and Rävaņa. And each side desirous of slaying the other, the monkeys and the Raksasas were exceedingly strong and heroic and like to mountains. And each party storming at the other, in that conflict were heard loud cries emitted by those swiftspeeding ones in anger. And fearful was the dust red-hued that was raised incessantly by the monkeys and the Rākṣasa; and it enveloped the ten cardinal points. In the field of battle, each enveloped with that dust raised, pale as silk, could not be discovered by the other. In consequence of that dust arising, neither standard, nor ensign, nor shield, nor steed, nor weapon, nor car could be seen. The fierce cries alone of those roaring and rushing were heard in that dreadful battle; but their forms were not visible to the sight. In that conflict in the dark then monkeys extremely enraged slew monkeys, and Räkşasas also killed the Rākşasas. And monkeys and Rākşasas slaying (indiscriminately) friends and foes, made the earth wet with blood, and miry. Then with showers of blood the dust was layed; and the earth was covered with corpses. Rākşasas and monkeys fast slew each other vigorously with trees and darts, maces and prasas, rocks, bludgeons and Tomaras, and by means of their arms resembling bludgeons, coped with their adversaries appearing like hills. And in the encounter monkeys slew Rākşasas of dreadful deeds. And in their turn Rākşasas, wrought up with passion, bearing in their hands prāśas and tomaras destroyed monkeys wielding dire arms. That leader of the force-Akampana-growing wroth, inspired with cheerfulness all the Rāks asas endowed with dreadful vigour. And the monkeys forcibly snatching away the weapons (of the Rākşasas), began to rive the Rákşasas with mighty trees and giant crags. In the meanwhile those heroes among the monkeys-Kumuda, Nīla and the exceedingly exasperated Mainda, summoned the utmost impetuosity they were masters of. And those foremost of monkeys and redoubtable able warriors without much ado began to spread quite a carnage in the van of the Rākşasa army, and by means of various arms terribly beat the Rākşasas.