There the earth was covered with monkeys whose bodies were rent with the arrows of the Ten-necked (Ravana). As the flies cannot stand before the flaming fire so they could not bear the vehemence of Ravana's shafts. Being thus assailed with pointed arrows they fled away crying, like to elephants being burnt by fire. Rävaņa with his arrows pursued in conflict destroying the army of monkey as wind dissipate the large clouds. Thus slaughtering the monkeys the lords of Räkşasas speedily reached in the encounter where Raghava was. Beholding the monkeys assailed and afraid Sugrīva placing Sușeņa in charge of a gulma*addressed himself for the battle. *The division of an army; a body of troops consisting of nine platoons or nine elephants, nine chariots; twenty-seven horses and forty five foot. Placing that heroic monkey, his equal in prowess, in that command Sugrīva sallied out with a tree in his hand to meet the enemy. And followed him on all sides the leaders of the monkeys with huge crags and various trees. The heroic Sugrīva emitted terrible roars in the conflict and assailed the heroic Rakşasas and many others. The huge-bodied monkey-chief crushed the Rakşasas like to the wind uprooting the trees at the time of dissolution. He began to make a downpour of crags at the Rakşasas host like to the cloud pouring down hailstorms at the bird in the forest. Being beheaded by the crags discharged by that monkeys chief the Rākşasas fell down like to mountains cleft. The Rākṣasas being thus attacked and shattered by Sugriva and roaring and falling down on all sides, an irrepressible Raksasa, skilled in archery, in archery, by name by name Virūpākṣa, pronouncing his own name, got down from the car and mounted an elephant. And mounted on the elephant that highly powerful Virūpākṣa sent forth leonine roars and dashed against the monkeys. Exciting the joy of the Răkşasas and removing their anxiety he discharged dreadful shafts at Sugrīva and his army. Being assailed by the pointed arrows of the Räksasa that lord of monkeys roared in anger and made up his mind to destroy him. Thereupon uprooting a tree the heroic monkeys, skilled in warfare leaped and struck that huge elephant down in his presence. Being assailed greatly by Sugrīva that huge elephant proceeded a little within the range of the bow and roared and died. Being greatly enraged on the destruction of the elephant the highly powerful Rākşasa dashed forward to face the enemy. That one of quick monuments took up his dagger and armour and viling, approached Sugriva. Beholding his movement Sugrīva took up a huge crag resembling cloud and hurled it against Virüpākşa. That highly powerful leading Rākṣasa, finding the crag about to fall, turned a little away and struck the monkey with his dagger. Being assailed with dagger by that powerful Räkşasa the monkey remained senseless for sometime on the ground. Rising up all on a sudden he, clenching his fist, struck that Rakşsas in the mighty encounter on his braeast and got him down. Being struck with the fist the night-ranger Virūpākṣa greatly enraged cut down with his dagger Sugriva's armour and tumbled him down with his feet. The monkey rising up again was about to deal him a blow, hard as a thunder-bolt, with a dreadful sound. And receding a little, he baffled its aim and returned one on Sugriva's breast. Finding his aim baffled and himself struck in return by the Rākşasa, Sugrīva, the lord of monkeys, was excited with anger. And the monkey-chief was now on the look-out for an opportunity to strike Virüpākşa. Immediately in anger he struck him down with a blow on his forehead. And being thus assailed with the fist resembling the thunder-bolt of Mahendra, he fell down on the earth bathed in a pool of blood. Blood gushed out of the person of Virūpākșa like to water issuing out of a fountain. And the monkeys beheld their enemy (Virūpākṣa) with his eyes disfigured in anger, bathed in a foam of blood, his whole body discoloured, trembling, rolling and crying piteously. There upon those too armies of the monkeys and Räkşasas, being ready to engage in the encounter, began to roar like to two mighty oceans having their banks broken. Observing that highly powerful Räkşasa, of discoloured eyes, slain by the king of monkeys, the monkeys and Rakşasa forces engaged in fight and looked like the rising Ganges.