Having heard the words of Säraņa, who had described the forces (of the monkeys), Suka, addressed Rāvana, lord of Rākşasas, saying. Those, o king, whom you see stationed, resembling mad elephants, like to nyagrodhas* belonging to the Gangă, like to Sālas in the Himavān, are incapable of being borne, they are possessed of strength, and able to wear forms at will; resembling deities and Dänavas, and like the gods in conflict. *Banians. These, numbering nine, five, and seven thousand koțis and thousand sankus and an hundred urindas, are the ministers of Sugriva, residing in Kişkindhā-monkeys begot by gods and Gandharvas, capable of assuming shapes at will. Those two whom you beholdest, staying there, of equal proportions and endowed with god-like shapes, are Mainda and Dvivida, who have no equals in fight. Permitted by Brahma, they had partaken of ambrosia. They hope to humble Lanka by their prowess. He whom you seseestaying like a mad elephant, the monkey who, being enraged, can by his strength agitate the deep itself, who, searching for Vaidehi, had presented himself before you, lord, behold this monkey come again!-whom you had seen before!*—is the eldest son of Kacari, known as the offspring of the Wind-god-celebrated as Hanumān, who had bounded over the deep. *This dislocation occurs in the original. These descriptions generally are hardly amenable to a sound syntax. Capable of wearing forms at pleasure, that first of monkeys is endued with grace and strength, and is of irresistible impetuosity even as that lord, the Wind. Seeing the Sun risen, (he) while a boy, resolving in his mind, Coursing a way measuring three thousand Yojanas, I will bring the Sun, my hunger is not appeased; and he sprang up, elated with strength. And, not getting that god, incapable of being subdued by the deities, saints and Rākṣasas, he dropped down on the Ascending-hill. And thereat a jaw of that strong jawed one was little fractured on the rock, and he is called Hanuman in consequence. I know this monkey and all his previous history. I cannot describe his strength, beauty or prowess. And this one alone hopes to lay Lankā low by his energy And why do you today forget the monkey, who had flung flaming fire into Lankā? And next to him is the hero of dark-blue hue, having eyes like lotuses, the Atiratha among the Ikswakus-of prowess celebrated in the world-in whom virtue never waver and who never swerve from righteousness; who know the Brāhma Mantra and the Vedas, the best of those versed in them—who pierce the sky with his shaft and cleave the Earth, whose ire is like death, and whose prowess is like that of Sakra, whose wife, Sītā, has been carried away by you from Janasthāna. And this is Rāma, who, O king, advance to encounter you in conflict. On his right side is one of the splendour of pure gold, broad breasted, having dark curied hair-this one is named Laksmana, ever mindful of his brother's welfare. He is versed in polity as well as warfare-the foremost of those learned in all the branches of knowledge; wrathful, invincible, victorious, powerful, conquering and strong, the right arm of Rāma and his own life going about. For Rāghava he care not for his life. He hope to exterminate all the Rākşasas in battle. He that stay occupying the left side of Rāma, and surrounded by Raksasas, is the king, Vibhīșana, sprinkled as the king of Lankā by the auspicious king of kings, he, filled with wrath, approach you (for battle). He whom you see staying in the middle like a firm-based mountain, the lord of all monkeys, inmeasurable prowess, and who in energy fame, intelligence, strength, and lineage, is as superior to the monkeys as the mountain Himavān overtopped all the mountains, who in company with the principal monkey-leaders dwelt in inac' essible Kiskindhā hard to penetrate, and dense with trees, and difficult of access, and denying approach on account of rocks; and whose golden garland consisting of an hundred lotuses looks exceedingly elegant, which is the desire of men and gods, and where is established Lakşmi-(is Sugrīva.). Rāma, having slain Vālī, has conferred this garland, Tārā, and the eternal monkey-kingdom on Sugriva. An hundred of an hundred thousand is called a koți by the wise. An hundred of a thousand kot i is called a Sanku. An hundred of a thousand Sanku is known as a mahācanku. An hundred of a thousand Mahācanku is here termed a Vrinda. An hundred of a thousand Vrinda is known as a Mahāvrinda. A thousand Mahāvrinda is called here a Padma. An hundred of a thousand Padma is known as a Mahāpadma. An hundred of a thousand Mahāpadma is termed a Kharva. An hundred of a thousand Kharva is termed a Mahākharva, and hundred of a thousand Mahākharva is termed a Samudra. An hundred of a thousand Samudra is known as a Mahaugha. Thus backed by a thousand koțſ, and an hundred Sanku, and a thousand Mahāśanku, and an hundred Vrinda, and a thousand Mahāvrinda, and an an hundred Padma, and a thousand Mahāpadma and an hundred kharva, and an equal Samudra and an equal Mahaugha, by koțis of Mahaughas-resembling the sea, and surrounded by the heroic Vibhīşana as well as his counsellors, that Lord of monkeys, always engirt by a mighty force, and possessed of exceeding strength and prowess, will encounter you in battle. Observing this host, that has presented itself, resembling a flaming planet, do you, O might monarch, prepare yourself to the uttermost, so that victory may be your, and that you may not come by discomfiture at the hands of the foe.