The Ten-necked one, come under the control of Time, did not brook the beneficial speech, spoken by Mālyavān. Contracting his face into a frown, he, coming under the masterdom of passion, with his eyes rolling in wrath, addressed Mayavān, saying. The words which, deeming the strength of the enemy as superior, you have harshly spoken, considering it as beneficial, had never before entered my ears. A (mere) man, and feeble, and alone, and having monkeys for his support, why do you deem Rāma, who has (further) been cast off by his sire, and has in consequence taken refuge in the woods, as competent (to cope with me)? Why do you consider me, who am the lord of the Räksasa, and feared even by the immortals, as weak and reft of all power? You, I suspect, speak (thus) roughly either from jealousy of my heroism, or for inciting me. Who that is wise and learned, ever address him roughly that is at once puissant and of (high) station, if not to spur him on? Why, having brought Sītā like a Sri shorn of her lotus, shall I give her up, from fear of Rāghava? Behold Rāghava, environed by Koțis of monkeys, with Sugrīva and Lakşmaņa, slain on of these days! He before whom even the gods cannot stay in the battle field, how can that Råvaņa ever come by fear? Better that I should be riven in twain, but bend I never will. This is my native fault; and nature is incapable of being overcome. If Rāma bath at his pleasure constructed a bridge over the ocean, what is the wonder in this that you have conceived such a fear? And although Rāma has crossed the ocean along with the monkey-army, yet I swear to you truly, living, he shall not back hence. When Ravana, wrought up with passion, had spoken thus, Malyavan, knowing him wroth, did not return a reply. And, duly tendering blessings to the king, Mālyavān, taking his permission, went to his own abode. The Räkşasa, Rāvaņa, along with his courtiers, having consulted together as to what was fit to be done, set about the defence of Lankā. He commanded the Raksasa Prahasta (to guard) the Eastern gate; and the exceedingly powerful Mahaparsva and Mahodara (to guard) the Southern gate; and he ordered his son Indrajit, possessing mighty powers of illusion, girt by innumerable Räkșasas, to guard the Western gate. He commanded Suka and Sārana to defend the Northern gate. But he said to the counsellors, I will myself go thither.* *i.e. to defend the Northerm gate. And he posted in the middle in the garrison the Raksasa, Virupaksa, endowed with exceeding prowess and energy, backed by countless rākşasas. Having taken these measures in Lankā, the raksasa-chief, urged by Fate, deemed himself as having achieved success. Having thus completely provided for the defence of the city, he dismissed the ministers; and, honoured by the counsellors with blessings of victory, (then) entered his magnificent and splendid inner apartment.