Seeing the man and the Rākṣasa engaged in battle, with their whole soul, each eager to beat the other, like to elephants with the temporal juice trickling from their temples, desirous of beholding their encounter, Răvaņa's mighty and heroic brother, bearing an excellent bow, stood in front of the arena. Taking up his post, he stretched his great bow and shot terrific sharp-pointed shafts at the Rāks asas. Even like thunder-bolt cleaving mighty mountains, those shafts furnished with peacock's plumes falling powerfully (upon the foe), rent the Raksasas. Those foremost of Raksasas, Vibhisana's followers, also in the encounter discharged darts and scimitars and pațțiśas at heroic Rākşasas. Surrounded by those Raksasas, Vibhisana, then in the midst of his followers, appeared like an elephant in the midst of young ones. Then inciting the monkeys, whose dear object was to slay Ravana, that one versed in time, the foremost of Rākşasas,spoke seasonably thus. This one that stay (in the field) is the sole and mighty support of the Raksasa-chief; and this is his remaining force. Why then do the monkeychiefs remain inactive? On this wicked Rāksasa being slain on the edge of battle, the remnant of his army, with the single exception of Rāvawa, is destroyed. That hero-prahasta-has been slain, and Nikumbha possessed of wondrous strength, and Kumbhakarņa, and Kumbha and the night-ranger Dhūmrākṣa, and Jämbumāli and Mahāmāli and Tikşņavega and Hemaprabha, and Suptaghna, and Yajñakopa, and the Rākşasa Vajradanștra, Samhradi, and Vikata, and Arighna, and Tapana, and Manda, and Fraghāsa and Praghasa, and Prajangha, and Jangha, and Agniketu, and Durdharsa, and the powerful Rasmiketu and Vidyujjihva, and Dvijihva, and the RaksasaSüryaśatru, and Akampana, and Supārsva, and the Raksasas-Cakramali, and Kampana, and Satvavanta, and Devāntaka and Narāntaka. Having slain these many powerful Rākşasas endowed with excess of might, having crossed the sea with your arms, do you cross this foot print of a cow. This is the remaining force which you monkeys must conquer; all those Rākşasas, that had come forward, elated with the pride of strength, have all been slain. It is not meet for me to slay the son of my brother, yet, casting off compassion will I for Rama slay him.* *The text has 'brother's son.' Tears surcharge the eyes of me who seek to slay him. Let therefore Lakşmaņa administer him his quietus. You monkeys, do you in a body (first) slaughter those that are beside him (Indrajit.)" Thus exhorted by that illustrious Rākşasa, the monkey-chiefs, were exhilarated and began to flourish their tails. Then those mighty monkeys roared again and again, and sent up various shouts, even as peacocks cry on seeing clouds. Then Jämbavān surrounded by his own forces, assailed the Raksasas with rocks-and with their nails and teeth. Thereat Räkşasas, endowed with exceeding strength, equipped with various weapons reproaching the lord of bears, as he was engaged in smiting (the foe), and renouncing fear, with shafts and sharp axes and pațțiśas and yaşțis, and tomaras, in the encounter assailed Jambavān, who was engaged in beating the Räkşasa forces. That conflict between the monkeys and the Rākşasas, waxed furious, like to the tumultuous encounter of the immortals and the Asuras fired with wrath. The magnanimous Hanumān incapable of being approached growing wroth, uprooting a mountain, and putting down Lakşmaņa from his back, began a great carnage among the Rākşasas by thousands. And fighting a furious fight with his uncle, the powerful Indrajit, slayer of hostile heroesagain rushed against Lakşmaņa. Then there took place an encounter between those heroes in the field, Laksmana and the Räksasa-discharging vollies of shafts and smiting each other; and those mighty and impetuous ones repeatedly covered each other with networks of arrows; like to the sun and the moon covered by clouds at the expiration of Summer. And on account of their light-handedness, neither discharge of arrows, nor the drawing of the bow; nor the setting of the shaft on the bowstring; not the taking of the bow; nor the selection of shafts; nor the clenching fast of their fists; nor the hitting of aims, could be perceived as they faught on. In consequence of the sky being covered with networks of arrows all around, discharged powerfully from their bows, the forms (of objects) could not be discovered. Laksmana having at Ravana's son, and Rāvana's son having at Lakşmana, critical was the huggermugger that ensued* in the encounter between each other. *i.e. in consequence of all sides being covered with arrows, neither the Rākşas nor the monkeys could distinguish their several parties in the encounter, and the blows that each dealt were misdirected in consequence. They both kept ceaselessly showering feathered and sharpened shafts, the firmament was engulphed with a deep darkness. In consequence of countless keen arrow alighting in hundreds, all sides and all the cardinal quarters were swarming with shafts. And all being overspread with gloom, a mighty fright took possession (of creatures) when the Sun having ascended the setting-hill, and darkness environing all objects. And that day* mighty torrents of blood flowed in thousands of streams; and fierce beasts of prey set up terrific yells (all around). And at that hour the wind did not blow, and fire did not blaze. * Aiya today in the text. The Maharsis said, 'Fair befell creatures.' And the Gandharvas along with the Cāranas grew exceedingly agitated. Then Sumitrā's son pierced the four black steeds of the leonine Räksasa, caparisoned in gold. Then he hit at (Indrajit's) charioteer with another yellow and sharpened javelin splendid, furnished with feathers; and resembling the thunder-bolt of the great Indra. And through his fleet handedness the graceful son of Raghu with the thunder-bolt of his shaft, resonant with the sound of his palm, separated the (charioteer's head) from his trunk. And on his charioteer having been slain the exceedingly energetic son of Mandodari, himself began to perform the function of a charioteer, and took up his bow. And this in the encounter was wonderful to behold. Then as (Indrajit) was eagerly engaged in managing the steeds, (Laksmana) pierced him with sharpened shafts; and when (Indrajit) was eagerly wielding his bow, (Laksmana) discharged shafts at his steeds. And on his steeds having been torn with shafts, Sumitrā's-foremost of fleet-handed in the encounter assailed (Indrajit) doubtlessly ranging the field. Seeing his charioteer slain in the contest, Rāvana's son forewent his martial ardour, and was cast down. Seeing the Rākşasa with his face fallen, the leaders of monkey-hands, were exceedingly delighted and rendered homage to Lakşmaņa. Then those monkey-chiefs— Pramāthi, Rabhasa, Sarabha and Gandamādana, not brooking (their foe) summoned their impetuosity. And suddenly springing up, those highly powerful monkeys endowed with terrific prowess descended upon those four best of steeds. On those chargers being assailed by those monkeys resembling mountains, blood gushed out of their mouths. Then the steeds were smashed and sent to the ground. And having slain the steeds, and smitten the mighty car-warrior,* again by a vehement bound, came to the side of Laksmana. *Maharatham (ac.) may also mean mighty car. By the way the samasa or junction called Tatpurusha is a frequent source of obscurity in Sanskrit specially where the gender of the word without samása is the same with that of the thing signified by the samāsa, as in this case. Springing down from his car whose steeds had been slain, Ravana's son, his charioteer having been pounded, charged the son of Sumitra with arrows. Then Lakşmaņa resembling the great Indra, on (Indrajit's) best of chargers having been despatched, in the encounter began to terribly rive with arrows discharged (his foe) footing on the earth and showering excellent sharpened shafts.