Finding his own army destroyed by the might of Angada, the exceedingly powerful RäkșasaVajradaistra-was overcome with rage. And stretching his dreadful bow of the splendour of Sakra's thunder-bolt, he began to shower shafts among the monkeys-ranks. The foremost among the heroic Rākşasas also, stationed on cars, furnished with various arms, warred on in the encounter. The heroic monkeys also-foremost of their kind-with rocks in their hands, faught around in united strength. In that conflict, the Rākşasas began to incessantly shower ayutas of arms among the flower of the monkeys-army. The monkeys, pre-eminently valiant, and resembling mad elephants kept showering over the Raksasa mountain-trees and mighty rocks. Then took place a hot contest among heroic warring monkeys and Raksasa, eager for encounter. And some, with their heads unbroken, had their arms and legs torn; and their bodies pierced with weapons, and laved in blood. Monkeys and Rākşasas lay down in the field, thronged with numbers of Kankas, and vultures, and swarming with flock of jackals. Striking affright to the timid, on the earth started up (spectral) headless trunks, with their arms and heads torn, ant their bodies riven all over. Monkeys and Rākşasas began to drop down to the earth. And the army of night-rangers, being sadly handled by the monkey-hosts, broke up at every point in the very sight of Vajradanştra. Seeing the Rākşasas, distressed with fright and harassed by the monkeys, the powerful Vajradarstra, with his eyes crimsoned with choler, entered the arena, bow in hand, frightening the monkey-forces, and he began to pierce the monkeys with straight-speeding shafts winged with Kanka feathers; and he pierced simultaneously seven, eight, nine, five, monkeys (in the field). and the exceedingly powerful Vajradanștra, transported into a towering passion, began to cleave the hostile ranks. Thereat terrified, the monkeys, with their bodies cut with arrows, rushed towards Angada, like creatures resorting to the Creator. And finding the monkeys ranks disordered, Vāli's son in a range cast his eyes on Vajradaństra, who also was eyeing him. Vajradarşțra and Angada faught fiercely with each other over and over again; ranging the field like a tiger and a mad elephant. Then (Vajradanstra) with hundreds and thousands of shafts) resembling tongues of flames, pierced the powerful son of the monkey in the vitals. Thereupon Vāli's son of mighty strength and tremendous prowess, with his body covered all over with blood, hurled a free at Vajradanstra. Seeing the tree in full career, the Räksasa without betraying any agitation, severed it in pieces; and the tree, thus assailed, fell to the earth. Seeing that feat of Vajradanșra, that foremost of monkeys taking up a huge crag, hurled it (at his foe) and sent up shouts. Seeing this descend upon him, that powerful one, calmly leaping down from his vehicle, stood on his feet on the ground. The crag discharged by Angada, coursing on in the field, dashed to pieces the car along with the wheels and the Kuvara as well as the horses. Then the the monkey, taking up another prodigious peak crowned with trees, let it alight on Varradanstra's head. Thereat vomiting blood, Vajradanstra, deprived of his senses, fro a moment overcome with stupor, stood embracing his mace, sighing. Then the night-ranger, recovering his senses, with his mace in high rage hit at the breast Vāli's son staying in the field. Thereupon, giving up his mace, he entered into a boxing encounter (with Angada). And hitting each other there, they both-the monkey and the Rākṣasa, richly with prowess, appeared like Angāraka and Budha. Then the exceedingly energetic Angada-best of-monkeys-uprooting a tree, stood there, covered with flowers and leaves. And (Vajradanștra) took a shield composed of ass's hid, and a sword broad and sightly, covered with bells, and graced with a leathern sheath. *What could this weapon be like? The monkey and the Rākşasa displayed curious and graceful movements. And attacking each other, they gave shouts eager for victory. And with blooding flowing from their wounds, they looked beautiful like blossoming Kinsukas. And warring, both, overcome with fatigue, went to the ground on their knees. Anon in the twinkling of an eye, that powerful monkey-Angada-started up, with his eyes glowing, like to a serpent that has been smitten with a rod. And (at length) with his stainless and sharpened sword, Vali's son, endued with exceeding strength severed Vajradaństra's huge head. The graceful head of the one having his body covered with blood, cut off by the sword, falling to the ground with its eyes rolling, was severed in twain. Seeing Vajradanştra slain, the Rākşasas, overwhelmed with fear and exceedingly agitated, in pitiful plight, with woe-begone faces and heads hung in shame, fled towards Lankā, attacked (all the while) by the monkeys. Having compassed Vajradanstra's destruction, the powerful son of Vali, endowed with exceeding strength, in the midst of the monkeyarmy experienced great joy on being honoured by the monkeys, like the wielder of the thunderbolt the thousand-eyed (Deity) surrounded by the celestials.