Rāghava thus declaring to him 'no fear' Ravana's younger brother, the greatly wise Vibhișana, bending low his head, cast his looks on the earth. Descending from the welkin with his devoted attendants the virtuous-souled Vibhisana, delighted, bowed to Rāma. And thereupon touching his feet along with four Rākşasas, Vibhisana addressed Rama, with words, fraught with piety, befitting the occasion and conducing to pleasure. I am Rāvana's younger brother and have been greatly insulted by him. I have therefore come to seek your shelter, the refuge of all creatures, abandoning Lanka and renouncing my friends and riches. My kingdom, life and happiness are all at your disposal. Hearing his words Räma replied, comforting him with words and favouring him as if with looks. Do you relate to me truly the strength and weakness of the enemies. Being thus accosted by Råma unwearied actions, the Raksasa, began to describe the strength of Rāvana. O prince, by virtue of the bocn acquired from the Self-Create, the Ten-necked one is incapable of being slain by all creatures-Gandharvas, serpents, or birds. My elder brother, the one next to Rāvana, is the heroic and highly effulgent Kumbhakarņa, Śakra's equal in battle. You may have heard, O Rama, his commander is Prahasta, by whom was defeated Manibhadra on the mount Kailāsa. (His son) Indrajit, equipped with invincible armour, bow and finger-protector made of the skin of iguana, becomes invisible in fight. And, worshipping Fire and becoming invisible, Indrajit, that graceful hero, O Raghava, slays the enemies in conflict, having the contending parties vast and well arranged. Mahodara, Mahāpārsva and the Rākşasa, Akampana, are his lieutenants, who equal the Lokapālas* in battle. *Divinities who protect regions, or the Sun, Moon, Fire, Wind, Indra, Yama, Varuna and Kabera. His army consists of ten thousand kotis of Rākşasas, wearing shapes at will, inhabiting the city of Lankā, and living on flesh and gore. And with the Lokpalas and the celestials, they were all defeated by the vicious-souled Ravana. Hearing the words of Vibhīşana and weighing them in his mind, that foremost of Raghu's race said. I understand well the strength and prowess of Ravana, which you have depicted truly, O Vibhisana. Do you hear truly that I shall slay the Tennecked one together with Prahasta and his sons, and I shall make you king. Whether he entered the Rasåtala or the regions under the earth, or seek shelter of the Grand-father of the celestials, he shall not be able to save his life from me. I do swear by my three brethren that I shall enter the city of Ayodhyā, after slaying in battle Ravana with his sons, kinsmen and friends. Hearing these words of Rāma of unwearied action, the virtuous-souled (Vibhisana), bowing his head to him, began. I shall lend you my might in slaying the Raksasas and devastating the city of Larkā, and shall be in the midst of Rāvana's army. There upon, embracing Vibhīşaņa, who spoke thus, Rama, delighted, said to Laksmana, Omy brother, do you bring water from the ocean. Sprinkling the greatly wise Vibhișana, I shall make him at once the king of the Rākşasas, o confrere of honour; for I am greatly pleased with him. Being thus addressed, Saumitri, at the command of the king, anointed Vibhișana and made him the king of the Räkşasas in the presence of the monkey host. Beholding Rāma's kindness (towards Vibhīş ana), the monkeys eulogized the high-souled one, exclaiming “Excellent! Excellent!” Thereupon, Hanumān and Sugrīva addressed Vibhisana, saying, Do you tell us how we shall cross over the main-the abode of Varuņa, along with the host of the highly powerful monkeys. Do you inform us of the means by which we may cross over, along with our army, the lord of rivers and streams-the abode of Varuna." Being thus addressed, the virtuous-souled Vibhisana replied, "It behovth the king, Rāghava, to seek refuge from the Ocean. This measureless deep was dug out by (the king) Sagara.* And the great ocean shall surely help Rāma belonging to Sagara's race. *Sagara was a sovereign of Ayodhyā, belonging to the same family with Rāma. Being thus accosted by the wise Rākşasa, Vibhīşaņa. Sugrīva reached where Rāma with Laksmana was. Thereupon, the broad-necked Sugrīva began to explain the well-meaning words of Vibhīşaņa, requesting Ráma to seek the shelter of the Ocean. And those words pleased Răma, pious by nature. And the highly effulgent (hero) requested, smiling, the active Lakşmaņa and the monkey-chief Sugrīva to collect necessaries for his adoration. O Lakşmaņa, this counsel of Vibhīşaņa appear to me as most sound. Sugrīva is a ways greatly wise, and you are greatly proficient in counsel. Do you, holding a conference, intimate to me what you think becoming." Thus addressed, those two heroes-Lakşmaņa and Sugriva, spoke respectfully the following words fraught with propriety. Why shall not the well-meaning words of Vibhīşaņa expressed now, please us O Rāghava, O you best of men? Without constructing a bridge over the deep, the terrible abode of Varuņa, even the celestials and their lord (India) cannot get at the city of Lanka. Do you act on the genuine counsel of the heroic Vibhisana, and without losing time, do you engage the Ocean for this work, so that we may with our army proceed to the city protected by Ravana. Being thus addressed Räma reached the shore of the lord of rivers and streams, covered with Kusa, like to fire getting into the sacrificial dais.