Then the spies communicated to Lankā's lord news concerning Rāghava and his host stationed at the mount Suvela. Hearing the words of the spies, that Rama, accompanied by a mighty army, had arrived (there), Rāvana was a little agitated and spoke to Sardula. Your colour has changed its natural aspect, and O ranger of the night, you look poorly. Did not come under the control of the wrathful foes? Thus ordered by him, then (Sārdula), bewildered by fear, addressed that tiger of a Raksasa, saying. Those powerful monkeys, o king, puissant, strong, and protected by Rāghava, are incapable of being ranged (by us). or They cannot be conversed with interrogated. All around, the courses are kept by monkeys resembling hills. As soon as I entered, and was scanning that host, I was discovered. And forcibly taken by the Rākşasa, I was pulled by them hither and thither. And furiously assailed by the monkeys with thighs, clenched fists, teeth, and palms, I was dragged in the midst of the army by the enraged monkeys. And, after having been taken all about, I was (at length) taken before Rāma, bleeding, with my limbs showing sorry work, and my senses swimming and paralysed. And, having been belaboured by the monkeys, I, on craving his kindness with joined hands, was, at his pleasure, rescued by Rāghava, with, Don't, don't! Having filled up the deep with rocks and crags, Rāma equipped with weapons, stay, occupying the gate of Lanka. And, letting me off, that one of suspassing vigour, surrounded by monkeys, and, arranging his forces in the Garuda fashion, advance upon Lanka. He draw nigh to the wall. Therefore, do one of these things in preference to the other, either render back Sītā, or give him battle. Hearing this, Ravana, lord of Raksasas, then reflecting in his mind, spoke to Sārdula these pregnant words. Even if the gods, Gandharvas, and Dānavas should array themselves against me, Sītā I shall not give, from fear of all creatures. Having said this, that exceedingly energetic one again said,You have ranged this army. Who here among the monkeys are heroic? O amiable one, what is their potency? And what are those monkeys that are hard to approach, like? And, O you of fair vows, whose sons and grandsons are they? Truly relate all this (to me). Having ascertained their strength and weakness, I shall in this matter adopt my course. Those who wish for fight, certainly take account of all this. Thus addressed by Rāvana, Sārdula—best of spies-thus began to speak in the presence of Ravana. O king, that unconquerable one in fight, Jāmbavān, is well known as the son Gadgada, king of bears. The other son of Gadgada is the son of Śakra's preceptor. By which son, single-handed, was done immense oppression to the Rākṣasa. The righteous and puissant Sușeņa is the son of Dharma. And the mild monkey, Dadhimukha, O king, is the son of Soma. 1. Righteousness. 2. Moon. And Sumukha, Durmukha and the monkey, vegadarcin (resembling) Death himself, were for certain begot by the Self-create in the shape of a monkey.* *Another meaning is, “The monkey, Vegadarsi who is death himself in the shape of a monkey." But I give the acceptable sense. Nīla himself is the son of the bearer of sacrificial oblations;* and Hanumán is famed as the son of the Wind-god. * Fire. The irrepressible and youthful Angada is the grandson of Śakra. And the lusty Mainda and Dvivida are sprung from Aśvi. And five are the sons of Vaivasvata, resembling the Reaper himself, Gaya, Gavāks a, gavaya, Sarabha and Gandhamādana. But I can not enumerate the rest, ten koțis of heroic monkeys-all sons of deities—burning for battle. And this is Dasaratha's son—this you resembling a lion, who slew Düşana and Khara and Triſiras. There breathes none on Earth that is like to Rāma in prowess, by whom was slain Virādha and Kabandha, resembling the Destroyer. No person can on earth describe the virtues of Rāma; by whom have been slain all those Rākşasas that had gone to Janasthāna. Here also is the virtuous Lakşmaņa, like to the foremost of elephants, coming in the way of whose shafts, even Vasava does not live. And here are ſveta and Jyotirmukha, sprung from Vāskara's self; and the monkey Hemakūta is the son of Varuna. The heroic Nalabest of monkeys, is the son of Viśvakarmă. And powerful and impetuous, Durdhara is the son of Vasu. That foremost of Rāksasas, Vibhisana, your brother, engaged in the welfare of Raghava, has laid seige to Lankā. Thus have I described to you the entire monkey host stationed in mount Suvela. As for what remain to be done, you are the master.