Hearing the lament of the king of Rākşasas, Kumbhakarma, laughing said. That evil which on the occasion of the conclave we had seen, has befallen you, who have passed by what was fraught with your good. Even as a sinner reaps perdition, verily has the fruit of your unrighteous act found you. At first, O mighty king, you did not ponder over this course of conduct; nor, from pride of prowess, did you at all take note of the evil thereof. He that dose last what should be done first, and what should be done last, is ignorant of what is prudence and what not. Acts not performed in harmony with season and place, like to acts performed counter to season and place, are the occasions of misery, and resemble clarified butter poured into fire that has not been sanctified. He stay well in the path that, in consultation with his counsellors, ascertain the five way touching the three kinds of action* *The five ways are (1) the mans of commencing an act (2) person, thing and wealth, (3) division of season and place, (4) providing agains mischance (5) success. The three kinds of action are treaty, war, etc. All this is nebulous; And the commentator is sadly reticent over this extremely important passage. The king that aided by his own intelligence as well as his counsellors act after reflection in consonance with the science of polity, that distinguish his friends from his foes), and, O lord of the Raksasas, that seasonably' pursue righteousness, or profit, or desire, or any two, or all these combined-truly has understanding.? 1. Religion is to be sought in the morning, profit in the afternoon, and desire at nigh, so the commentator. 2. One is at sea in the midst of these formless generalities. The tantalized intellect makes a desperate attempt to grasp the body of the shadow seeming substance, but the empty air mocks his pains. A translator, however, is fast bound to the oar and must pull on, will be, nil he. But the king or the heir apparent, that, having heard what is prime among the three, does not understand, has his time in vain on his erudition. He that controlling his own self, consult with his counsellors seasonably touching gift, forbearance, difference and prowess, as well as virtue, profit and desire-does not in this world come by calamity. Perceiving the fair fruit (of a line of action) accruing to him here, a king should act in consultation with counsellors endowed with intelligence and versed in the import of things. Not understanding the sense of the scriptures, persons possessed of beastly intelligence, entering into the heart of their counsellors, are inspired with a desire of speaking out of sheer volubility. Albeit uttered heedfully, the speech of those that are ignorant of learning and the knowledge of the sense of things, and who are intent upon attaining abounding affluence, should not be acted upon. Those-spoilers of business-who from recklessness talk of pernicious as if profitableshould certainly be rejected as counsellors. Some counsellors-destroyers of their mastersjoining intelligent enemies (of their lords), act in a way opposed to their interests in this world. Their lords, at the hour of consultation, by their behaviour should know these counsellorsenemies in the guise of friends-who have been won over (by the opposite party). Even as the fowls of the air enter the hole in the Krauñca, enemies find and easy entrance into the short comings of him that is fickle and that rush into act without heed. He that disregarding his foe, omits to guard himself, come by disasters and lose his place. Even what had been advanced by the beloved and my younger brother is fraught with our welfare. Do you now what you-wish. Hearing Kumbhakarma's words, the Tennecked one knit up his brows, and, wrought up with wrath, said to him. I am worthy of being honoured by you, like your superior. What needs this verbal travail? Do you what is fit. Vain is the mention now of what I did either through stupor or delusion or pride of prowess. Now bethink you of what is proper. Do you through your prowess assuage the sorrow of mine springing from my impolitic conduct, if you cherish any feeling for me, if your strength stay and if you deem this business of mine as by far more momentous to you. He is a friend that succour one fallen in distress and is undergoing affliction; and he acts friendly that helped a person lapsing from the path of morality. As he was speaking thus in words sedate yet severe, Kumbhakarma, concluding that Ravana was undelighted, makes his remarks mildly. And seeing his brother extremely sorry, Kumbhakarņa, pacifying him, gently said. O king, intently hear my words. O repressor of foes! O lord of Raksasas, banish this sorrow, and casting away your wrath, return you to nature. O king, so long as I live, you must not suffer your heart to fare thus. Him will I slay for whom you grieve. But whatever condition you may be in, I must tell what is for your welfare; and therefore from sentiment of friendship as well as from fraternal affection I have spoken thus to you o King. What a friend from affection should do at a time like this, I shall do the same. See the havoc I spread among the foes in fight. O long-armed one, behold, on Rāma having been slain by me on the edge of battle along with his brother, the monkey-army in headlong flight. And today seeing Rāma's head brought by me from the field, be you, O long-armed one, happy; and let Sitā be overwhelmed with woe. And let those Raksasas in Lankā who have had their kindred slain (in battle), see that dear sight-Rāma slain (in fight). Today shall I slaying the enemies in battle, wipe the tears of those who mourn their friend slain and are overwhelmed with grief. To-day behold the lord of monkeys-Sugrivaresembling a mountain or a mass of clouds lighted up by (the living) sun, lying stretched on the field. But why, O sinless one, albeit comforted by these Rākşasas eager for saying Dasaratha's son, as well as by me, did your persist in your sorrow? Rāghava forsooth shall slay you after slaying me But, O lord of Raksasas, I cannot come by grief (at Rāghava's hands). O repressor of foes, do you now command me O you of unparalleled prowess, you need not yourself face the foe in fight. I shall abolish your foes endowed with redoubted might. If even Śakra himself, and Yama, and the god of Fire, and the god of Wind, and Kubera, and Varuņa-shall range themselves against me, them shall I encounter in fight. Purandara himself is seized with fright at sight of me, having a body measuring a mountain, equipped with sharpened spears, furnished with sharp teeth, and setting up shouts. And who wishing to save himself shall be able to stay before me as I casting away my weapons keep pounding my enemies with celerity? No need of the dart, or the mace, or the sword, or whetted arrows. I shall with my bare arms alone slay (Rāma) along with the thunderer himself. If Raghava bear the impetus of my blows, the shall the vollies of my shafts drink his life blood. Why, O king, while I remain, did you burn in anxiety. And I am ready to sally out for compassing the destruction of your enemies. Cast off all terror of Rāma. I shall slay in battle Rāghava and Lakşmaņa and the exceedingly powerful Sugrīva and the Räksasadestroying Hanumān, who made Lankā blaze. I shall cat up the monkeys present in the encounter. And signal is the celebrity that I shall confer on you. O king, if your fear springs from Indra or the Self-create, even the immortals shall measure their lengths on the earth when I am wrought with rage. And I shall subdue Yama himself and devour the God of Fire. I shall bring down the very welkin garnished with stars. And I shall slay Satakratu and drink up the abode itself of Varuna. I shall crush the mountains and rive the earth. And today let all creatures as they are being eaten up, witness the prowess of Kumbhakarņa, after he has slept for a long time. Even the celestial regions do not suffice for me as my fare. I go for securing felicity us huring in pleasures plenteous flowing from the destruction of Dasaratha's son. And slaying Rāma along with Lakşmaņa, I shall eat up all the foremost of monkey-bands. Make merry, my king; today drink Varuni. Enjoy pleasures, banishing sorrow. And today on my having despatched Rāma to the mansion of Yama, Sītā shall come under your control for good.