Hearing the speech of the huge-bodied, longarmed and mighty Kumbhkarma, Mahodara said. O Kumbhakarņa, although sprung in a noble line, you are wondrous haughty and of a vulgar form; and you are not everywhere competent to discern your course. It certainly cannot well be that the king cannot distinguish between proper and improper; but you has from your youth upwards been insolent; and your joy is in talking perenially. But the foremost of the Raksasa is versed in place and increase and injury, and know the duties touching season and place, and how to advance his own party and lower that of the foe. But what person ever act according to what is proposed feebly by one having strength, yet of inferior intelligence, and who has never respected the aged. You are not naturally competent to understand what you yourself says touching the opposed virtue, profit and desire. Verily action is the spring of all agencies of happiness or misery; and it is only those that act either well or ill that reap the results of their acts. Virtue, and interest bring about emancipation as well as heaven and prosperity. But evil come from unrighteousness and harms spring therefrom. People reap the fruit of their acts in this world or the next; but the fruit of desire is reaped readily. Therefore should a king set about attaining his desire. And this also had we advised you with our soul. And that is the harm that one should display his prowess before a foe? Did you show the reasons for your taking the field alone? But I shall point you out what is improper and unreasonable in this (proposed) course. How shall you alone vanquish that Rāghava who formerly routed in Jansthāna innumerable Rākşasas possessed of exceeding strength? Did you not today in the palace behold those powerful Rākşasas that had been beaten in Janasthana-cowed down in fear? Alas! you wished to awake Rima, son to Daśaratha-knowing full well that le resembles an enraged lion or a sleeping serpeni. But whom does it behove to confront him ever flaming in energy, difficult of being approached when enraged, and unbearable even like Death himself? On approaching the foe, this whole host itself shall be imperilled: and therefore, my child, your marching alone does nowise recommend itself to me. Who is there that, albeit weak bent on renouncing his life, wish to bring under subjection a foe that is powerful, as if he would act with reference to one that is inferior? O foremost of Rākasas, why did you wish to fight with him whose peer there is none among men, and who is equal to Indra and Vavasvata himself? Having said this to Kumbhakarņa wrought up with wrath, Mahodara addressed that destroyer of creature-Ravana-in the midst of the Raksasas. Having already obtained Vaidehi, why did you delay ? If you wish it, Sītā shall come under your control. I have perceived a way as to how Sītā may smile upon you. Do you listen: and should it please you; act you accordingly. Do you proclaim it about that I and Dvijihva and Samhrādī, and Kumbhakarņa and Vitardanathese five-are marching for compassing the destruction of Rāma. We, marching out, shall battle with Rāma, putting forth our uttermost. And if we succeed in securing victory, no expedient need we resort to (or bringing Sītā round). But if our foe live after fight and we also having faught the fight, then shall we do what I conceive in my mind. We shall come hither from the field, bathed in blood, and having our bodies cleft with arrows marked with the name of Rama. And we shall give out that both Ráma and Lakşmaņa have been eaten up by us And then we Shall hold your feet, saying, 'Do you gratify us'. Then, O king, do you through Gajaskandha publish it all round that Ráma has been slain along with his brother and the army. O repressor of foes, (pretending to be) well pleased, do you dispense-viands, and servants, and objects of enjoyments, and wealth to your retainers; and to the many heroes and warriors distribute wreaths and attires and unguents. And do you (Simulating) delight drink. On this report-name that Rāma has been eaten up by the Rākşasas along with his friends, having spread round and round entering (the Asoka wood), and soothing and pacifying Sītā in solitude, Allure her with corn and riches and gems. By this deceit, О king, working powerfully through Sītā's sorrow, she albeit unwilling, shall, having lost her lord, come under your control. Losing her charming husband, she from despair and female railty, shall come under your away. Having formerly been brought up in happiness, she, although worthy of felicity, (ultimately) had come by misfortune. And now finding happiness to be in your custody, she shall unreservedly come over to you. In my opinion this is the proper course to follow. As soon as you see Rāma, evil shall befall you. Remain here. Do not wish (to go to the field). By refraining from fight, you shall acquire great good. O lord of people, by conquering the foe without battle, you without losing your forces and putting yourself to peril, you, O lord of earth, shall attain fame and high religious merit, and prosperity and renown for ever and for ever.