Then, in fierce wrath seizing bludgeons, and pattiśas, lances and bearded darts and javelins, and axes, bows and excellent shafts and swords, resembling crystalline water, sprung up the Rākşasas, Rabhasa, and the mighty Sūryasatru, and Saptaghna, and Yajñakopa, and Mahāpārsva and Mahodra, Agniketu the irrepressible, and the Rākṣasa Rasmiketu, and the lusty Indraśatru, son to Ravana-and Prahasta, Virupaksa, and the exceedingly strong Vajradanstra, and Dhumrākşa, and Nikumbha, and the Rākşasa Durmukha. And, flaming in energy, they all addressed Ravana, To-day shall we slay Rāma, and Sugrīva along with Lakşmaņa, and the helpless Hanumān, who has damaged Lankā. Then, preventing them, who had (thus) equipped themselves with all kinds of weapons, and making them sit down, Vibhisana, with joined hands, again spoke to them, saying. The wise have asserted that an appeal to prowess should be resorted to anent a business then only when the end sought cannot be attained through the three (other) means. Prowess produce fruit only in respect of welladvised action directed while carefully watching (enemies) that are negligent, or captive, or under Divine affliction. But why do you intend to discomfit (Rāma), who is vigilant, who desire victory, who is strong in the Divine strength, who has subdued passion, and who is hard to subdue? Who had in this world ever thought of or reasoned at ɔut Hanuman's career over the dreadful deep, the lord of streams and rivers? O rangers of the night, the strength and prowess (of the foe) being immeasurable, you should by no means recklessly disregard him. And what was the wrong that formerly had been done by Rāma to the king of the Rākşasas, that he has carried off from Janasthāna the spouse of that illustrious one? If Khara, who had trespassed into regions not his own, has buen slain in battle by Rāma, surely a creature should to the best of his might preserve his life. It is for this great fear that exercise us on the score of Vaidehi owing its existence to this,* that she, having been ravished, should (now) be given up. What is the use of acting so that quarrel may be the consequence? *The feeling of revenge for the slaughter of Khara and the rest. And (Rama), possessed of prowess, yet ever abiding by morality, is incapable of initiating hostilities for no purpose. Therefore, do you give him his Maithili. And before, he by means of his shafts rive this city together with her elephants and steeds, overflowing with countless gems, do you give him his Maithili. And before the dreadful, irrepressible and mighty monkey-host block up this Lankā of ours, do you give (back) Sītā. This city of Lankā shall perish as also all the heroic Rākṣasas, if you did not yourself make over Rāma's spouse to him. I exert myself to pleasure you, because of the fraternity (that subsist between us). Do what I say. I say what is truth and what also is for your good. Do you render (back) Rama's Maithili. Ere yet the king's son, for compassing your destruction, shower sure shafts resembling the rays of the autumnal Sun, having shining heads and feathered parts, and exceedingly hard, do you render Maithili to son of Daſaratha. Forsake your wrath at once, which destroy happiness and virtue; and follow righteousness, which enhance enjoyment and fame. Be you propitious, so that we may live (at ease) along with our sons and relatives. Render (back) Maithili to Dasaratha's son. Having heard Vibhisana's speech, Ravanalord of Raksasas-leaving all of them, entered his own chamber.