Seeing his brother slain by Sugrīva, Nikumbha, gazed at the lord of the monkeys, as if consuming him with his passion. Then that one endowed with calmness, grasped a bludgeon entwined with wreaths, and furnished with an iron ring measuring five fingers, and resembling the top of the Mahendra;* plated with gold and embellished with diamonds and lapises, and looking like the rod of Yama himself; dreadful and capable of removing the fear of the Raksas. *The mountain, so named. And whirling this, that highly powerful one, resembling the banner itself of Sakra in energy, Nikumbha possessed of terrific strength, with his mouth wide open, set up shouts. With gold adorning his breast, and Angadas placed on his arms and a pair of curious and variegated ear-rings, Nikumbha, with his ornaments and that same bludgeon, appeared beautiful like a mass of roaring clouds laughing with lightning and furnished with the iris. The head of that huge-bodied hero's parigha undid the conjunction of the seven' Winds and appeared? like a noiseless and smokeless flame. 1. This indicates the length of the Parigha. 2. This might refer to Kumbha as well. Along with the gyration of Nikumbha's parigha the whole welkin, together with the excellent city* of the gandharvas, and the planets, stars and the moon, began to whirl. *Some say Vitapabati and some say Alaka. Nikumbha was hard to approach like to the fire of dissolution, being resplendent with the brilliance of parigha and other ornaments and having his anger for its fuels. The Rākşasas and monkeys did not dare stir even out of fear. And the heroic Hanumān, spreading his breast, stood before him. Thereat the powerful (Nikumbha) having long-arm* threw his parigha resembling the Sun at the breast of that powerful one. *Lit. arms resembling parighas. Falling on the firm and spacious breast of Hanumān it was broken into hundred pieces. The broken portions, being scattered, appeared like hundreds of fire-brands in the sky. Like to a mountain standing still even at the time of an earthquake that mighty monkey was not moved albeit struck with the parigha. Being thus hurt that highly powerful Hanumān, the foremost of the monkeys, with great velocity clenched his fist. With this, the powerful (monkey) gifted with great impetuosity, and resembling the wind in prowess, struck Nikumbha on his breast. With that fist, his (Nikumbha's) armour* was riven and blood gushed out. And a light rising out of his breast suddenly disappeared like to lightning disappearing in a mass of clouds. *Some texts read carma (skin) in the place of Varma-(armour) i.e., his skin was rent-This equally indicates Hanuman's strength. Being struck with his (Hanuman's) fist Nikumbha was greatly moved and restoring himself attacked the mighty Hanumān and pulled him up. Beholding in conflict the terrible and powerful Hanumăn pulled up by Nikumbha, the residents of Lankā began to shout with joy. Being thus put to shame by that Rākşasa, Hanumăn the son of the Wind, struck him with his iron fist. And releasing himself from the grasp of Nikumbha, Hanumān the Wind-god's son instantly planted his foot on the earth. Inflamed with ire, he, throwing down Nikumbha, began to crush him; and gifted with vehemence, he, with great impetuosity, leaped up and sat on the breast (of the Raksa). And halding his head with two hands, he, emitting loud roars, displaced his head. Nikumbha being thus slain in conflict by the Wind-god's son, there ensued a terrible conflict between the highly enraged armies of the son of Dasaratha and the lord of Rākşasas. Nikumbha being deprived of his life, the monkeys began to shout-as if resounding all the quarters. And with it the whole earth moved and the abode of the celestials dropped down. And the Rākşasas-hosts were greatly terrified.