Burning with grief on account of those words,* Sarama gladdened and cheered her, even as masses of clouds (cheer up) the burning Earth. *i.e.the words of Ravana. Then, desirous of doing her good, (Sita's) friend, conversant with season, and ever precluding her speech with a smile, spoke to her seasonably. O you having dark eyes, I can, secretly going to Rama and communicating to him your auspicious words, come back clandestinely. Nor, when I course the supportless sky, can even the Wind or Garuda follow me. As she said this, Sita with her grief a little lightened, said to Sarama in sweet and smooth words. You are capable of even going to the nethermost regions. But do you on my behalf that which is fit to be done by you. If you intend doing me a good turn, and if your sense be steady, I would know what Ravana is doing after having left this place. That guileful and wicked-minded one, Rāvana, destroyer of enemies, having powers of illusion, overwhelms me even as the Vāruni just drunk. Confining me here for ever and a day, (Rāvana) sets on dreadful Räksnasas to alike threaten and scold me constantly. And I am agitated and alarmed and my mind is (always) uneasy. And I, dwelling in the Asoka wood, is ever agitated. If there is any talk (of delivering me), or keeping me confined, you should communicate to me the decision arrived at. This is the highest favour that I seek (at hands). Thereat, the mild-speeched Saramā, wiping (Sītā's) face washed in tears, spoke to her, as she said this. If this is your wish, I will go, O Jānaki. O Mithila's daughter, having possessed myself of the intent of the enemy, I shall come back. Having said this, (Saramā), repairing to the Raksasa, heard Raksa, heard Ravana's converse with his counsellors. Having heard of the decision of that wickedminded one, she, understanding decisions, swiftly retraced her steps to the fair Asoka forest. Then, entering there, she saw Janaka's daughter, expecting (her) like a very Sri,, bereft of her lotus. And, the fair-spoken Sarama, on getting back (near her), Sītā, embracing her affectionately, herself gave her a seat. Sitting down here at ease, do you relate to me faithfully all about the determination of the wicked-minded and guileful Ravana. Thus accosted by the trembling Sītä, Saramā related everything that had been said by Råvaņa and his counsellors. O Vaidehi, the Rākşasa lord was advised by his mother and the aged counsellors in pregnant words informed with affection, having your deliverance for their object. Do you make over Maithili to the king of men, paying him homage due. You have in Janasthāna profusely witnessed wonderful instances (of his prowess). The crossing of the ocean, Hanuman's sight (of Sītā) and the slaughter of the Rākşasa in fight, what person is capable of doing all this in battle? Thus long exhorted by his counsellors as well as his mother, Rāvaņa does not make up his mind to emancipate you, even as a covetous person is loath to pare with wealth (appropriated). O Maithili, without renouncing his life in battle, he does not intend to liberate you. Even this is the determination which that cruel one has arrived at along with his advisers. This intent is in consequence of their coveting surcease. He can not yield you up from sheer fear; not is he backward in battle, or shirk his own destruction or that of all the Rākşasas. O dark-eyed lady slaying Rāvaņa in battle with sharp shafts, Rāma shall take the back to Ayodhyā. In the meanwhile there was heard a mighty uproar occasioned by the whole host, and drums and conchs, which shook the earth. Hearing that hubbub of the monkey-army, the servants of the Råkşasa monarch, ran who were in Lankā, growing dispirited, and bereft of energy, with weakness overcoming their powers, did not see any good, in consequence of the fault of the ruler.