Hearing those words of the Wind-god's son, the irrepressible Rāma, conversant with all the Šāstras, replied, with words expressing his own opinion. I have also thought of some thing regarding Vibhisana. I wish you all, interested in my wellbeing, to hear that. (Vibhīşaņa) has come here as friend so I cannot forsake him by any means. And even if he has come with any evil intent it is not culpable for the pious to afford him shelter. There upon hearing his words and considering them well, Sugrīva, the lord of the monkeys, replied in more auspicious* word. *More reasonable word. Whether this ranger of the night is sincere or wicked, he should never be offered any shelter, since he has forsaken his brother in the midst of these calamities. What reason is there to believe that he shall not renounce us in our difficulty? Hearing the words of the lord of monkeys and casting his looks towards them, Kākutstha, having truth for his prowess, smiling a little, spoke, to Lakşmana, crowned with all the marks of piery, saying. Without being conversant with Sastras, and living in the company of old men, none can speak such words as have been uttered by the king of the minkeys. There appear to me, however two subtler reasons anent the difference between brothers, among the kings-one is evident and another mundane. There are two classes of foes-one consisting of the members of the same line the other of the neighbours. And these generally bring about our misfortune whenever any opportunity presents itself. And it is for this that he has he has come here. Those kinsmen, who do not think of one another's mischief, generally long for their respective well-being. But even such wellmeaning relatives are feared by the kings. And hear, I shall relate, what the Sastras say regarding the weak points you have mentioned as to the advisability of taking the enemies to our side. We are not his kinsmen and this Rākşasa has come here with a view to gain the kingdom. Even the Rākşasas are wise enough to ascertain the proper course-so we must take Vibhisana. If the brothers are confident and satisfied with each other they generally live together, or else they fear each other and ultimately engage in a tumultuous war. And there has sprung up some difference with Råvana and therefore Vibhīşaņa has come here. Nor are, O friend, all brothers like Bharata, all sons like me to their and all friends like you. Being thus addressed by Rāma, the highly wise Sugriva, along with Lakşmaņa, rose up and bending low his head, said. O you the best of all forgiving persons, this night-ranger has been despatched by Rāvana. I therefore think it better to kill him. Being impelled by his vicious sense that Rākṣasa has come here to slay us, o innocent one, when myself, you and Laksmana shall consider ourselves secure. Therefore the largearmed Vibhīşaņa the younger brother of the ruthless Rāvana, deserves to be slain along with his counsellors. Having thus addressed (Rama) the foremost of Raghu's race, skilled in are of speech, Sugrīva, the lord of monkey host, equally versed in the are of speech, became silent. Hearing the words of Sugrīva, and weighing them, Rāma again addressed the foremost of monkeys with more reasonable accents. Wicked or other wise, whatever this nightranger may be, he shall not be able to do me the least mischief. Piśācas, Dānavas, Yakşas or all the Rākşasas on earth, I can slay them all, if I like, with the tips of my fingers, O you the lord of monkeys. I have heard of a pigeon adoring and entertaining with its own flesh, an enemy who took its shelter. While a pigeon received so friendly its enemy, the slayer of its mate, how can I then act otherwise, O foremost of the monkeys? Do you hear, I shall relate, a sacred story, narrated by the great ascetic, the truthful Kandu, son of the ascetic Kanyā. o slayer of foes, even a wicked-minded enemy, if he, with folded palms and a poor heart, crave for your shelter, should not be slain. If an enemy, proud or terrified, seek shelter in affright, he should be saved by a great man even at the risk of his own life. One, who from fear, ignorance or wilfully does not protect him who seek his shelter, perpetrate a mighty iniquity, blamed of all. When a person is slain before him whose shelter he has taken he take away all the virtues of his protector. So great is the sin in not affording shelter to those who seek for it; it stands in the way of going to heaven, brings in calumny and destroys the strength and prowess. I shall therefore follow the excellent words of Kaņdu-leading to piety, fame and the attainment of the abode of the celestials. I always declare 'no fear' to all creatures, whenever any, approaching me, says, 'I am thine' and seek my shelter. Even this is my pious observance. O Sugrīva, O foremost of monkeys, do you soon bring him here, whether he be Rāvaņa or Vibhisana and I shall declare to him 'no fear'. Hearing the words of Rāma, Sugriva, the lords of those who go bounding, over-flowing with friendliness, bespake Kākutstha. What wonder is there that you wouldst speak these auspicious words, O you the foremost of kings, conversant with morality, gifted with prowess and ever treading the pious track as you are. Truly does my inner self regard Vibhīşana as devoid of any wicked intention. He has been well sounded by signs and gestures. And let the greatly wise Vibhīşaņa, O Rāghava, be placed on an equal footing with us and gain our friendship. Hearing the words of Sugrīva, the lord of monkeys, the king of men (Rāma) made instantly friends with Vibhīşaņa, like to the conqueror of enemies' cities making friends with the king of birds.