Entering his court, the king, distressed, and exceeding aggrieved sat him down on the foremost seat sighing like an enraged lion. And stricken with grief in consequence of his son's death, that highly powerful Ravana, with folded hands, addressed all the heroic Rākşasas saying. Do you all proceed to battle with elephants, horses and cars. And encircling Rāma only and discharging shafts at him, delightedly, like to clouds, in the rainy season, poring water, do you slay him. Or I shall slay him to morrow in the presence of all, wounded by you in the mighty encounter with sharpened arrows. Hearing the speech of their lord the Rākṣasas, with a huge army and a host of cars, speedily issued out for battle. They all threw at the monkeys life-destroying Parighas, pattisas, arrows, daggers and Parasvadhas. And the monkeys too threw crags and trees at the Rākşasas. Thus on the eve of sun set there arose a terrible conflict between the Rakşasas and the monkeys. They struck each other in the conflict with clubs chitras, Prasas daggers and Parasvadha. The conflict being thus carried on, there arose a mighty dust which was again destroyed by the current of blood gushing out of the persons of the Rakşasas and the monkeys: Elephants and cars were like the banks of that river of blood, the arrows were like the fishes, and the flags were the trees on their banks and the corpses were like planks afloat there. Being thus wounded and assailed by the Rākşasas, those heroic monkeys leaped and broke down the flags, armours, cars, horses and other weapons. With their sharp teeth and nails they scratched the hair, ears, foreheads and the noses of the Raksasas. Like to vultures falling upon a felled tree, hundreds of monkeys fell upon one Räkşasas in that encounter. The Rákşasas resembling mountains, with huge clubs, prasas, daggers and Parasvādhas, struck the monkeys (in their turn). Being thus assailed by the Räkşasas, the mighty host of monkeys took refuge of Răma, the son of Dasaratha, the worthy refuge of all creatures. Thereupon the highly effulgent and powerful Rāma, taking up his bow, entered the Rākşasa host and began to make a downpour of arrows. Rama entering the field, those terrible Rakş asas, being burnt with the fire of his arrows, could not stand before him like to clouds disappearing before the Sun in the welkin. The night-rangers only espied the dreadful feats performed by Råma and which were above the power of others. Except when guiding the huge army or driving the cars they could not see Rama like to the wind invisible in a forest. The all beheld the Råkşasas force scattered, wounded, burnt down with arrows, broken and assailed with weapons by Rāma But none could see the quick moving Rāma. As people cannot see the soul which governs all objects of sense so they could not see Rāma, who was thus inflicting wounds on them. It is he who is destroying the soldiers riding the elephants, it he who is breaking down the mighty cars, and it is he who with sharp arrows is slaying the cavalry-rider and horse. "Thus saying those Räkşasas, in that conflict and in the very presence of Rāma, highly enraged began to slay each other. They were all bewildered by the huge Gandharva weapon discharged by the high souled Rama and so they could not see Rama, whose was thus burning down their force. The Rákşasas sometimes beheld thousands of Rāma in the battle field and again saw one Rāma only. They at times saw the quick-moving golden end of the bow of that high-souled one, resembling a circular fire brand but they did not behold Rāghava. He looked like kālacakra, having his middle body as its navel, his own strength as its lustre, the arrow for its radius or spoke, the bow for the circumference, the twang of the bow for its sound, his power and intelligence for its brightness, and the aim of the celestial Weapons for its limit. In the eighth division of the time by Rāma alone with arrows resembling the flame of fire were destroyed ten thousands swift-coursing cars, eighteen thousand elephants fourteen thousand horses and riders and tow million Rākṣasas infantry assuming shapes at will. And those night rangers, who were still left, having their horses killed, cars and flags broken fled in fear of life to the city of Lanka. The battle field, filled with slain horses, elephants and infantry, looked like the high-souled and enraged Rudra's arena of sports. Thereupon the celestials with Gandarbas, Siddhas and the great ascetics glorified the wonderful feat of Rāma. The virtuous-souled Rāma addressed Sugrīva, Vibhīşaņa the monkey Hanumān, the leading monkeys Jämbavān, Mainda and Divada who were near him, saying, This is the power of my weapons and as well as that of Rudra. The high-souled Rāma, equalling Śakra in prowess, thus slaying the huge host of the lord of Rākşasas and assailing them with shafts and weapons-the celestials, delighted, saying his praises.