Beholding in Lankā that dreadful and aweinspiring work performed by Hanuman like to the high-souled Sakra, the lord of Raksasas, looking down with shame, addressed them all, saying. That monkey alone has invaded and entered the city of Lankā hard to reach and has espied Sītā, the daughter of king Janaka. He has shattered the palace, and the altar of sacrifice, slain the leading Raksasas, and, in short, agitated the whole city of Lankā. What shall I do now? And what should you all do one this occasion? It behove you all go give me such counsel as become me and will conduce to my glory. 'Victory is the outcome of consultation'-this do the sages* say. Let us, therefore, O mighty ones, engage in counsel, relating to the measures we should adopt towards Rāma. * Manasvin, according to Rāmānuja, means hero. There are three orders of men on this earththe superior, the middling and the inferior. This distinction cannot be perceived without a knowledge of the signs, and so I shall relate to you their merits and demerits. He is said to belong to the superior order, whose counsel contains the three signs (mentioned below), or who engages in works after consulting duly with friends capable or with persons having the same end in view, and some times with others, and who serve Providence. He belongs to the middle order who consults his own self only, depends on the Providence, and engages alone in works. He belongs to the inferior order who engage in works without ascertaining their merits or demerits, disregarding the will of the Providence and saying, 'I will do this,' and is inactive (at last). And counsels are also divided into three divisions like to the three orders of men (mentioned). That counsel belongs to the superior order in which the counsellors with their judgement reinforced by a knowledge of political ethics, are unanimous. That one belongs to the middle order in which the counsellors after varied discussion, arrive at unanimity in the long run. That one is the worst in which the counsellors differ from each other and agree a little in the long run, with no good result. You are all gifted with good intellects: do you all unanimously settle as to what become me and conduce to my well-being. Environed by a thousand of patient monkeys, Rāma, with a view to capture our city, is approaching towards Lankā. Forsooth, shall he cross over the main along with his younger brother and a mighty host. He can by his prowess dry up the ocean and do the other.* Rāma approaching thus with a hostile intention along with the monkeys, it behove you to devise such means as might protect my city and army. *i.e. bridge over the ocean.