Hearing the lamentations of the wickedminded Ravana, overwhelmed with grief, Trisiras addressed him, saying. O Sire, this second uncle to us possessed of mighty prowess has* forsooth been slain in fight. But, О king, heroes never indulge in grief as youdoes. as *Evameva-forsooth, I render it. The commentator, however, says it means such as you have described him. O lord, you certainly alone are competent to conquer the triple world. Wherefore then did you went such sorrow like an ignoble one? You have your dart conferred on you by Brahmā; and your mail and your weapon—the bow-and your car yoked with a thousand asses, sending forth clatter resembling the rumbling of clouds. The deities and the Dănavas have by means of your arms been terrified over and over again. And furnished with all arms, you ought to chastise Rāghava. But stay at your pleasure, O mighty sovereign, I will go out to battle; and even as Garuda capture serpents, will I capture your enemies. As Sambara was vanquished by the lord of the immortals, or Naraka by Visnu, will I bringing down Rāma in battle make him sleep (in the field). Hearing Triſiras words Rāvana-lord of Rākşasas-urged on by fate, considered himself as having regained his life. Hearing the speech of Triģiras, Devāntaka, and Narāntaka, and the energetic Atikāya also, were wrought up with martial enthusiam. Then those foremost of Naiſtas-the heroic sons of Rāvaņa-endowed with the prowess of Sakra himself-roared out, I will go,' 'I will go.' or All could range the sky, and all were skilled in illusion, and all were crushers of the pride of the immortals; and all were irresistible in encounter. All of them were endowed with superior strength, and all had achieved wide celebrity. They had never been heard of as having been beaten in fight even by the gods along with the Gandharvas, the mighty serpents accompanied by the Kinnaras. And all were skilled in weapons and heroic; and all were versed in werfare. And all were possessed of the higher knowledge; and all had obtained boons. Then the king surrounded by those sons of his, appearing like celestials, capable of injuring the force and fortune of the foes, looked splendid like Maghavan environed by the immortals, humblers of the hauteur of mighty Danavas. Embracing his sons and adorning them in ornaments, he sent them to the field with his best benedictions. Rävaņa sent the brothers, Yudhyonmatta and Matta, for protecting the princes in the field. Then, saluting the high-souled Ravanadestroyer of creatures, and going round him, those huge-bodied ones marched forth. And furnished with every description of medicinal herbs and perfumes, these six Nairtas-foremost of their kind endowed with great strength, burning for battle, marched forth, Triširas and Atikāya, and Devântaka and Narāntaka, and Mahodara and Mahāpāśva went out, urged on by Fate. Then Mahodara mounted the elephant Sudarsana-sprung in the race of Airāvata, and resembling dark-blue clouds. Accoutred in every weapon, and decked with quivers, he looked splendid on his elephant like the Sun ascending the crest of the Setting-hill. Ravana's son-Trisiras, ascended a car yoked with excellent steeds, and furnished with every variety of arms. Having ascended the car, Trisiras bow in hand appeared beautiful like a mass of burning clouds having lightning and meteors, and crowned with Indra's bow.. *The rain-bow is called sometimes Indra's bow and at others Rama's bow. Dight with three diadems, Trisiras looked splendid in that superb car, like the monarch of mountains Himavān—with the three golden hills. Then that foremost of all bowmen-the powerful Atikāya-son to the lord of Raksasas-ascended the best of cars, having excellent wheels and akşas, and yoked with excellent steeds, and furnished with bottoms and holes; flaming with quivers and bows; and bristling with prāścas and swords and blugdeons. Adorned with a crown plated with wrought gold' and (other) ornaments he looked like the Meru swimming in its own splendour. That powerful son of the kind surrounded by the Naiſtas looked lovely on that car like the thunder-handed (Deity) engirt by the immortals. Narāntaka mounted a white steed resembling Uccaiḥśravă, caparisoned in gold, having a large frame and endowed with the velocity of the wind. Taking a prāśa, Narāntaka appeared like the energetic Guha mounted on the peacock, grasping his dart. Taking a bludgeon decked in golden Ornaments, Devántaka resembled Vişņu at the time of the churning of the ocean, holding the Dorbhya* and staying burthening (the earth). *The mountain Mandara which served as the churning-stick.. The powerful Mahāpārsva endowed with terrific energy, taking his mace, appeared like Kuvera holding in his hand a mace in the encounter. Like immortals issuing out of Amarāvatſ, they marched out with elephants and steeds and cars sending out clatter resembling the rumbling of clouds. And them followed high-souled Räkşasas equipped with mighty-arms. Those sun-bright high-souled princes decked with diadems appeared splendid like burning planets in the firmament. The various gorgeous attires which they had worn resembled rows of cranes in the sky, looking like autumnal clouds. Resolved on dying or conquering the foe in fight, those heroes sallied out seeking encounter. Those high-souled ones, incapable of being repressed in fight, roared and shouted and discharged shafts and held them, The earth shook as they sent up leonine roars and struck at their arms with their hands; and the sky seemed riven with the leonine roars of the Rākşasa. Issuing out cheerfully, those foremost of Rāks asas endowed with great strength beheld that monkey-army staying with upraised rocks and stones. The high souled monkeys also saw that mighty host of Räkşasas thronging with elephants, horses and cars, and ringing with hundreds of bell-lets; resembling dark-blue clouds; upraising mighty arms; and environed on all sides by Naiſtas resembling flaming fire. Seeing that force advance, the monkeys, finding opportunity, upraising gaint crags momentarily set up shouts. And thereat, the Rakş asas, incapable of bearing those shouts, shouted in reply to the monkeys. And again the monkeys shouted to the Raksasa, who were unable to put up with that cry. And hearing that loud shout of the monkey-leaders, the mighty Raksasa, incapable of bearing that noise expressive of exhilaration, shouted still more dreadfully. Then diving into that dreadful Räkşasa army, the monkey-leaders began to range it with uplifted rocks, like to mountains. Equipped with trees and stones, the monkeys enraged, ranged the Raksasa army, now rising into the sky, and now coming down to the earth. And some among the powerful monkeys went about taking broad-shouldered trees. The encounter that took place between the thronging Räkşasa and monkeys was some-thing terrific. And (the monkeys) began to pour a wonderful shower of trees and rocks and cliffs. The monkeys of dread prowess were resisted with vollies of shafts. In the contest the monkeys and Rākşasas emitted leonine roars. And monkeys crushed Yatudhānas with rocks, and, wrought with rage, (they) in the encounter slew (Raksasas) covered with armour and ornaments; and steeds. The monkeys on a sudden slew heroic Yätudhānas. Smite with mountain-peaks on their persons, and with their eyes falling off, the foremost of Rakşasas moved, dropped down, or roared in the scene of conflict. The Rakşasas (on their part) pierced the foremost of monkeys with sharpened and keen darts and clubs and scimitars; and slew them with darts and pracas. And, eager for bringing down each other, the monkeys and the Räkşasas with their persons washed with the blood of their antagonists felled each other. In a moment the earth was covered with crags and swords discharged by monkeys and Raksasas, and was drenched in gore. The field was blocked up with scattered mountain-like Rākşasas influenced by martial ardour, mangled by their enemies. The monkeys thrown down and felled by means of broken crags and monkeys* and arms and legs, waged a wonderful war. *i.e. the carcasses thereof. Those foremost of Naiſtas slew monkeys with (the dead bodies of monkeys); and the monkeys smote Rākṣasas with (the dead bodies of) Rāks asas; and the Raksasas slew (the monkeys), hurling rocks and crags. And snatching away their own arms by main force, the monkeys finished Rākṣasa; and they, slaughtered them with mountain-peaks, and also wounded each other. The monkeys and Räkşasas emitted leonine roars in the encounter. The Rākşasas, slain by the monkeys, having their mail and defence for the body rent, bled like to trees exuding sap. And in that encounter, some among the monkeys destroyed cars with cars, elephants with elephants, and steeds with steeds. The Raksasas rived the trees and rocks of the foremost monkeys by means of Kșurapras and crescents and sharpened Bhallas and arrows. In that encounter the earth became impassable, having been scattered with crags baffled and severed trees and (warriors) slain by monkeys and Rākṣasa. Those monkeys, equipped with various weapons and with their vigour unworn, entering upon the conflict casting off fear, cheerfully putting forth efforts springing from pride of spirit, warred on with the Räkşasas. In that fearful conflict, which was being waged, on the monkeys having been exhilarated and the Rākşasas having been brought down, the Maharsis and the deities sent up shouts. Then mounted on a charger endued with the celerity of the wind, and grasping a whetted dart, Narāntaka entered into that fierce army of monkeys, like a fish diving into the deep. That hero by means of an effulgent bearded dart pierced seven hundred monkeys, and at one time the high-souled enemy of Indra slew the army of the foremost of monkeys. The Vidyadharas and Maharsis saw that highsouled one mounted on horseback, ranging the monkey-ranks. His course was discovered, miry with flesh and blood and blocked up with mountain-like monkeys fallen. When the monkeys set their hearts on displaying their prowess, Narāntaka, baffling them, pierced them with shafts. He consumed the monkey-army, like fire burning a forest. And when the wood-rangers uprooted trees and crags, they slain by bearded darts dropped down like mountains riven by the thunder. Raising a glowing prasa, the powerful Narāntaka began to range about in the rear of the forces; dashing everywhere (against the foe) in fight, like the wind in the rainy season. *Sangramānte, I presume, means rear of the forces; although literally it means, at the conclusion of the conflict, because this interpretation would not be proper, the battle being now at its hottest. The heroes could not appear prominently, or keep their posts. And how could they then move freely? And that one endued with prowess pierced everyone, whether springing, or staying, or moving. Broken through by a single praśa, resembling the Reaper, and furnished with solar effulgence, the monkey-ranks began to roll on the earth. The monkeys were ill fitted to bear the impetus of that präśa having the touch of thunder itself; and they raised a loud cry. The appearances of those monkey-heroes falling were like mountains toppling, having their summits riven with the thunder-bolt. Those high-souled and powerful monkeys that formerly had been brought down by Kumbhakarma, having recovered, were present with Sugrīva in this encounter. Sugrīva, looking around, saw that monkeyarmy flying in all directions, agitated with the fear of Narantaka. After seeing the army in flight, he saw Narāntaka himself, advancing, wielding a prasa, and mounted on a steed. As soon as he saw (that hero), the exceedingly energetic lord of monkeys, Sugriva addressed the heroic prince Angada endowed with strength equal to that of Indra, saying. Go against this heroic Raksasas that is mounted on a steed; and speedily deprive of life that one who is devouring up the ranks of his foes. Hearing his master's speech, Angada descended from that host resembling clouds, like the powerful Sun himself. And resembling a mass of crags, Angada-foremost of monkeys, Adorned with Angadas, appeared beautiful like a mountain with metals on it. And weaponless himself, and furnished only with nails and teeth, Vali's son attacking Narāntaka, said. Stay! What shall you do with these inferior monkeys? This prasa, having the feel of the thunder-bolt, do you hurl at my heart itself. Hearing Angada's words, Narāntaka was fired with wrath. And knawing his upper lip with his teeth and sighing like a serpent, Narāntaka, wrought with wrath, approached Vali's son. Then whirling his praśa, he suddenly discharged that flaming (weapon) against Argada. And then it was snapped on the breast of Vali's son, resembling the thunder-bolt, and dropped to the earth. Seeing the praśa broken in pieces, like a powerful snake severed by Suparna, Vāli's son, raising his hand, dealt a slap at the head of his (Narāntaka's) steed. Thereat, with his legs sinking down and his eye-balls coming off and his tongue hanging down, and wearing the look of a mountain, on being smite with that slap, Narāntaka's steed fell down to the ground, with its head lying at random. Narāntaka seeing his charger slain and fallen, was seized with a furious wrath, and raising his clenched fist, that one endowed with exceeding great energy in that conflict hit Vāll's son on the head. Thereat Angada having his head wounded by that blow, warm blood gushed out plentifully. And momentarily burning and momentarily swooning he, regaining his senses, was amazed. Then Vāli's son, the high-souled Angada clenching his fist into a blow resembling Death itself in energy, and like to a mountain-peak, let it descend on the chest of Narāntaka. Thereat, with his breast riven and broken down, vomiting flames and having his body bathed in blood, Narāntaka dropped down to the earth, like a hill shattered by the impetus of the thunder-bolt. On Narāntaka of exceeding prowess having been slain by Vali's son in battle, there arose a tremendous uproar in the firmament from the wood-rangers and the foremost of celestials. Angada having performed that difficult deed of prowess, capable of delighting the mind of Rāma, was seized with amazement;* and that one of terrific feats in fight was again inspired with delight in the encounter. * Probably, at his own prowess.