Having seen omens, that one, Laksmina's elder brother, conversant with them, embracing the son of Sumitrā, said these words. O Laksmana, occupying (this tract) of cool waters and woods affluent with fruits, will we, dividing and arranging our forces, stay here. Mighty is the fear that I see at hand, boding destruction to people and the slaughter of the foremost heroes of bears, monkeys and Rākşasas. The wind blow darkly, and the Earth shake. The tops of the mountains tremble, and trees topple down. The clouds are ashen and roistering, and roar roughly. And lowering, they shower portentous drops of blood. The twilight is terrible and look like the red sandal. And a fiery circle dropped from the flaming sun. And on all sides birds and beasts, distressed, uttering woe-begone notes, and grim-visaged, set up cries against the sun, arousing great fear. The Moon, although not appearing* in the night, burns, and with dark and red rays rises, as if it intended to exterminate people. *The moon, it seems appear, but does not look out clearly. The aspect (of the sun) is slight, rough, and good;* and, O Lakşmaņa, a blue mark is visible on the unclouded Sun. *Prasasta-I do not see the propriety of this epithet in this connection. This may be a mistake. The stars seem crased by a mighty volume of dust. O Lakşmaņa, behold this sight disastrous to people like to the universal dissolution. Crows, and hawks, and the inferior vultures, wheel all round. And jackals are sending inauspicious yells, exciting great fear. The earth shall be covered with darts and javelins, and swords discharged by monkeys and Räkşasas, and be turned into mire with flesh and gore. Surrounded by all the monkeys, will we, using speed, this very day rapidly enter into the city ruled by Ravana, incapable of being subdued. Having said this, that subduer in conflict, that lord, that enchanter of men, Rāma,* equipped with his bow, proceeded in the direction of Lankā. *The word Räma occurs twice, one being the cognomen of the solar hero. The other means, the enchanter of men. And all the principal monkeys-Sugrīva with Vibhisana-went on, setting up roars, for the destruction of foes, who were determined to battle with them. And consequently Raghu's son was well pleased with the fortitude and exertions of the powerful monkeys, for bringing about what dear to Ravhava.