Then the spies of the king informed him of the forces of Rāghava, incapable of being agitated, which had stationed themselves on Suvela. Hearing the arrival of Rāma's mighty army from the spies, Ravana was a little agitated, and he spoke to the ministers. Let the ministers speedily present themselves, having their wits about them, the time forsooth has come for counsel. Hearing his mandate, those Raksasas, his counsellors, swiftly presented themselves. And then he consulted with his Rākşasa counsellors. Having deliberated duly, that resistless one, dismissing his ministers, entered his own abode. Then, taking with him the highly strong Vidyujjihva, huge bodied and gifted with the powers of illusion, he entered where Mithila's daughter was. The lord of Rākşasas said to Vidyujjihva, skilled in illusion, Do you bring Janaka's daughter under the sway of illusion. O ranger of the night, do you, taking an illusory head of Rāghava, as well as a mighty bow with the shaft (set), present yourself before me. Thus accosted, the night-ranger, Vidyujjibha, saying, So be it, displayed that desired illusion to Ravana. Thereat, the king, eager to meet with Sītā in the Asoka woods, well-pleased, conferred an excellent ornament on him. Then the exceedingly powerful lord of the Naiſtas, the younger brother of the Dispenser of riches, entered (into that place) and saw (there Sitā) distressed, albeit unworthy of distress, with her head hung down, overwhelmed with woe, sitting on the ground, staying at the aśoka woods, engaged in the contemplation of her lord, conciliated by dreadful Räkşasis remaining near. then, drawing near Sita, Ravana, proclaiming his exultation, said these haughty words to the daughter of Janaka. O gentle one, he depending on whom you, being soothed by (me), slight me-that slayer of Khara, your husband, Rāghava, has fallen in battle. Your roots have been completely severed, and your pride has been destroyed by me. In consequence of this calamity, O Sītā, you shall become my wife. O foolish (girl), renounce this idea. What will you do with that is dead? O meek (wench), be you the mistress of all my wives. O you of slender religious merit! O you whose object has been defeated! O you that presumes to be wise! Hearken to the destruction of your lord, like the dreadful destruction of Vrtra! Surrounded by a vast army gathered by the sovereign of the monkeys, Raghava had presented himself on the shore of the sea, for compassing my destruction. And on the sun have set, Rama stationed himself with his mighty army, oppressing the northern shore (of the sea). Then at midnight (my) spies coming to that host, thus stationed, fatigued from travel, and sleeping soundly (in consequence), first ranged it. Then my mighty forces led by Prahasta slew his host overnight, where was present Răma along with Lakşmaņa. And repeatedly upraising pattiśas and bludgeons, swords, rods and other mighty weapons; and (discharging) showers of arrows, and darts, and daggers and maces and sticks and crows and bearded darts and discuses and clubs; the Rākşasas discharged these among the monkeys. While Räma was sleeping, the furious Prahasta by means of a mighty falchion, with speed cut off his head clean. Vibhīşaņa, who was flying at his will, was taken captive. And Lakşmaņa along with the monkeys army has departed somewhere. O Sītā, Sugriva lord of monkeys-has his neck broken; and, O Sītā, with his jaw fractured, Hanuman has been slaughtered by the Rākşasas. And Jāmbavān, endeavouring to spring up bearded darts, even as a tree cut off. The stalwart Mainda and Dvivida-those foremost of monkeyssighing and lamenting, bathed in blood, destroyers of foes-were cut off with a sword. Panasa is rolling on the earth like a (veritable) Panasa. And mangled by many iron arrows, Darīmukha lies in a cave. And the exceedingly energetic Kumuda, dumb, is slain by shafts. And torn by innumerable (arrows) discharged on all sides by Raksasas. Angada, vomiting blood, Leith on the ground. The monkeys, hard pressed by elephants, and others by networks of cars, lie low in the field, having been agitated like clouds by winds. And others afflicted with affright, flee, attacked (by the enemy) in the rear, and followed by the Rākṣasas, like mighty elephants pursued by lions. Some have fallen into the sea, and some have taken refuge in the sky; and the bears have mounted up trees along with the monkeys. And on the shore of the sea, and in mountains and woods many are the tawny-hued monkeys that have been slain by Rākşasas of frightful forms. Thus has your lord been slain by my forces, along with his army; and I have his head, washed in blood and besmeared with dust. Thereat, the exceedingly irrepressible lord of Raksasas, Ravana, spoke to a Raksasi, in the hearing of Sītā. Bring (hither) the Raksasa, Vidyujjibha of cruel deeds, who has personally brought Rāghava's head from the field. Thereat, Vidyujjibha, taking the head along with the bow, bowing down the head (to Ravana), stood before him. Then spoke king Rävaņa to the Rākşasa, Vidyujjibha of the long tongue, who was staying by. Do you at once hold before Sītā the head of Dasaratha's son. Let her clearly behold the ultimate sad plight of her lord. Thus addressed, that Raksasa, throwing that graceful head before Sītā, swiftly vanished, Rāvana cast down the mighty blazing bow, famed through the three worlds, saying. This is Rāma's. This is the bow of your Rāma with the string fixed. Slaying that man over night, Prahasta brought it hither. When Vidyujjibha placed the head of that man, Ravana poured the bow on earth. Then he spoke to illustrious Sītā, the daughter of king Videha to submit to his desire.