Entering the city of Larkā, the king afflicted with the fear of Rāma's arrows, with his pride humbled, was undergoing great torments: Overpowered by the high souled Rāghava, the king resembled an elephant defeated by a lion or a serpent defeated by Garuda. Remembering Råghava's arrows resembling a comet risen at the universal wreck, and of the splendour of live lightning, the Raksasa chief was aggrieved. Rāma, seated on a superb golden seat and eyeing the Raksasas, spoke this word. Forsooth all the austere asceticism I have performed go go for nothing, for although resembling the redoubtable Indra, I have been overcome by a mortal. This dire speech of Brahmā also reverts to my remembrance, Know you that the fear come from a human being. You are incapable of being slain by deities and Danavas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Raksasas and serpents. But you have not asked for immunity from men. I deem even this son of Dasaratha as the occasion of my fear. I was formerly cursed by that lord of the Ikşawaku line-Anaranya-saying, 'O worst of Rākşasas, a person shall spring in my race, who, O wicked-minded one, shall you in battle along with your sons and courtiers and forces and horses and charioteers. I was also cursed by Vedavatī, who was formerly outraged by me. And she is (perchance) born as the exalted daughter of Janaka. What had also been uttered by Umā and Nandisvara and Rambhā and Varuna's daughter, has come to pass. Taking note of this, you should strive (to the uttermost.) And let the Räkşasas be posted at the gateways, highways, and the walls. Do you wake up that destroyer of the pride of the deities and then Danavas-Kumbhakarma, endowed with unparalleled gravity, overwhelmed with the curse of Brahmā. Seeing himself worsted and Prahasta also slain, that Rākşasa endowed with dreadful power issued his orders to the fearful force. “Do you vigilantly guard the gates and mount the wall. And do you wake up Kumbhakarņa come under the sway of slumber. And deprived of his senses through lust, he sleep secure. And the Rākşasa sometimes sleep nine, seven, ten, or eight months away. Of measureless might he has slept for nine months. Therefore, speedily rouse very powerful Kumbhakarņa. Foremost of all the Rākşasas in fight, that long armed one shall speedily slay the monkeys as well as the princes. He is a very banner in battle, and the crown of all the Raksasa. But intent on common pleasure, Kumbhakarna, with his senses stupefied, sleep ever. I have been worsted in fierce fight by Rāma; but on Kumbhakarņa being awakened, my grief shall go. If he does not help me in such high peril, what shall I do with his strength resembling the strength of Sakra himself? Hearing the words of the lord of the Rākşasas, the Rākşasas, bestirring themselves, went to the abode of Kumbhakarņa. And desired by Rāvana, those feeding on flesh and blood went off hurriedly taking perfumes and wreaths and a mass of food. And entering Kumbhakarņa's charming cave having a wide gateway, measuring a yojana breathing around perfumes of flowers, those highly powerful ones, pushed off by Kumbhakarna's breath, with the utmost energy they could summon up stood their ground and entered the cave. Then entering that charming cave having floors paved with gold and gems. those Naiſtas endowed with great strength, saw that one of dreadful prowess, lying down. Then they together set about waking up the slumbering Kumbhakarņa looking like a hill extended, and sunk in profound slumber; with his body having its down standing on end; lying down; like a sighing serpent; rolling people* with his powerful breath, reposing; possessed of dreadful prowess; having a huge nose; of a person vast as the nether sphere; lying stretched at length; smelling of fat and blood; decked with golden Angadas; and warning a diadem endowed with the splendour of the sun. And (they) saw that subduer of enemies and foremost of Nairtas-Kumbhakarna. Then they huge bodied Rākșasas piled up before Kumbhakarma, Meru-like animals for conferring rare gratification and heaps of deer and buffaloes and boars. And the Rākşasas made an astounding heap of rice. Then the enemies of the immortals put up before Kumbhakarņa jars of blood and various kinds of food, and smeared that repressor of foes with excellent sandal, and made him inhale perfumes and the aroma of wreaths. And they made (the place) rife with the incense of dhupa, and extolled that smiter of enemies. And then the Yātudhānas roared around here and there like clouds. They winded conchs beaming moon-like. And they incapable of being beaten shouted in full chorus. The night-rangers shouted and struck at their arms with their hands and began to pull him. And for rousing Kumbhakarņa, mighty was the din that they raised. Hearing those loud sounds of conchs and drums and Papavas; and those proceeding from persons striking at their arms with their hands; and leonine roars, rushing on all sides and riving the very heavens, birds suddenly dropped down. When the high-souled Kumbhakarņa sleeping soundly did not awake at that terrific tumult, the Raksasas took up Bhusundis and maces. Then the Raksasas, drawing near, smote Kumbhakarņa sleeping sweetly in the chest with mountain-peaks, maces and clubs. But the Rākşasas could not stay before Kumbhakarņa owing to the hurricane heaving at his breath. Then tightening their cloth (about their waist), those Rākşasas of dreadful prowess sounded Mşdangas and Paņavas, conchs and kumbhas. And ten thousand Rākṣasas together surrounded that one resembling a heap of darkblue collyrium and fell to rousing him. But albeit assailed with shouts and smite with weapons, he did not wake up. And when they succeeded not in rousing him, they more than ever exerted themselves. Then they smote him with horses and camels, and mules and snakes, rods and lashes and hooks, and with might and main sounded kettledrums and conchs and Mțdangas. And they struck his body with innumerable huge blocks of wood. And summoning up their dearest energy, they dealt him blows with maces and clubs. And at that mighty uproar, entire Lankā was filled with her woods and hills; yet he did not wake up. Then they simultaneously sounded a thousand kettle-drums beaten with sticks of polished gold. And coming under the sway of the curse, when that one sunk in slumber did not wake up, the night-rangers were wrought up with wrath. And overcome with choler, they endowed with dreadful prowess addressed themselves vigorously to awakening him; and others put forth their energy. Others smote the kettle-drums, and others set up loud cries. And others cut off his hair, and others bit his ears. Others poured into his ears a thousand vessels of water. But Kumbhakarņa come under the spell of a mighty slumber did not wink. Others-strong ones-armed with poniards (kūt as) and maces, made their poniards and maces alight on his person. And struck with sataghnis bound with cords, that huge-bodied one did not wake up. Then when a thousand elephants rushed against his body, recovering his consciousness, he awoke. Assailed with mountain-peaks and trees descending on his body, he without minding those tremendous blows, on sleep having been dispelled. Suddenly got up yawning, suffering the pangs of hunger. Then that night-ranger resembling an elephant or a serpent or a mountain-peak, casting about his arms superior in force to the thunder-bolt itself, and opening his deformed mouth like to that of a mule, yawned (again and again). As he yawned, his mouth resembling the subterraneous regions, looked like the Sun stationed at the summit of Meru. That night ranger possessed of unwieldly strength woke up, yawning. And the breath that he breathed resembled a storm raging in a mountain. Then as he sat up, Kumbhakarņa's form appeared like that of the Destroyer himself at the universal wreck, intent upon consuming all creatures. The large eyes of that one, resembling a life flame and endowed with the splendour of lighting, appeared like a pair of glowing planets. Then they pointed to him all those heaps of edibles, various and profuse, bears and buffaloes, and that powerful (Raksasa) fell to. And hungering, he fed on flesh and athirst, drank blood. And then that enemy of Sakra drank vesselfuls of fat and blood. And concluding that he was replete, the nightrangers came up; and bowing down their heads stood circling him on all sides. Then with his eyes discoloured and drooping from drowsiness, he casting his eyes around addressed those night-rangers. That foremost of Naiſtas cheered all those Naiſtas: and surprised at his having been roused, spoke to the Rākşasas. Why, being honoured, have I been awakened by you? Is it well with the king? Or has any fear : sprung up here? Or has a mighty fear presented itself forsooth from among others; for which I have bee speedily awakened by you? This very day will I uproot quite the fear of the sovereign of the Rākşasas. I will split up the great Indra himself, or make Fire himself give up his heat. One does not awaken my like for a light cause. therefore do you give the real truth of the cause of your awakening me. Thereat a minister of the king, named Yupakş a, with joined hands said to that humbler of foesKumbhakarna-wrought up with wrath, who was thus speaking. No fear anywise springs to us fro the Deities. But, О king, a great fear does cross us, coming from a mortal. And never fear so come to us anywise from Daityas or Dānavas, as it has arrived from a man, O king. This Lanka has been hemmed in by monkeys resembling mountains. And terrific is the terror that come even from Rāma scorched with fire springing from the ravishment of Sītă. Ere this by a single monkey was this splendid city burnt down. And the prince Akşa has been slain along with his following and elephants. That thorn in the sides of deities, that lord of the Raksasas-Pulastya's son himself-has been set free in conflict by Rāghava endowed with the splendour of the Sun, Saying, “Go you. What had been done to the king by neither the gods nor Daityas nor yet the Dănavas, has been done by Rāma; and he has been set free, having come to a pass imperilling his life. Hearing Yüpākşa's speech and hearing of the defeat of his brother, Kumbhakarņa, with his eyes whirling, spoke to him, saying.. Today, O Yüpākṣa, after vanquishing in battle the monkey-army together with Laksmana and Raghava, shall I see Ravana. I shall regale the Rākṣasas with the flesh and blood of the monkeys, and myself drink the blood of Rāma and Lakşmaņa. Hearing his words as he haughtily spoke thus with his spirit of insolence magnified by much, that foremost of the Nairta soldiers, Mahodara, with joined hands observed. O long-armed one, having at first heard Rāvana's words and considered their justice or otherwise, you will afterwards defeat the foe in fight. Hearing Mahodara's words, the exceedingly energetic and mighty (Kumbhakarma) surrounded by the Rākşasas, prepared to depart. Having roused from his slumbers that one of terrific prowess having dreadful eyes the Rāks asas speedily arrived at the residence of the Tennecked one. And presenting themselves before the Tennecked on seated on a superb seat, all the nightrangers spoke with joined hands. O lord of the Rākṣasas, your brother, Kumbhakarņa, has been roused. Shall he march from there; or will you see him come here? Thereat, Ravana, pleased, spoke to those Raks asas who had presented themselves, “I wish to see him here, and do you honour him fittingly." Thereat, saying 'So be it', the Rākşasas, directed by Ravana, going back, spoke to Kumbhakarna. That foremost of all the Rākşasas-the kingwish to see you. So mind you going, and gladden your brother. The irrepressible Kumbhakarna possessed of prodigious prowess, learning the mandate of his brother, sa', ing, 'So be it', rose up from his bed. Washing his face, and having bathed, that one, feeling refreshed and enjoying exceeding exhilaration of spirit, wishing to drink, urged (the Rākşasas) to bring the nerve-conferring draught. Then the Rākşasas at the command of Rāvana speedily procured wine and various kinds of viands. Having drunk two thousand vessels (of wine) he prepared to go. And slightly swollen and flushed, Kumbhakarma, attaining access of strength and fire, waxed wroth and resembled the Doom and Destroyer-Yama himself. And striding to the residence of his brother backed by the Raksasa force, Kumbhakarņa shook the earth with his tread. Illuming the highway with the splendour of his person, like the thousand-rayed (Sun) discovering the earth with his rays, (Kumbhakarna) went on, engirt around by joined hands resembling wreaths, like Śatakratu* going to the abode of the Self-sprung. *Lit. him of an hundred sacrifices-an appellation of Indra. Suddenly seeing that slayer of foes of immeasurable prowess, resembling a mountainsummit, walking along the highways, the woodrangers stationed outside (the monkey-camp), along with the leaders of bands, were seized with affright. Then some sought the shelter of Răma, worthy of being so sought; and some, stricken (with panic), dropped to the earth; and some, suffering (from fear), fled to the carindal points; and some through stress (of apprehension) lay down on the ground. Seeing that one resembling a very mountainpeak, decked with a diadem, seeming to touch the Sun himself with his energy, of colossal altitude, and wonderful to behold, the woodrangers, tormented with fright, began to scamper on all sides.