Having his steeds slain, the night-rangerIndrajit, standing on the ground, waxing fiercely angered, flamed up in energy. And armed with bows, they, desirous of slaying each other with shafts resembled an elephant and a bull in a forest, came out for securing victory in encounter. And slaughtering one another the Rākşasas and the wood-rangers, rushing this way and that, did not (for a moment) leave their lords. Then Rāvana's son, gladdening all the Rākşasas, and himself feeling cheered, addressed them in words of praise, saying. All sides are entirely enveloped in this gioom, so that, O foremost of Raksasas, here we dysiot know who belong to us and who not. Do you fight fearlessly for stupefying the monkeys; and I too, mounted on a car, shall come hither into the conflict. Do you so act that the high-souled rangers of the woods may not attack me as I enter the city Saying this, that slayer of foes-Rávana's son. deceiving the wood-rangers, entered the ciiy of Lankā for providing himself with a (freah) car And embeilishing a chariot, graceful and adorned with gold, furnished with prāsas and swords and arrows, yoked with superb steeds, and driven by a charioteer, knowing horses and possessed of instructions (anent his art), that victor in battle-the exceedingly energetic son of Ravana-ascended it, That hero, Mandodari's son urged on by the force of the Finisher, went out of the city, surrounded by the foreinost Räksasas; and drawn by fast-speeding steeds, he presented himself before Lakşmaņa along with Vibhisana. Seeing Răvaşa's son seated on the car, the son of Sumitrā and the exceedingly powerful monkeys and the Raksasa-Vibhisana-were highly amazed at the lighthandedness of that intelligent one. And Ravana's son, waxing furious, in that contest began to bring down monkeys by hundreds and by thousands. That victor in battle— Rāvana's son fired with wrath, summoning all his celerity, slaughtered monkeys, drawing his bow into a circle. And slaughtered by närâchas of terrific impetuosity, the monkeys saught the shelter of Sumitrā's son, like creatures seeking the refuge of their lord. Then the son of Raghu, flaming up in martial wrath, severed his* bow, displaying his fleethandedness. *Indrajit's. Thereat, taking another bow, (Indrajit) hurriedly fastened the string to it. And this bow also did Lakşmaņa cut off by means of a brace of arrows. When (Indrajit) had his bow severed, Suinitra's son pierced the son of Rāvana with five shafts resembling the venom of a poisonous serpent. piercing his? The shafts discharged from his' mighty bow, person, dropped to the earth like to powerful red serpents. 1. Laksmana's. 2. Indrajit's. Having his bow cut off, Ravana's son, vomiting blood by his mouth, took up a superior bow powerful to a degree and having a stout string. Then aiming at Lakşmaņa, he, summoning his utmost celerity, showered arrows, as shower Purandara in the season of rains. Thereat Laksmana, subduer of enemies, retaining his calmness, resisted that powerful arrows shower shot by Indrajit. Then that exceedingly energetic one, Rahgu's son, possessing himself in calmness, displayed (his prowess) to the son of Ravana; and this was wonderful (to behold). Then displaying his lightness in the use of weapons, Laksmana, growing furious, pierced the Rakşasas with three arrows each in that mighty encounter; and the lord of Räkşasas struck him with showers of shafts. And pierced sore by that powerful enemyslayer of foes— be incessantly sent innumerable arrows after Lakşmaņa. And ere they reached their destination, that slayer of hostile heroes severed them with whetted arrows; and in the encounter that righteous one and foremost of car-warriors with a dart having bent joints, cut off the head of his charioteer mounted on the car. And deprived of their driver, there the steeds, retaining their calmness, began to go in rounds and this was wonderful. Then Sumitrā's son of steady prowess, fired with anger, in that contest, frightening all, pierced his horses with arrows. And not brooking that act (of his adversary), Rāvana's son in the encounter pierced with ten shafts Sumitrā's son capable of making people's down stand on end. And his shafts resembling thunder-bolts, and like to all varieties of venom, touching (Lakş mana's) mail having a golden splendour, were reduced to naught. Thereat considering Lakşmaņa as clad in an impenetrable armour, Ravana's son-Indrajitgrowing furiously enraged, displaying his lighthanedness in arms, pierced Lakşmaņa in the temples with three well-knobbed shafts. And with those arrows lodged in his temples, Raghu's son, delighting in battle, appeared beautiful in the field like a mountain furnished with three summits. Albeit thus smitten in the contest by the Rākşa with shafts, Lakşmaņa swiftly smote him in turn with five arrows; and in the encounter Lakşmaņa drawing his bow, pierced with shafts Indrajit's face graced with elegant ear-rings. And those heroes-Lakşmaņa and Indrajitequipped with exceedingly powerful bows, and endowed with heroism and dreadful prowess, wounded each other with sharp arrows. Both Lakşmaņa and Indrajit, with their persons bathed in blood in that encounter, appeared like to flowering Kinsukas. And approaching each other, those bowmen, each setting his heart on victory, wounded each other all over the body with terrific shafts. Then Ravana's son, carried away by martial rage, pierced Vibhīşaņa in his handsome face with three arrows. And piercing the lord of Rākṣasas, Vibhișaņa, he with three iron-headed arrows, pierced the monkey-leaders each with a shaft. Thereat, enraged at him more furiously then ever, the exceedingly energetic Vibhīşana with his mace despatched the steeds of the wickedminded son of Răvaņa. Then jumping down from his chariot with its horses slain, (Indrajit), endowed with great cnergy, who had his charioteer pounded, discharged a dart at his uncle. Seeing it descend, the enhancer of Sumitrā's joy severed the same with whetted arrows and brought it down in ten fragments to the ground. And Vibhîşana of a tough bow, growing enraged, discharged at (Indrajit), who had his steeds slain, five speeding shafts having the touch of the thunder-bolt. And those arrows furnished with gold at the feathered parts, riving his person, were bathed in blood, and resembled mighty red serpents. Thereat wroth with his uncle, Indrajit took up an excellent shaft-bestowed on him by Yama himself-endowed with terrific force, the flower of shafts among all the Rākşasas. Seeing that mighty shaft set by him (on the bow-string), the highly powerful Laksmana, possessed of dreadful prowess, (in his turn) took up another arrow, bestowed by Kuvera himself of imme jurable soul in a dream, unconquerable, and incapable of being borne even by the celestials and Asuras with Indra at their head. On their best of bows being powerfully drawn with their arms resembling bludgeons, they set up cries like to Krauñcas. On those foremost of shafts set on those excellent bows of those heroes, being drawn, flamed up in exceeding splendour. Those flaming arrows, discharged from the bows, illumining the welkin, with vehemence struck at each others head. A concussion took place of those arrows of terrific aspects; and a furious fire sprang up thereat, with embers shooting around. And dashing against each other like to mighty planets, they, reduced to an hundred shivers in the encounter, saught the earth. Seeing their shafts baffled, Indrajit and Laks mana, staying on the edge of the battie, were seized with shame and wrath. Thereat Sumitra's son, flying into a fury, took up a Vāruņa weapon. And the conqueror of the great Indra intent on battle, in the encounter discharged a terrific Raudra weapon; and the exceedingly wonderful Văruņa weapon was baffled by him. Then, waxing wroth, that victor in battle-the wondrous energetic Indrajit—as if annihilating the world, discharged a flaming Angeya weapon. The heroic Lakşmaņa resisted it with a Solar weapon. Seeing his weapon resisted, Ravana's son, transported with passion, took up an Asura arrow, capable of rending foes. And from that weapon issued daggers and clubs and darts and bhusundis and maces and swords and axes.* *This arrow resembled somewhat the bomb-shells in modern European warfare. And in the conflict, seeing that dire and dreadful weapon, irresistible to all creatures and capable of riving all arms, the effulgent Lakşmaņa baffled it with a Māheśvara* weapon. *i.e. belonging to Maheśvara or Śiva. The encounter that took place between them was wonderful and capable of making people's down stand on end. And beings stationed in the sky surrounded Lakşmaņa on all sides. In that terrific encounter of the monkeys and the Rākşasas resounding with dreadful roars, the welkin was covered with innumerable beings seized with wonderment. Saints and Pitrs and deities and Gandharvas and birds and serpents, placing Satakratu in their front, protected Laksmana in the conflict. Then that hero, Rāghava's younger brother, fixed (on his bow) another superior shaft, having the feel of fire itself, and capable of riving the son of Rävaņa; furnished with fair feathers; tapering; having elegant joints; symmetrical; and plated with gold, and arrow capable of finishng the body; irresistible; dreadful; terrific to Raks asas; resembling the venoin of poisonous serpents; and worshipped by the celestial hosts; by which the exceedingly energetic and wonderful Lord riding the horse' Sakra-of old in the war between the celestials and the Asuras had defeated the Dānavas. And Sumitra's son, Lakşmana graced with auspiciousness, drawing on his best of bows that foremost of sharts to Airdra weapon-invincible in conflict, spoke these words, tending to bring about his success, "If Daſaratha's son-Rāma is righteous and truthful, and if in prowess he has no rival, then slay this son of Ravana.” Saying this, the heroic Lakşmaņa in that conflict, drawing the straightspeeding arrow up to his car,' discharged it at Indrajit. 1. The celestial steed, Uchchaiśrvā, sprung from the ocean on the occasion of the churning of the deep. 2. Words addressed to the deity presiding over the weapon. 3. i.e. drawing the bow to its utmost stretch. And shooting the Aindra Hearon, that destroyer of hostile heroes-Laksmana-severing from its trunk the head of Indrajit with its corslet, graced with burning ear-rings, brought it down to the ground. The mighty severed head of the Rākşasas son, resembling one made of gold, was seen covered with blood. And slain, Ravana's son dropped to the earth, with his armour and corslet on, and his bow fallen (from his grasp). Then all the monkeys with Vibhīşaņa set up cheers, even as the immortals cheered at the destruction of Vrtra. And in the sky there arose the victorious shouts of all beings and high souled saints, and also of Gandharvas and Apsarās. And knowing (Indrajit) fallen (in fight), the mighty army of Rākşasas, attacked by monkeys burning for victory, fled in the ten cardinal directions. And assailed by the monkeys, the Raksasas, pursued (by their foes), with their senses lost, rushed towards Lankā, leaving their arms behind. And overwhelmed with fright, Rākṣasas fled in an hundred directions, all renouncing their arms-bearded darts, and swords, and axes. And harassed by the monkeys, some hurriedly entered, Lankā, and some plunged into the sea, and some saught shelter in the mountains. Seeing Indrajit slain and lying down on the field of battle, thousands of Raksasas fled away. As when the Sun sets, his rays remain no longer, on that Raksasas having fallen, the Raks asas dispersed in the ten cardinal quarters, like to the sun when his rays have been rendered mild, or fire which has been extinguished. The mighty-armed (Indrajit) was utterly shorn of life. And on the son of the Raksasa-chief falling, the world, having its foe slain, with its huge affliction gone off, experienced the height of joy. On that unrighteous Raksasa having been slain, the reverend Sakra together with the Maharsis was filled with delight. And sounds of kettle-drums were heard in the sky proceeding from the celestials. And blossoms were showered by dancing Apsarās and high-souled Gandharvas. And this was wonderful (to behold.) And on that Raksasa of fell deeds having been slain, the dust was laid, the water became transparent, the sky looked bright, and the deities and Dänavas were filled with rejoicings. And on that dread of all creatures having been slain, the gods, Gandharvas and Dänavas, assembled together in joy, said, "Now let the Brahmanas who have their sins removed, with their anxiety gone off, range about.” Then the monkey-leaders, seeing that foremost of Naiſtas of unparalleled prowess slain in battle, began to gladly pay homage (to Lakş mana). And Vibhīşaņa and Hanumān and Jāmabavān, leader of bears-saluted and hymned Lakşmaņa on the score of his victory. And shouting and bounding and roaring, the monkeys at this hour of high joy stood surrounding Raghu's son.* *Descendant, that is. And flourishing their tails and striking the earth (with them), the monkeys shouted, 'Victory to Laksmana!' And embracing each other, the monkeys with delighted spirits began to converse in various ways touching Raghava's welfare. Beholding that deed, difficult of being done, performed by their beloved friend, Laks mana, and hearing their foe, Indrajit, slain (in battle), the celestials attained the summit of joy.