Seeing Ravana wrought up with wrath, the exceedingly strong Mahāpārsva, reflecting for a moment, observed with joined hands. The man that, entering the forest, abounding with deer and ferocious animals, does not drink honey, make a fool of himself. O destroyer of foes, who is the lord of you, that are lord yourself? Enjoy with Vaidehi, taking your enemy by the hand. O you endowed with prodigious power, do you exerting your might lead your life, after the manner of hens, and invading Sītā again and again, do you enjoy her and derive pleasure (therefrom). When you have attained your purpose; what fear can succeed? Alike when on your guard, and off it, you shall provide against all exigencies. Kumbhakarņa along with us, as well the exceedingly powerful Indrajit, are competent to chastise the thunder-bearing (Deity) equipped with his thunder. Passing by gift, conciliation, and dissension, which have been as signed by the wise as the means of success, I relish the success in business which is attained through chastisement. O highly powerful one, we shall, without doubt, by the prowess of our arms, subdue all these enemies of your that have come hither. Thus addressed by Mahāpārsva, king Rāvana, honouring his speech, said. O Mahāparáva, I will relate to you, who have spoken (thus), a secret matter relating to myself, which befell me long since I saw Puñjikasthală, like a flame in the sky, coursing to the Greatfather's mansion. Her pace slackened, as soon as she saw me, (turn) I feasted on her and deprived her of her attire. Then she went to the Great-father's place, like a crumpled lotus. That high-souled one received information of all that I had done; and thereat, waxing enraged, the Deity spoke to me. If from this day, you ravish a female by force, your head certainly shall be riven in an hundred pieces. It is for this, that with my mind afflicted with fear, I do not violently force, Videha's daughter Sītā, anent lying with her fair self. My rush is like that of the sea, and my motion that of the wind. Dasaratha's son does not know this, and therefore does he approach sea. Who wish to address a lion that is lying asleep in a cave, resembling Death wrought up by wrath? Răma has not seen shafts shot by me, resembling two-tongued serpents, and therefore, it is that he approach me. Like a meteor burning an elephant, I shall, with shafts shot from bow in hundreds, resembling the thunder-bolt, consume Rāma. As at the proper hour the risen Sun defeat the splendour of the stars, will I, surrounded by a mighty army, overpower his strength. Neither the thousand-eyed Vasava, nor yet Varuņa, is capable of fighting me. By the might of this arm did I formerly conquer this city, governed by Vaiśravana.