Seeing in sore straits his own mighty forces capable of making people's down stand on end, and seeing his brothers resembling Sakra in prowess, routed; and seeing also his uncles brought down in battle, as well as his brothersYuddhonmatta and Matta— foremost of Råkş asas, that crusher of the pride of deities and Dānavas-the exceedingly energetic Atikāya-resembling a hill, who had obtained from Brahmă a boon in battle, was fired with wrath. Ascending a car effulgent like a thousand suns mingling their rays into a burst of brilliance, that enemy of Sakra, charged the monkeys. Stretching his bow, (Atikāya) decked with a diadem wearing polished ear-rings, proclaimed his name (among the monkey-ranks) and shouted in lofty tones. And with his leonine roars and the proclamation of his name, and the tremendous twang of his bow-string, he struck terror into the monkeys. Seeing the magnitude of his person, the monkeys thinking that it was Kumbhakarna who had come, and affrighted thereat, sought the shelter of each other. Seeing his form like to that of Vişnu when he displayed his threefold energy, the monkeywarriors seized with fear, began to scour on all sides. On Atikāya appearing before them, the monkeys stupefied in that conflict, saught the shelter of Laksmana's elder brother. And from a distance Kakutstha saw the mountain-like Atikāya mounted on the car and equipped with his bow, like to roaring clouds (seen) on the occasion of the universal disruption. Seeing that huge-bodied one, Rāghava struck with surprise, comforting the monkeys, addressed Vibhisana, saying. Who is this one resembling a mountain, furnished with a bow and having leonine eyes, that is stationed on a large car hoked with a thousand steeds, he that with effulgent sharpened darts and keen práśas and tomaras, shine like Maheśvara environed by spectres-he that displaying his fatal tongue appear splendid surrounded with darts in his car; like a mass of clouds graced with lightning. And his bows adorned and backed with gold all over, beautify his car even as Indra's bow beautify the firmament. Who is this foremost of Räkşasas and best of bowmen that embellishing the field of battle, approach on a car glorious as the sun; who, . displaying the ten cardinal points with his shafts resembling the rays of the sun, appear handsome with his peak of a banner bearing the figure of Rāhu, whose bow bent in three places, emitting roars resembling the rumbling of clouds, and plated with gold, look like the bow itself of Satakratu? His mighty car furnished with a banner and ensign and bottom, and having clatter resembling the roaring of clouds, has four horsemen (attached to it). There are on the car eight and thirty quivers and dreadful bows and yellow-golden bowstrings. There are (in that car) two effulgent swords at iis side, illumining it, their hafts measuring four lands and their blades ten each. That calm (warrior) wears red garlands about is neck, and resembles-a mighty mountain. And very destroyer, he has a mighty mouth, appearing like that of the destroyer himself; and he look like the sun stationed on clouds. With his arms adorned with golden angadas, he appear splendid like that best of mountains the Himavān with its towering summits. With his pair of ear-rings, his charming yet terrific countenance shine like the full Moon entering into Punarvasu.* *The seventh lunar asterism. O mighty-armed one, tell me all about this foremost of Rākşasas, seeing whom the monkeys, overwhelmed with fear, fly away in all directions. Asked by the king's son Rāma of immeasurable prowess, the exceedingly energetic Vibhīşaņa spoke to Rāma, informing him. The highly powerful .king, Vaisravana's younger brother of dreadful deeds, the highsouled Rävaņa, is the sovereign of the Rāks asas. This one is his mighty son, like to Rāvaņa himself in strength. He serve the aged, is of wide celebrity and is the prime of those versed in all branches of knowledge. He is competent to ride horses and elephants, to wield the sword or draw the bcw, or in sowing dissensions, or giving away, or in counsel, he reposing in whose arm Lanka has cast off fear. Know him to be Atikāya, son to Dhānyamāli. Having adored the pure-souled Brahma with austerities, he has obtained weapons, and has defeated his foes (in fight). You shall be incapable of being slain by celestials and Asura's was the boon conferred on him by the self-sprung; and he also gave him this celestial mail and this car resembling the effulgent Sun himself. He has vanquished (in battle) hundreds of deities and Dänavas; and he has always) protected the Rakşasas, and destroyed Yakşas. This intelligent one resisted the thunder-bolt itself of Indra; and in encounter baffled the very noonse of the king of waters. This one is Atikāya-foremost of Raksasas; and that son of Rāvana is the humbler of the hauteur of deities and Dänavas. Therefore, O best of persons, do you endeavour your best. This one with his shafts slaughter the monkey-hosts before (us). Then the powerful Atikāya entering that monkey-force, stretched his bow and shouted again and again. The high-souled principal monkeys, seeing that (hero) possessed of a dreadful person, that best of car-warriors-stationed on his car, rushed forward. And Kumuda and Dvivida and Mainda and Nila and Sarabha dashed on at one time with trees and mountain-peaks. Thereupon that foremost of those skilled in weapons, the exceedingly energetic Atikāya, severed those trees and rocks by means of shafts dight with gold. In that encounter that powerful one possessed of a gigantic person, skilled in arms, pierced all those monkeys staying before him with arrows entirely made of iron. And agonised, having their persons pierced in that mighty conflict by that arrowy shower, they were incapable of resisting the same. The Rakşasas terrified that host of monkeyheroes, even as an enraged lion priding in his youth terrify a society of deer. In the midst of those bands of monkeys, that lord of Raksasas did not slay anyone without battle. And then springing up before Rāma, that one furnished with his bow and quiver, addressed him in haughty words, saying. Stationed in this car holding the bow and arrows in my hands, I will not fight any that is ignoble. Him that has strength, and that also understand this business, let him today speedily give me battle. Hearing his speech, that slayer of foesSumitrā's son, was fired with wrath. And not bearing him, he sprang forward disregarding his antagonist's words, and took up his bow. And flying to fury, Sumitra's son, darting up, took out arrows from his quiver, and stretched his mighty bow in front of Atikāya. Filling the entire earth and the sky and the ocean and all the cardinal quarters, the terrific twang of Lakşmaņa's bow struck terror into the (hearts of the) night-rangers. Hearing the dreadful twang of the bow of Sumitrā's son , the exceedingly energetic and powerful son of the lord of Rākşasas was struck with surprise. Then Atikāya, enraged, seeing Lakşmaņa advance, taking sharpened shafts, spoke to him. You are a bc/, O Sumitra's sons and as such know not how to display prowess. Go you. Why wish you to fight with me resembling death itself. Not Himālaya itself or the firmament or the earth is capable of bearing the impetuosity of shafts shot by my arms. You wish to rouse a fire slumbering sweetly. Leaving alone your bow, do you return. Do not lose your life by coming in contact with me. Or it may be that you are proud; and therefore, have no mind to return. Stay then. Renouncing your life, you shall go to Yama's mansion. Behold my whetted arrows-crushers of the insolence of foes resembling the weapon itself of the Lord,* adorned with burnished gold. *Isvara, Siva, His weapon is the trident. Even as a lion enraged shedded the blood of a mighty elephant, this arrow of mine resembling a serpent shall shed your blood. Having delivered himself thus, he fired with wrath set his shaft on his bow. Hearing in that encounter Atikāya's wrathful speech fraught with hauteur, the highly powerful and intelligent son of the king possessed of exceeding grace, was transported with passion; and he said. You can not attain pre-eminence solely by virtue of your speech. One cannot be a worthy person simply by say. O wicked-minded one, do you display your strength on me equipped with the bow and holding arrows in my hands. Manifest yourself by your valour, you ought not to blow your own trumpet. He, who is actually powerful identified as a real gallant. Seated on a chariot and skilled in archery you are equipped with all weapons, therefore, you display your own prowess either with your arrows or with arms. Then, I shall cut off your head with my sharpened arrows like wind falls down a palm fruit from its stalk, ripened in the process of time. To-day shall my shafts decked in gold, drink your blood flowing from your person and issuing of wounds inflicted by my resembling darts. 'This one is a boy', thinking this, you ought not to slight me. Whether I am a boy or an old* man' death shall you know in the conflict. *The commentator says the passage means-"You know (me) for death itself.” I prefer the sense given. It was as a boy that Vişņu had overpowered the triune world with his prowess.” Hearing Laksmana's words, fraught with reason and high sense, Vidyadharas and ghosts, deities, Daityas out arrows and Maharşis, and the high-souled Guhyakas then beheld that marvel.* *The encounter that ensued between Lakşmaņa and Atikāya. Then Atikāya, enraged, setting his arrow on his bow, shot it at Lakşmaņa, as if devouring up the welkin. Thereat, Lakşmaņa-slayer of hostile heroes-with a crescent severed that sharpened shaft resembling a venomous serpent, as it was descending. Seeing the shaft severed, like a serpent having its person cut off, Atikāya waxing exceedingly enraged, took up five arrow; and the nightranger discharged them at Lakşmaņa. Thereat Bharata's younger brother cut off the approaching arrows with whetted shafts. Having severed them with sharpened shafts, Lakşmaņa— slayer of hostile heroes-took up a sharpened arrow, as if flaming in energy. And taking it, Lakşmaņa set it on his excellent bow; and drawing the latter, vigorously discharged the shaft. That hero endowed with prowess hit that foremost of Rākşasas in the forehead with that i shaft having bent knots, discharged from his bow drawn to its full bent. That arrow piercing the forehead of that dreadful Raksasas, and smeared with blood, appeared like the lord of serpents in a mountain. The Raksasas, smarting under Laksmana's shaft, showered, like the dreadful gateway of Tripura battered by Rudra. Then recovering himself and reflecting, he said.* *Cintayāmasa-thought, I apprehend, means said in this connection. Excellent well! By this discharge of your shaft, you approve yourself as a foe in whom I can well glory. Having spoken thus candidly, he, folding his hands at ease, and seated on the platform of his car, began to range in it. Then that foremost of Raksasas began to take up, set and shoot one, three, five, or seven shafts. Those shafts resembling Fate itself, plated with gold at the feathered parts, and looking like the Sun himself (in splendour), discharged from the bow of the lord of Rakşasas, lighted up the heavens. Thereat Raghava's younger brother by means of many a sharpened shaft calmly cut off all those vollies of arrows shot by the Rakşasas. And finding all those arrows riven in the encounter, that enemy of the lord of the immortals, Ravana's son, was fired with wrath, and took up a whetted shaft. Then aiming that arrow, that highly powerful one suddenly shot it; and with that, rushing on, hit Sumitra's son in the chest. Struck in the encounter by Atikaya, the son of Sumitra began to bleed copiously, like a mad elephant discharging the temporal jouice. Then that lord at once extricated the arrow; and then took up a keen shaft and fixed the same on his weapon.* *i.e. the bow. Then he set a shaft (on his bow-string) reciting a formula for the Agneya* (Belonging to the god of Fire.) weapon; and thereat his arrow as well as bow flamed up. Then the highly powerful Atikaya took up a Ruadra* weapon; and thereon fixed a shaft plated with gold at the feathered part, and resembling a serpent in sheen. *Relative to Rudra. And even as the reaper hurled his rod, did Lakşmaņa hurl that weapon inspired with divine energy, dreadful and aflame, at Atikaya. Seeing that shaft set upon an Āgneya weapon, that night-ranger discharged a Raudra arrow set upon a Solar weapon. There like a pair of infuriated serpents, those arrows with their heads flaming in energy, baffled each other in the sky. And burning each other, the shafts fell on the earth; and those best of arrows, shorn of brilliance and reduced to ashes, were deprived of their splendour. And having blazed in the welkin, those two fell down to the earth reft of their lustre. Then Atikāya wrought up with wrath discharged an arrow called Aişīka dedicated to Tvaştā. Thereat the powerful son of Sumitrā severed that shaft by an Aindra* weapon. *Belonging to Indra. Seeing Aisika baffled, that Prince-son to Rāvana-fired with rage, fixed an arrow on a Yămya' weapon; and then the night-ranger shot that weapon at Lakşmaņa. And Lakşmaņa resisted it by a Vāyavya' weapon. 1. What could this be like? The commentator is silent over this important point. 2. Belonging to the wind-god. Then as a mass of clouds poured down showers, Laksmana, enraged, poured volleys of shafts on Rāvana's son. Thereupon, hitting Atikāya, those arrows coming in contact with his mail, had their barbs broken, and fell down to the earth. Seeing them baffled, that slayer of hostile heroes-the renowned Laksmana-began to shower shafts by thousands. And albeit showered with those arrows, that Raksasas, the mighty Atikāya-in that encounter was not pierced by them on account of his impenetrable mail; and that best of men failed to hurt him in the contest. Then approaching him, the wind-god spoke to him, saying, "This one has received a boon from Brahmā, and is covered with an impenetrable mail. Pierce him with a Brahma* weapon. He cannot otherwise be slain. This one clad in mail and endowed with prowess is forsooth incapable of being slain by others." *Belonging to Brahma. Hearing the words of the wind-god, Sumitrā's son like to Indra in prowess took an arrow endowed with fierce impetuosity, and at once set it on a Brahma weapon. On that sharp-headed best of arrows being fixed on that foremost of weapons, the cardinal quarters and the Moon and the sun and the mighty planets and the sky were saized with affright; and the earth shook. And inspiring that arrow furnished with a feathered part and resembling an emissary of Yama himself, and fixing the same on his bow, Sumitrā's son in that encounter discharged that shaft like to the thunder-bolt at the son of the enemy of Indra. And in that conflict Atikāya beheld that shaft fair-feathered and having its feathered part dight with splendid diamonds, acquiring enhanced vehemence arising from its having been discharged by Lakşmaņa, and hissing and rushing on with tremendous impetuosity. Seeing it, Atikäya swiftly resisted it with countless sharpened shafts. But endowed with the energy of Suparna himself, that shaft vehemently went to him. Seeing that shaft flaming and resembling the Fatal destroyer himself, coming, he, exerting himself to the utmost resisted it with darts and Rştis and maces and adzes and javelins and arrows. But beating down all those weapons of wonderful forms, that arrow alive with flames, coming to the diadem-decked head of Atikāya, severed the same (in twain). That head furnished with a corsalet, cut off by Laksmana's arrow, suddenly dropped to the earth, like a summit of Himavān toppling (to the ground). Seeing him rolling on the earth, with his attire and ornaments scattered about, those nightrangers that survived were overwhelmed with grief. And with pale forces and distressed, they, fatigued in consequence of the thrashing they had undergone, suddenly began to cry in frightful accents. On their leader having been slain, those nightrangers that were about (Atikāya), without waiting any longer, overwhelmed with panic, rushed towards the city. On their foe endowed with terrific prowess and incapable of being conformed, having been slain, innumerable monkeys filled with excess of joy, and displaying countenances resembling blown lotuses, paid homage to Lakşmaņa working out their welfare.