Seeing the leaders of monkeys as pointed out by Suka, the exceedingly puissant Lakşmaņa-Rāma's right arm, and his brother Vibhīşaņa staying near Rāma, and Sugrīva of dreadful prowess—sovereign of all the monkeys, and the strong Angada, grandson to the thunder-hand one, and the powerful Hamunān; and the unconquerable Jāmbavān; and Sușeņa; and Nila and Nala-best of monkeys, and Gays; and Gavākṣa; and Sarabha; and Maind; and Diwivida,Ravana, with his heart agitated a little, and his wrath aroused, when their talk had ended, rebuked those heroes, Suka and Sāraṇa. And he wrathfully spoke to them, standing in humble guise with their heads hung down, harsh words faltering with passion. That counsellors subsisting (on the wealth of their master and sovereign), should say aught disagreeable to him, whether they meet with his favour or disfavour-is not meet. Without being questioned, it is (proper) for you both to hymn the praises of a foes that is opposed and that has advanced for encounter! You have in vain worshipped your preceptors, aged people, and spiritual guides, for you have failed to appropriate the cream of Political Science, which should be availed of. Or if you had appropriated the same, you have forgotten it afterwards;;and you bear the burden of ignorance. And it is owing to my good fortune that, having such stupid counsellors, I have as yet held my kingdom. Have you no fear of death that you use harsh speech towards me, who am the ruler and whose tongue dispense good and evil? Even trees may exist in the forest, coming in contact with burning fire; but transgressors cannot exist, visited with the chastisement of the monarch. I shall slay these wicked wights, who praise the side of the enemy, if my anger be not moderated, remembering their former good offices. Avaunt! Go hence from near me! I do not wish to slay you, remembering your good acts. Slain you (already) are, who are ingrate and cherish no affection for me. Thus accosted, Suka and Sarana, seeing (how things stood), covered with bashfulness, went out, saluting Ravana by uttering 'Victory!' Then that ranger of night, the Ten-necked one, said to Mahodara, who was present, to summon some spies. Thus accosted, Mahodara speedily ordered some spies (to present themselves). Thereat, the spies, hurriedly arriving there at the mandate of the monarch, and, presenting themselves, stood with joined hands, uttering blessing of victory. Then the lord of Rākşasas, Rāvana, addressed the spies, who were heroic, faithful, calm, and courageous, Go hence, and acquaint yourselves with the exertions of Rama; as well as with those who, being the custodians of Rāma's close counsels, have gladly joined him (here). How he sleep and how he wake, and what he engage himself in, having deftly acquainted yourselves with all this thoroughly, do you come (back here). The wise king that gathers (a knowledge of) his enemy through spies, can, putting forth a modicum of effort in conflict, neutralise (his exertions). Thereat the spies, saying, So it is, taking Sardula to the fore, with delighted hearts went round the sovereign of the Raksasas. And, having gone round the high-souled Raks asa-chief, the spies set out for where Räma with Laksmana was. And repairing secretly to the vicinity of the mountain bordering on the fair shore,* they saw Rāma and Lakşmaņa with Sugrīva and Vibhís ana. *Suvelasya Säilasya may also mean, of the mount Suvela. Seeing that host, they were overwhelmed with fear. And, while staying there, they, discovered by the righteous lord of Raksasas, Vibhisana, were sore harassed (by the monkeys). That wicked Rākşasa, Sārdula, alone was taken (before Rāma). But Rāma liberated him, who was assailed by the monkeys. And Rāma also, entertaining no enmity against them, also liberated the others, (who accompanied Sārdula). And, on having been put to straits by the powerful monkeys of fleet vigour, they, breathing hard, and with their consciousness lost, again, arrived at Lankā. *The spies, that is. Then those exceedingly strong spies, always ranging outside, presenting themselves before the Ten-necked one, informed him of the forces of Rāma, stationed near mount Suvela.