Seeing Kumbhakarņa slain by the high-souled Rāghava, the Räkşasas conveyed the tidings to the lord of the Raksasas-Ravana; (and addressed him, saying) O king, that one resembling the destroyer himself, urged on by death, having scoured the monkey-army and eaten up monkeys, and for a while displayed his prowess, has met with his quietus at the hands of Rāma exerting his energy. And with half his body immersed in the dreadful deep, your brother, Kumbhakarņa, with his nose and ears cut off, and blood besmearing his body, with his head and limbs hewn away, and his body uncovered, mountain-like block up the gate of Laňkă with his person-and resemble a tree that has been consumed by a forest-fire. Hearing the mighty Kumbhakarņa slain in battle, Ravana burning in grief, swooned away and dropped to the earth. Hearing their uncle slain, Trisiras* and Atikāya-destroyers of gods and men, began to weep, oppressed with sorrow. *Three-headed. Mahodara' and Mahāpārśvahearing of their uncle slain by Rāma of untiring deeds, were overcome with grief. 1. Huge-bellied. 2. Mighty flanked. Then regaining his senses with extreme exertion, that foremost of Rākṣasas, distressed in consequence of the destruction of Kumbhakarna, mourned with his senses overwhelmed, saying. O hero! O humbler of the pride of the foe! O mighty Kumbhakarna! Leaving me, you through stiny, have gone to the abode of Yama. O exceedingly powerful one, leaving me (alone) whither did you wend, without extracting my dart as well as that of your friends? Now really I am not, inasmuch as my right arm has dropped. Backed by this one, I would not fear celestials and Asuras. How today forsooth has such a hero-crusher of the hauteur of gods and Dänavas—resembling the fire arisen at the hour of universal wreck, been slain in fight by Raghava? He who could not be harmed by the concussion of the thunder-bolt itself-how can he, smitten with Rāma's arrows, sleep soundly on the earth? These gods stationed in the sky along with the saints, beholding you slain the battle, are shouting in glee. Surely today the monkeys overjoyed, finding occasion, well scale all the gateways and fortifications of Lankā. I have nothing to do with empire. And what shall I do with Sītā? And deprived of Kumbhakarma, I do not even wish to live. If I do not slay in encounter that slayer of my brother-Rāghava, certainly death is even that which is good for me, otherwise, this life is useless. This very day will I repair to that place where my younger brother is. Forsaking my brother, I forsooth dare not live for a moment. For the gods shall laugh on seeing me, who had formerly wronged them. But, how, O Kumbhakarņa, you having been slain, shall I conquer Indra? Now the beneficial words of Vibhīşaņa have been verified. And as through blindness I did not accept the advice of that high-souled one, Kumbhakarņa and of Prahasta, this disaster arisen, shame me sore. As I had disgraced the virtuous and graceful Vibhīşaņa, this peril producing grief, has been the consequence of my conduct. Having thus piteously and long lamented Kumbhakarna, the Ten-necked one, with his inmost soul overwhelmed with sorrow, and sore distressed in consequence of grief, fell down, knowing his brother—the enemy of Indra-slain in battle.