Then that heroic general, the Rākşasa named Prahasta, possessing the splendour of sable clouds, submitted with joined hands. I am competent to baffle in battle gods and Dänavas and Gandharvas, ghosts, birds and serpents, what then is a couple of human beings? Having been negligent and confident (in our power), we have all been deceived by Hanumān. But, I living, that ranger of woods shall not (again) go hence with his life. All the earth down to the ocean, containing hills, forests and woods, shall be rendered free from monkeys. Do you command me. O ranger of the night, I shall deliver (the Rāks asas) from the monkeys; and you shall not have to suffer in the least in consequence of your transgression.* *i.e. the ravishment of Sitā Then the Rāksasa named Durmukha, growing enraged, said, This overpowering of all of us must not be forgiven-this flagrant discomfiture of the metropolis of the auspicious lord of the Rākşasas as well as of his inner apartment by the foremost of monkeys. This moment marching alone (from hence) will I exterminate the monkeys, even if they shall have entered the dreadful deep, or the sky, or the subterranean regions. Then the exceedingly powerful Vajradańșțra, wielding up a terrific bludgeon, stained with flesh and gore, wrathfully observed. Rāma the irrepressible existing, and also Sugrīva with Lakşmaņa, what have we to do with the weak and wretched Hanumăn? This very day, staying single-handed Rāma with Sugrīva and with Lakşmaņa, with this bludgeon shall I return, after having sorely troubled the monkey-host. O monarch, if you are minded, hear this other word of mine! Verily he that is fertile in resources and ever ready, compass success. Let thousands of Raksasas, heroic, terrible, fearful to behold, and wearing forms at will, appointed by the lord of Rākṣasa, presenting themselves before Käkutstha in palpably human shapes, calmly say to that foremost of the Raghus, 'Despatched have we been by your younger brother.' Hearing this, he (Rāma), summoning his forces without delay, shall come hither. Then, equipped with darts, javelins and maces, and bearing bows, arrows and scimitars in our hands, we shall swiftly and summoning speed* set out (from hence); and stationing ourselves in the sky in bands, and slaughtering the monkey-army with mighty showers of rocks and weapons, we shall lead it to Death's door. *Tvarita-summoning speed-redundant. Let us in this wise decoy Rāma and Laks mana; and if they fall into our design, they shall, without doubt, lose their lives. Then that hero, Kumbhakarma's son, named Nikumbha, endowed with exceeding prowess, in high wrath remarked to Rāvana, destroyer of worlds. Do you, all of you, stay here along with the great king. I alone shall slay Rāghava together with Laksmana, and Sugrīva with Hanumān, and all the monkeys. Then a Raksasa, named Vajrahanu, resembling a hill, in wrath lapping the corners of his mouth with his tongue, said. Do you, casting off anxiety, engage yourself as you list. I alone shall swallow up that entire monkey-host. Do you, remaining at ease and without anxiety, drink Varuņa wine. I single-handed shall slay Sugrīva with Lakşmaņa, as well as Hanumān with Angada, and all the monkeys.