The unrighteous king, overmastered by his passion (for Sītā), in consequence of his sinful act as well as the loss of honour he sustained at the hands of his friends, became reduced. The occasion for war was (wanting Rāvana, possessed by lust, and continually thinking of Vaidehī, conceived along with his counsellors that the time for entering into hostilities had arrived. Sallying forth, he ascended a mighty car furnished with golden network, adorned with pearls and coral and yoked with trained steeds. Having ascended that excellent vehicle, having sounds resembling those of mighty clouds, that foremost of Raksasa, the Tennecked one, drove towards the court. As he coursed on, Rākşasas, bearing swords and shields, and carrying all kinds of weapons, went before the lord of the Rākşasas. And (some of) these, wearing various frightful suits, and decked with diverse ornaments, went, surrounding his rear and flanks. And many atiratha heroes went with cars, and superb mad elephants, and sportive steeds; and bearing in their hands maces and bludgeons; and darts and clubs. Some of them were bearing spades and others with darts in hands. As Rāvana marched towards the court, there arose the loud blares of a thousand trumpet, and the uproarious sounds of conchs. That redoubtable and mighty car-warrior held his course, suddenly making sides resound, and beautifying the high ways. The spotless white umbrella of the lord of Rākşasa, being raised up, looked beautiful like the Moon at her full. On his right and left graced two crystal white cámaras furnished with threads of gold. All those Rākşasas standing on the ground with joined hands, bowed down their heads to the foremost of Rākşasas who was seated on his car. Hymned by the Råkşasas with blessings of victory, that exceedingly energetic chastiser of enemies arrived at the court constructed (by Viśvakarmā). That highly energetic one in person entered that court paved with silver and gold, having its heart decorated with crystal, and gracefully covered with silk, embroidered with gold; excellently constructed by Viśvakarma, and guarded by six hundred ghosts. Rävaņa sat down on a superb and august seat consisting of lapises, furnished with a pillow; and covered with a soft dear-skin. And lord-like he commanded the envoys possessed of fleet vigour, saying. Do you speedily summon hither the Raksasas. I fancy some mighty effort has to be put forth against our foes. Hearing his words, the envoys began to range Lankā; and going to every house, they fearlessly collected the Rākṣasas from places of sport, bedrooms, and gardens. Then some set out, mounting cars, and some mounting proud coursers, and some on foot. And like the welkin filled with fowls, the city thronged with approaching cars, elephants and steeds. Leaving their various vehicles and cars behind, they entered the court on foot, like lions entering mountain caverns. Taking the feet of the sovereign, and honoured by him (in turn), they sat them down, some-on raised seats, some on cushions of Kusa, and some on the floor. Presenting themselves agreeably to the command of the monarch, they sat them down each according to his position, before the lord of Raksasas, Ravana. There came also the learned and competent to arrive at infallible decisions, and they sat them down in order of merit. And there also came courtiers endowed with virtues, versed in every thing, and having intelligence for their eye-sight, and innumerable heroes by hundreds also (arrived) at that court for ascertaining the course the would prove beneficial. Then mounting a large, noble and splendid car, having its parts decked with gold, and yoked with horses, the magnanimous and renowned Vibhīşana went to the court of his elder brother. That younger brother (of Rāvana), announcing his name, bowed down at the feet of his elder brother. And Śuka and Prahasta were employed in giving to each a separate seat befitting his rank. From all sides in the court there began to spread the odour of excellent agura and sandal and wreaths belonging to the Räkşasas, decked in gold and various gems, and clad in costly attires. And no one among these present at court uttered any thing, or spoke any falsehood, or conversed in loud accents. And having completely attained their desire, all of fierce prowess, gazed at the face of their lord. In the assembly of those intelligent, and exceedingly powerful persons, equipped with arms, the intelligent Rāvaņa appeared splendid like the vaira-handed Indra among the Vasus.