That captor of hostile capitals, the mightarmed Rāma, was advancing (upon Larikā) with the sounds of drums mixed with the blares of conchs. Hearing this noise, Ravana-lord of Raks asas-reflecting for a while, cast his eyes upon his counsellors. Addressing there all those counsellors, that afflictor of the world—the crooked and highly powerful lord of the Rākşasas, Rāvaņa, making his court resound, running down (Rāma's) crossing the main, as well as his vigour, strength and manhood, said to them. What you have said touching Rama's (prowess), has been heard by me. And I also know you to be of sterling valour in the field. Yet why, knowing Rāma's prowess, do you silently look at each other? Then the maternal grand sire (of Rāvaņa), possessed of exceeding wisdom, named Malyavān, hearing his words, said. The king that is accomplished in the various kinds of learning,* and that follow polity, ever command affluence and bring his enemies under his subjection. *The commentator says there are four and ten kinds of learning; but unfortunately he does not enumerate them. He that seasonably concludes peace and carries on war with his enemies, and who advances his own party, attain great affluence. A king should enter into peace, if he be an equal or inferior of his adversary, and engage in war, if be more powerful, but an enemy should never be disergarded. Therefore, O Rāvana, peace with Rāma is what commends itself to me; and do you render to him that for which you have been invaded (by him), viz., Sītā. All the Devarsis and Gandharvas wish for (Rāma's) victory. Therefore, do not enter into hostilities with him; but do you bend your mind to the conclusion of peace with him. That possessor of the six attributes, the Greatfather, has appointed two courses, (respectively) for the Asuras and the celestials, having for their eousness. Righteousness, we hear, is the course of the high-souled celestials, as, O. Rākşasa, unrighteousness is that of Rākşasa and Asuras. During the Kţta Yuga, righteousness swallow up sin; and during Tisya,* unrighteousness swallow up virtue. *The Kali Yuga. You, ranging the three worlds, worlds, had extinguished pregnant piety, and reaped unrighteousness; and it is for this that your foes have waxed potent. *While ranging the three worlds on a career of conquest, you didst, disturbing sacrifices, etc., wrong righteousness. Having grown through through your your neglect, unrighteousness devour us, and that protector of the gods, (righteousness), is strengthening the side of the celestials. You, addicted to carnal pleasures and acting in defiance of duty, had aroused the high wrath of the saints resembling fire. The power of these possessed of souls sanctified through asceticism, and ever engaged in invoking the aid of righteousness, is incapable of being resisted and is like flaming fire. The twice-born ones engage in contemplation with intent minds, offer oblations into the fire according to the ordinance, and loudly recite the Vedas. They overpower the Rākşasa, uttering the Vedas; and thereat they fly in all directions like clouds scattered in summer. The smoke that arise from the Agnihotra sacrifices of saints resembling fire, enveloping the energy of the Räkşasas, spreads over the ten cardinal quarters. The fierce austerities of vow-observing saints, performed at particular sacred spots, try the Rākş asas sore. You have obtained a boon, conferring immunity at the hands of deities, Dänavas and Yakşas. But men and monkeys, bears and Golăngülas, possessed of enormous strength and endowed with vigour, and of indomitable prowess, coming here, are setting up roars. Witnessing various and many dire portents, I perceive the destruction of all the Rākşasas. Dreadful and terrific clouds, uttering harsh sounds, are showering blood all around Lankā. And (live) vehicles are dropping profuse tears. And all sides, covered with dust, do not appear bright as formerly. And beasts of prey, jackals and vultures, are emitting frightful cries, and, entering into the garden of Lankā, form themselves into bands. In dreams mighty dark-hued women in front of dwellings, seizing at (the furniture) thereof, and speaking inauspiciously, laugh displaying their sable teeth. In houses dogs are feasting on the articles of worship. And cows bring forth asses, and mungooses, mice. And cats are pairing with leopards, and swine with dogs, and Kinnaras with Rākşasas and human being. are And red-footed white sky-coursing pigeons, urged on by Doom, are going about for the destruction of the Raksasas. And female-parrots in houses, wounded and worsted by other birds delighting in discord, are dropping down, emitting indistinct notes. All the birds and beasts crying (distressfully) with their faces turned towards the sun. And at dusk a frightful, withered, tawnyhued male figure, looking like Death himself, with his head shaven, peer into the houses (of people). These and other evil omens occur. Rama I deem as Vişnnu assuming the form of a man. Rāghava of steady prowess, for certain, is no human being, he that has built a bridge over the deep, must be an exceedingly wonderful person. Therefore, O Rāvana, conclude peace with Rāma-king of men. Having ascertained fit course, do you act properly. Having said this to that vile one, and known the intention of the lord of Rākşasa, that strong Mālyavān, of exceeding prowess, became silent, eying Ravana.