Hearing the words of Hanumän rehearsed properly, Rāma, exceedingly delighted, said. By Hanumān has been performed a very great deed, rare on earth, and one incapable of being even conceived by any other in the world. Save Garuda and the Wind-god, and save also Hanumān, him find I not who cross the wide ocean. Entering by main force the city of Larkā, incapable of being subjugated by the gods and Dänavas and Yaksas, the Gandharvas, serpents or Raksasas, and well protected by Ravana, who, living, come out (of it)? Who that is not the compeer of Hanuman in strength and prowess, even enters into (Lankā) hard to subdue, and carefully guarded by the Raksasas? Having put forth his strength commensurate with his prowess, Hanuman has also performed a great act befitting a servant on behold of Sugriva.* SO *Having seen Sītā, which was all that he had been commissioned to do by Sugrīva, Hanumān has destroyed Räkşasas and burnt Lankā; and this he did of himself like a good servant. That servant who, being entrusted with a hard task, after having accomplished it, do another work in pursuance of (the prescribed business), is the best of men. That servant is middling, who, deputed to any task,* do not albeit capable, perform any other work which may be dear to the king. *i.e. performing the entrusted work. That servant who, entrusted with any work of the king do not, although competent, heedfully accomplish the same, has been called the worst. Anent the order (which he had received), Hanuman has done the work (and more). He has not been humbled,* and, further, he has pleased Sugriva. *By the Raksasas. And by seeing Vaidehī, (Hanumān) has, while reaping righteousness, saved me, the Raghu race, and the highly powerful Lakşmaņa. This pain my mind sore, that I cannot do a like benefit, returning this dear office of his. Embrace express the all (of the Deicy),* and, finding this occasion, I extend my embrace to the high-souled Hanumān. *The commentator explains this obscure passage after his own orthodox fashion. The gist is this. Delight is the essence of the Deity, and all His incarnations body forth this. Embrace is typical of this emotion. Having said this, Rama, with his down standing on end in joy, embraced the selfcontrolled Hanumān, who was present after having finished his speech. Then reflecting for a while, the best of the Raghus again spoke in the presence of Sugrīva, lord of monkeys. Complete success has been attained anent the search of Sītā. But when I think of the ocean, my mind is again sunk in dejection. How can the assembled monkeys go over to the southern shore of the vastly deep, difficult to cross? This tidings you have related to me touching Vaidehī; but what are the monkeys to do next avout crossing the sea? Having said this to Hanumān, that slayer of foes, the mighty-armed Rāma, agitated by anxiety, was then plunged in thought.