Hearing of the destruction of Makarākşa, the heroic Răvaņa, being excited with ire, began to grind his teeth. Being thus angered, and thinking within himself what steps to take, he ordered his son Indrajit to proceed to the battle-field. O hero, gifted with great prowess as you are, do you, hidden (in clouds) or appearing before them, slay the two heroic brothers Rāma and Laksmana. You did defeat in conflict Indra of unequalled prowess. Shall you then neglect to slay men as they are? Being thus addressed by the lord of the Raks asas and obeying his father's command, Indrajit proceeded towards the sacrificial ground to satisfy Fire (with oblations). There came some she-demons with crimson turbans and waited respectfully where Rävaņa's son was offering oblations to Fire. In that sacrifice the weapons were the leaves of sara,' bibhitakas? were fuels, and there were brought crimson clothes and sruvas made of black iron. 1. Saccharum-a reed or grass. 2. Beleric myrobalan. 3. A ladle with a double extremity or two oval collateral excavations made of wood to pour ghee Spreading fire on all sides with śare leaves and Tomaras, (Indrajit) caught a living goat, all black, by the neck. The fire, with oblations of sara, became greatly blazed and devoid of smoke. There were visible many good omens indicating victory. The flame of the fire was like to gold, and moving Southwards began to receive offerings of clarified butter. Thus offering oblations to fire and to celestials, Dänavas and Raksasas, he ascended in excellent car and soon disappeared. It was drawn by four horses and a huge bow, set with sharp arrows, appeared beautiful on that excellent car. The chariot was brilliant with its own native resplendence, adorned with gold and painted with the figures of deer and a cresent. It was encircled on all sides with golden bracelets, adorned with flags made of viadurja and was like to the flaming fire. Being thus well protected with Brahma weapons resembling the Sun in brilliance, the mighty son of Rāvana became invincible. Offering oblations to Fire in accordance with demoniac incantations and thus obtaining the power of hiding himself, that hero, ever victorious in battle, issued out of the city and said. Slaying these two brothers in battle, who have uselessly wandered away into the forest, shall I crown my father Răvana with victory. Destroying Rāma and Lakşmaņa, and clearing the monkeys off the earth, shall I satisfy my sire greatly. Saying this, he disappeared from their view. Thereupon that fearful foe of the lord of celestials appeared in the battle-field, excited with wrath, armed with bow and sharp Nārācas and commissioned thus by the Ten-necked one. He beheld there those two heroes discharging flaming arrows and surrounded by the monkeys like to the fearful three-hooded serpent in the midst of other serpents. Thinking "these must be both brothers, Rāma and Lakşmaņa," and stretching his bow he began showering arrows like to clouds. He was seated in a car in the welkin and hidden from the human gaze and began to assail! Ráma and Lakşmaņa with sharp shafts. Being hurt with the arrows, Rāma and Lakş mana, fixing arrows on their bows, began to discharge celestial shafts. Those two highly powerful heroes could not even touch his person with their arrows resembling the Sun albeit they covered the whole welkin therewith. And clouding the whole sky with smoke that effulgent one, enveloped in frost, his himself from their gaze. There was not audible the twang of kis bow, the sound of the wheels, or the noise of the steeds. Nor was he seen by any. In that terrible darkness of clouds that one of mighty arms began to make a downpour of Nāracas and arrows like hail storms. In that encounter, Rāvana's son, inflamed with ire, wounded Rāma, with shafts, resembling the Sun and obtained by him as a boon. Being hurt with Nārāchas, like to mountains wet with rain, those two foremost of men, began to discharge shafts feathered in gold. Reaching the son of Rāvana in the sky and soaked in blood those golden arrows, fell down on earth. Those two best of men, hurt with his arrows, became more effulgent and beffled the shafts discharged by the Räkşasa. Thereupon Rama and Lakşmaņa began to aim their sharp shafts to the direction whence the arrows came down. And stationed in his chariot that mighty carwarrior disturbed all quarters with his arrows and pierced Dasaratha's sons with sharp shafts won by him. Being greatly hurt with those sharp-pointed and terrible arrows Rāma and Lakşmaņa appeared like blossoming kingsukas. Like to the sun hidden in clouds they could see neither his countenance and motion, nor his bow and arrows. Being wounded with those arrows hundreds of monkeys died and fell down on the earth. Thereupon Lakşmaņa, being excited with wrath, spoke to his brother, saying-"To slay all the Rākṣasas shall I discharge today Brahma weapon.' Thereupon Rāma spoke to Lakşmaņa, gifted with auspicious . marks, saying.-"It does not behove you to clear all the Rākşasas off the earth for the folly of one individual. You should not slay him, who has retired from battle, has hidden himself, has sought your shelter, has stood before you with joined palms, has fled away or who is bewildered. O you of mighty-arms, let us try to slay him (Indrajit). And to accomplish it I shall use the weapons gifted with great impetuosity and resembling the serpents. He is hidden from the public gaze so we must slay him, had he been fighting openly the leaders of the monkey hosts could have slain that Räks asas. Truly he shall be burnt to death with my shafts and fall down on the earth albeit he entered the regions under the earth of the abode of the celestials. Having said these words pregnant with a high significance, the high-souled and heroic descendant of Raghu, being surrounded by monkeys, began to concert various plans for the destruction of that terrible Raksasa of wicked deeds.