Then the graceful Sugrīva spoke words capable of soothing sorrow, to Dasaratha's son, Rāma, who was wrought up with grief. Why, O hero, does you grieve, like one that is base? Let not this be so. Chase away you grief, even as an ingrate resign amity. Nor, O Rāghava, when the whereabouts of Sītă has been discovered, and when too the abode itself of the foe has been known, do I perceive the reason of your sorrow. You, O Raghava, are intelligent, conversant with learning, wise, and judicious. Do you cast away this sorry way of thinking, even as a selfcontrolled (ascetic) caste away any course of thought interfering with the attainment of his purpose. Crossing over the ocean swarming with gigantic alligators, we shall enter Lankā and slay the enemy. Of a person that is dispirited and poor in pluck and that has his soul overwhelmed with grief, every interest droops, and he comes by misfortunes (one after another). All these heroes, these leaders of monkeyhordes, who are ardent for they welfare, are competent to enter into fire itself. From their cheerful attitude I know this, and firm is my faith. It behove you so to arrange things that, slaying the foe, Rāvana of impious acts, we may bring higher Sītā by our own prowess. Do you, O Rāghava, so order matters that a bridge may be constructed (over the main), and that we may behold the palace of the Rākşasa monarch. We having seen the city of Lankā, established on the summit of Triküța, do you for certain conclude Răvaņa as slain in battle immediately after (we see her). Without throwing a bridge over the ocean-the dread abode of Varuņa-even the Asuras and celestials with Indra (at their head) are unequal to subduing Laňkā. When the bridge over the ocean has been constructed up to near Laňkä, and when my forces have crossed (over the sea), consider victory as secured. As these monkeys are heroic in fight, and able to wear forms at will, O king, do not let your intellect get stupefied and thus mar all interests. In this world, sorrow berefts people of their prowess. Do you do even what should be done by a man-summon your manliness; for what an actor does promptly, conduce to his success. At this time, O eminently wise one, do you realise goodness through they energy.* Of heroic, high-souled, men like yourself, on their sustaining and entire or a partial loss, grief undo every interest. *i.e. as I understand this rather obscure passage, prove the good through your vigour-secure victory to the cause of goodness through they might. Therefore, the foremost of intelligent persons, and conversant with every lore, you should along with councillors like me, strive to beat they foe. Find I none in the three worlds, O Rāghava, who can stay in fight before you equipped with your bow, Your business entrusted to these monkeys shall not (anyway) suffer. And soon, crossing over the boundless main, you shall behold Sītā. Therefore, O king, renounce your sorrow, and call up wrath. Those Ksatriyas that conceive no anger in respect of their enemies, have their activity annulled; and all fear furious persons. Drawing nigh to us, do you, gifted with acute intelligence, cast about for crossing over the dreadful deep, lord of streams, along with us. On these forces getting beyond the ocean, do you take it for certain that we have won; and when my whole host has reached the further shore, do you indubitably conclude that we have obtained victory. These monkeys, heroic and capable of assuming in fight forms at will, shall slaughter those foes by showering rocks and trees. If I see any means of crossing the ocean, Varuna's abode, I shall, O destroyer of foes, deem him as slain in battle. And what is the use of dilating? Every way you shall prove victorious. And I see omens, and my mind is filled with delight.