Hearing that Akampana had been killed, the lord of Raksasas, overwhelmed with anger, with his face somewhat fallen, cast his eyes on his counsellors. Then pondering and reflecting for a while, in the forenoon he went round the city of Lankā for inspecting the barracks. The king surveyed the city guarded by the Rakşsasas, covered with innumerable barracks, and crowned with ensigns and standards, Seeing the city besieged, Ravana-lord of the Rākşaşas-seasonably spoke words of welfare to Prahasta skilled in fight. "Save battle, deliverance find I none for the city suddenly beleaguered and put to straits. And this strain must be borne by these versed in warfare-me or Kumbhakarna or you-my general or Indrajit or Nikumbha. Therefore do you from this place, speedily taking this force, march to where the monkeys are, for securing victory (in the encounter). And as soon as you set out, the monkeyforces, hearing the roars of the foremost Rākșasas-speedily setting themselves in motionshall flee away. And volatile and haughty and of fickle minds, the monkeys will not be able to bear your shouts; even as elephants are incapable of bearing the roaring of a lion. And on that monkey-army running away, Rāma in company with Sumitrās son, deprived of his power and shorn of support, shall, O Prahasta, come under your subjection. In this matter, your being slain is uncertain, but victory is certain. Now do you, as you weigh out welfare, declare yourself for or against this course. Thus addressed by Ravana, Prahasta-general of the forces-said to the Rākşaas-chief; like Uśanas addressing the lord of Asuras. O king before this we had deliberated together with wise counsellors, and then we disputed with each other in our respective views. And I had declared myself for giving up Sītā as fraught with our welfare; and we saw war involved in withholding her. I have ever been honoured by you variously with gifts and regard and soft speech. And what is your good for which I shall not be at the pains? My life I do not care to keep, nor yet my sons or my wife. Behold! for you will I offer up my life into the sacrificial fire of conflict. Having said this to his master-Rävaņa-the general, Prahasta, addressed his generals staying before him, saying. At once bring up the mighty host of Raksasas Today in the field of fight will I entertain the flesh-feeding fowls of the forest with the bodies of the foes slain with my resistless shafts. Hearing his speech, the highly powerful leaders arrayed the army in that abode of the Raksasa. In a moment Lankā swarmed with heroic and terrific Rākşasas equipped with various arms, as if with elephants, as well as with people worshipping Fire and bowing down to Brāhmaṇas. And the perfumed breeze blew, laden with the incense of sacrificial offerings. The Raksasas, inspired with martial ardour, put on diverse garlands, consecrated with scriptural formulae; and donned on their armour. And furnished with their boys and wearing their armour, the Rākşasas, on seeing king Ravana, leaving (their vehicles), stood, surrounding Prahasta. The greeting the monarch, Prahasta, furnished (with all appliances of battle), winding his dreadful trumpet, ascended his car; having all sorts of weapons; yoked with wondrous fleet steeds; driven by a competent charioteer, excellently furnished; sending up sounds resembling the rumbling of mighty masses of cloud, appearing like the very sun or Moon; invincible with a serpent-standard; having a defence as well as a portion exceedingly handsome; netted with gold all round; and seeming to be laughing in grace. Then ascending this car, Prahasta, whom Rāvana had entrusted with authority, surrounded by a vast host, swiftly went out of Larkā. And then there were heard the sounds of kettledrums, resembling the roars of Parjanya, and the sounds of musical instruments, as if filling the Earth. And on that general of the forces marching, sounds of conchs were heard (all around); and the Rākşasas of dreadful forms and huge bodies, going before Prahasta, advanced, emitting tremendous roars. Narāntaka, Kumbhahunu, Mahānāda, and Samunnata Prahasta's counsellors all of themwent on, surrounding him. And he went out by the Eastern entrance, environed by this exceedingly dreadful array, resembling troops of elephants. And resembling the Destroyer-Yama himselfPrahasta in rage went out surrounded by that mighty host resembling the sea. And at the tumult raised by their exodus, as well as the roars of the Rākşasas, all creatures in Lankā began to cry in preternatural tones. And swarming under the cloudless welkin, birds feasting on flesh and gore began to gyrate at the right hand of the car. And dreadful jackals, emitting live flames from their mouths, set up cries. And stars began to shoot from the firmament; and the winds to ruffle. And enraged at each other, the planetary bodies were shorn of their brightness. And clouds emitting sharp sounds, showered down blood upon the car, and those marching in front were washed therewith. And alighting at the top of the standard, a vulture set up cries, facing the south and began to prick both its sides, thereby depriving (Prahasta) of his grace. And from the hands of his charioteer and his driver conducting the steeds, never given to turning away from the field the goad began to drop again and again. The auspiciousness that was bright and rare when the army set out, was clean gone in a moment, and the steeds began to stumble on even ground. And as Prahasta of renowned worth and valour marched, the monkey-army equipped with various arms, presented themselves before him. And loud was the tumult that was raised by the monkeys. And mighty was the din that was heard of those, uprooting trees and taking up ponderous crags, of the Räkşasas roaring and the monkeys storming in both the exhilarated armies of Raksasa and wood-rangers, of vehement and able (warriors) eager for slaying each other, and challenging each other to fight. And like an insect falling into a flame, the wicked-minded Prahasta for obtaining victory, increasing his impetuosity entered into that host of the monkey-king.