With the presence of the king* that assembly of heroes looked beautiful, as does the autumnal night, garnished with beauteous stars, with the Moon. *Rāma. And oppressed with the bursting energy of the host resembling the ocean, the Earth trembled. Then the rangers of the forest heard a hubbub in Lankä, as well as the sounds of trumpets and Mşdangas, mighty and capable of making people's down stand on end. At those sounds, the leaders of monkey-bands were delighted beyond measure, and, resenting the same, set up cries louder than those sounds. The Rākşasas also heard the roars of the monkeys, resembling the rumbling of haughty clouds in the sky. Beholding Lankā with variegated standards, and streamers, Dasaratha's son went* to Sītā with an aggrieved heart. *i.e. mentally. Here that one having eyes resembling those of a young deer, is confined by Rāvana, like to Rohini overpowered by the red-bodied planet.* *Angāraka. Sighing hot and long, and looking at Laks maņa, that hero spoke words fraught with his good at that time. Behold, O Laksmana, Lanka towering up as if piercing the heavens; and, built by Viśvakarmā on the brow of the mountain, she seems to have been made by the Mind. Constructed in time past with edifices thronging her, Larkā looks the all-encasing air, covered with pale clouds. Larikā is embellished with groves resembling Citraratha, fair, and eloquent with the notes of various birds, and fraught with fruits and flowers. Behold the intoxicated birds, and the black bees blending (with the blossoms). And the blessed breeze sway the trees vocal with the coels. Having divided his forces there agreeably to the directions of the scriptures, Dasaratha's son, Rāma, thus spoke to Laksmana. He ordered that monkey-army, saying, taking his own forces, let the puissant and invincible Angada along with Nila, station himself in the centre of the forces. Let the monkey, named Rşabha, surrounded by numbers of monkeys, post himself at the right of the monkey-army. Let the active and irrepressible Gandhamādana, resembling an elephant fragrant with the temporal exudation, stay, occupying the left of the forces. I myself along with Lakşmaņa, shall heedfully stay in the fore-front. And the monkeys, Jāmvabān, Sușeņa and Vagadarci, the three high-souled, foremost bears,* shall protect the interior (of the forces). *The epithet 'bear' coming after 'monkey' may look incongruous; but, I fancy, 'monkeys' is used in the general sense of being connected with the monkeys-hest. As the Sun, surcharged with energy, protects the hind half of the globe, let the monkeymonarch protect the rear of the monkey-army. That army being skilfully divided into parts and protected by great monkeys, resembled the welkin covered with clouds. Then, taking up mountain-peaks and migh trees, the monkeys began to proceed towards Lankā, burning to crush Lankā in battle. We shall demolish Lankā by hurling mountain-peaks, or with our clenched fists. Thus did the foremost of monkeys think in their minds. Then the exceedingly energetic Rāma addressed Sugrīva, saying, Our forces have been rightly marshalled, let go (now) Suka. Hearing Rāma's words, the lord of monkeys possessed of great strength, liberated the envoy, Suka, at the command of Rama. Liberated at the word of Rama, Suka, who had been sore tormented by the monkeys, oppressed with exceeding great fear, went to the lord of Raksasas. There at, Ravana, laughing, said to Suka, Are your wings fettered? And you seemst as if your wings had been severed. Why? Did you come under the control of the volatile (monkeys)? Thereat, exercised with fear, Suka, commanded by the monarch, answered the lord of Rākşasas in this excellent speech, saying. Repairing to the northern shore of the sea, I, pacifying (the monkeys) with mild speech, communicated your tidings clearly (to Sugrīva). Thereat, as soon as they saw me, the monkeys flying into a wrath, captured me, and attempted to clip my wings and slay me with their clenched fists. They are insuseptible of being spoken, to. No doubt whatever can exist that, o lord of Rāskhasas, the monkeys are by nature wrathful and fierce. The same Rāma that has slain Virādha and Kabandha and Khara, has arrived (here) along with Sugrīva, searching for the whereabouts of Sītă. Having thrown a bridge across the brine and crossed the salt sea, Rāghava, equipped with his bow, stay here, setting the Raksasa at naught. The hosts consisting of thousands of bears and monkeys, resembling hills and clouds, envelope the Earth. And peace there can be none between the forces of the Rákşasas and the hosts of the sovereign of monkeys, like to the deities and the Danavas. They advance before the wall. Speedily do one of these things-make over Sītā without delay, or give (him) battle. Hearing Suka's speech, Ravana with his eyes reddened in wrath, spoke, as if burning (Suka) with them. Even if gods, and Gandharvas, and Danavas should array themselves against me, I will not from fear of all creatures, render (back) Sītā. When shall my shafts pursue Raghava, like maddened Bhramaras making towards blossomy trees in spring? When by means of flaming shafts shot from my bow shall I burn (Rāghava) with his body bathed in blood, even as a meteor (burn) an elephant? When, surrounded by a mighty host, shall I confound his ranks, even as the Sun arising, (vanquish) the light of the stellar spheres? My impetuosity like the Ocean's, my strength like the Wind's, Dācarathi does not know, and therefore it is that he desire to fight with me. Rāma has not seen my shafts resting in the quiver, resembling venomous serpents, and therefore it is that he seek to fight with me. Rāghava has not in conflict formerly known my bow representing my Vinā sounded with my shafts; having tremendous sounds proceeding from the strings; dreadful; with the cries of distressed people for its mighty strains of music; and resonant with the reports of Nārāchas and palms. And, having bathed in the great field of battle of representing the river of bostile forces, I will in the encounter strike (this Vinā). Neither the thousand-eyed Vasava, Varuna himself, can (cope) with me in battle; nor can Yama, or Vaiśravana's self vanquish me in mighty conflict with the fire of arrows. nor