Hearing Sugrīva's speech, reasonable and fraught with high sense, Kākutstha accorded his assent to it and spoke to Hanumān, saying. By asceticism, or constructing a bridge, or drying up the ocean, competent every way am I for crossing over this ocean. Of impracticable places, tell me how many there are in (Lankā), which are incapable of being come at. O monkey, as you have seen personally, I wish to get acquainted with all this. And you have at your leisure duly noticed in Lankā the nur.ber of the army, the inaccessibility (or otherwise) of the gates, the defence of Lankā, and the dwellings of the Rākşasas. Do you faithfully relate this to me, for you are observant. Hearing Rāma's speech, Hanumān, offspring of the Wind-god, foremost of those conversant with speech, again spoke to Rāma, Hearken! I will describe to you by what method is the city of Lankā guarded and protected by the Rākṣasas, how loyal the Rākşasas are, the surpassing prosperity of Lankā, the dreadfulness of the deep, the divisions of the forces, and the number of the elephants, horses, cars, etc.' Having said this, that best of monkeys, knowing the nature of things, went on. Lankā, filled with mad elephants, ever rejoice. She is great, thronging with cars and inhabited by Raksasas. Her doors are firmly established and furnished with massy bolts. And she has four wide and giant gates. (At those gates) are powerful and large arms, stones, and engines, whereby a hostile host approaching, is opposed. At the entrances are arrayed and set in order by bands of heroic Rākşasas, hundreds of dreadful sharp iron sataghnis.* *A kind of fire-arms, or ancient Hindu rocket; or a stone set round with sharp iron spikes. According to Rāmānuja, a sort of mace about two yards in length, with spikes. She has a mighty impassable golden wall, having its side emblazoned in the centre with costly stones, coral, lapises and pearls. Round about is a moat, exceedingly dreadful, with cool water, eminently grand, fathomless, containing ferocious aquatic animals, and inhabited by fishes. At the gates are four broad bridges, furnished with machines and many rows of grand structures. On the approach of hostile forces, their attack is repulsed by these machines, and they are thrown into the ditch. One among these bridges is immovable, strong and fast established; adorned with golden pillars and daises. O Rāma, albeit Rāvaņa hunger for fight, yet is he calm; and he is vigilant and ever engaged in superintending his army. And dreadful and resembling a celestial citadel, Lankā cannot be ascended by means of any support. She has fortresses composed of streams, those of hills, and artificial ones of four kinds. O Rāghava, she is situated on the other shore of the ocean having its limit far away. And way there is none even for barks, and all sides are destitute of division. That citadel is built on the mountain's brow; and, resembling the metropolis of the immortals, the exceedingly invincible Larkā is filled with horses and elephants. And a moat and sataghnís and various engines adorn the city of Lankā, belonging to the wicked Rāvana. And an ayuta of Raksasas, dart-handed, hard to subdue, and all fighting at the front with their swords-protect the Eastern gate. And a lac of Rākşasas with a fourfold force, and with the flower of the soldiery-protect the Southern gate. And a prayuta of Rākṣasas, bearing swords and shields, and skilled in all arms, protect the Western gate. And an arbuda of Rākṣasas protect the Northern gate. And car-warriors and horsemenpersons honoured and sprung from noble linesby hundreds and thousands,tand irrepressible goblins and koțis of Rākşasas, protect the garrison. I have broken down the bridges and filled up the entrenchment. I have burnt that city of Lankā and laid the wall low. Let us by any way whatever cross over Varuna's abode. Do you take it for certain that the city of Lankā is subdued by the monkeys. What is the use of your reckoning the rest? Aigada, Dvivida, Mainda, Jambavan, Panasa, Nala, and the general, Nīla, bounding and reaching Răvana's abode, and riving the same consisting of woods and hills, moat and gateway, walls and dwellings, shall, O Rāghava, bring (hither) Sītā. If this be so,* do you order the entire body of the army to be brought; and do you set out at the proper hour. *Ebam ajnápaya: Ramanuja reads sense into this passage. If you wishes the principal monkeys to go, bring them; if you wish the whole host to march, call it hither, and march at the auspicious moment.