As the monkeys and the Rākşasas thus faught on, the sun set, ant the fatal Night came. Then commenced a night-engagement between the dreadful Rākşasas and the monkeys of fixed hostility, each party burning for victory. In that profound darkness, the monkeys and the Rākşasas began to slay each other, exclaiming, You are a Raksasa,' and 'you are a monkey.' And in that army there was heard a mighty uproar of 'slain,' 'rive!" 'come!' 'why fliest?' And, dark-hued, the Raksasas, equipped in golden mail, in that deep darkness appeared like elevated hills clad with woods of flaming incdicinal herbs. And in that limitless gloom, the Rākṣasas, transported with wrath, advanced with impetuous speed, devouring monkeys. And, fired with terrible wrath, they, bounding up, with their sharp tecih tore up steeds caparisoned in gold, and standards resembling venomous serpents. *i.e. the monkeys, as appears from the context. The lusty monkeys in battle agitated the Rāks asa host, and, waxing furious, with their teeth pulled and bit elephants and the riders there of, and cars furnished with flags and standards. Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa with shafts resembling venomous serpents, slaughtered the foremost among the Rakşasas-both those that were seen and those that were not. The dust of the earth arising from warring combatants, and from the hoofs of horses and the wheels of cars, choked up eye and ear. And as the mighty envounter, capable of making people's hair stand on end, went on, there flowed a fearful river of gore. The sounds of kettle-drums and Mşdangas and Panavas, mingled with those of conchs and carwheels, were wonderful (to hear). The sounds of steeds neighing, and Rāks asas (roaring) and monkeys, rejoicing, were something tremendous. And, with able monkeys slain; and darts and javelins and axes; and slaughtered Raksasa wearing forms at pleasure, lying mountain likethe field of battle, seeming to have offerings of arms representing flowers, became difficult to recognise, and inaccessible; and the earth was drenched with streams of blood. That Night, destructive to monkeys and Rākş asas, was dreadful, and difficult of being outsped by all, like to the Fatal Night of beings. And in that attacked Rama with a shower of shafts. The roars of those beings as they advanced, sending up shouts in anger, resembled the dashing of the Ocean at the time of the universal dissolution. In the twinkling of an eye, Räma by means of six shafts resembling tongues of flames, struck six of the night-rangers, viz., Yajñaśatru, irrepressible (in fight), and Mahaparsva, and Mahodara, and the huge bodied Vajradanstra, and those two-Suka and Sarana. And, pierced in their vitals with Rama's shafts, they, having only their lives left to them, disappeared from the field. Then in the twinkling of an eye, that Mahāratha rendered all sides clear (of all gloom) by means of arrows resembling tongues of fire; and those other heroic Raksasas that were in front of Rāma, were destroyed on approaching the place, like insects approaching a fire. And with shafts plated with gold lying in all directions the night resembled one in autumn decked with fire-flies. And in consequence of the uproar occasioned by the Rakşasas, and the sounds of drums, that night, already dreadful (in itself), became all the more so, On that sound attaining dimensions on all sides, it seemed as if the mount Trikuta, containing numerous caverns, had been speaking. And huge-bodied Golangulas of equal lustre with darkness itself binding fast the nightrangers with their arms, began to swallow them up. And Angada was present in the encounter, for slaying foes. And Indrajit, fairing sadly at the hands of Angada, abandoning his vehicle, and having his horses as well as his charioteer slain, vanished then and there. That feat of Väli's son, worthy of being honoured, all the celestials with the saints and both Rāma and Lakşmaņa lauded to the height. All beings were acquainted with the might of Indrajit in battle; and, therefore, witnessing his discomfiture, and seeing that high-souled one, they refoiced exceedingly. Seeing the enemy vanquished, all the .monkeys with Sugrīva and Vibhisana, experiencing high delight, exclaimed, "Excellent !" "Excellent!" In the battle field beaten by Valr's son , of dreadful deeds, Indrajit was fired with a mighty wrath. And, being handled hard in battle, and having vanished from the field, the heroic and wicked son to Răvana, who had received a boon from Brahmä, transported with passion, remaining invisible, began to discharge sharpened shafts of the splendour of the thunder-bolt. And worked up into rage, he in the conflict pierced Raghu's sons, Rāma and Lakşmaņa all over their bodies, with terrific arrows consisting of serpents. And himself engirt with illusion, that nightranger, given to fighting in crooked ways, remaining invisible to all creatures, stupefied the descendants of Raghu in battle; and by means of his shafts bound the brothers, Rāma and Laksmana. Then in the sight of the monkeys, those heroes and foremost of men were suddenly overpowered with shafts by the enraged (Indrajit). And when the son of the Rākşasa monarch felt himself incompetent to cope with them openly, then that impious one, resorting to illusion, bound those princes (by that means).