Thereupon the greatly powerful Rākşasa, by name Śārdüla, beheld the army of Sugrīva arranged on the shore of the ocean. And, beholding the army all busy, the emissary of the vicious-souled Raksasa-Ravana, entered the city of Lanka and, approaching his lord, said. The army of monkeys and bears has approached Lanka. It is immeasurably deep as the ocean. And those two sons of the king Dasarathathe brothers Rāma and Lakşmaņa, gifted with great beauty, coming to rescue Sītā, have stationed themselves on the shore of the ocean, O you of great effulgence. The army of Rāma extends over the sky and ten yojanas. I have come, O great king, to acquaint you with the real truth. And, knowing everything, it behove your emissaries, O king, to settle whether to render back Sītā, to adopt measures of conciliation, or to sow dissension's in the enemy's camp. Hearing the words of Sardāla, Ravana, the lord of Rākşasas, being anxious to ascertain his duty, addressed a Raksasa by name Suka, the most sensible of his counsellors, with the following pregnant words. Do you go and communicate to king Sugrīva my behest, in becoming and excellent accents. You are born of a great family and are the mighty son of the king of bears. I have no dissension with you. In fact I consider you as my brother, O king of monkeys. Though I have stolen the spouse of the highsouled prince (Räma), yet what is that to you, Sugriva? Do you return to Kiskindhā. The monkeys shall not by any means be able to attack the city of Lankā. Even the celestials and Gandharvas could not-what of these men and monkeys? And being thus commissioned by the lord of Rākşasas, that night-ranger assumed the shape of a bird and, bounding, speedily reached the sky. And, proceeding far over the deep and stationing himself at the welkin, he spoke to Sugrīva all the words with which he was addressed by the vicious-souled Ravana. Hearing him speak thus, the monkeys leaped up quickly and reached there with a view to chop off his wings or to slay him with their clenched fists. On being seized vehemently by all these monkeys, that night-ranger was brought down speedily from the sky to the earth. And being assailed by the monkeys, suka said, O Kākutstha, it does not behove (people) to slay an emissary. Do you therefore prevent the monkeys. He who passing by his master's behest, give out his own intention, is not faithful; and he therefore deserve to be slain. Hearing the piteous accents of Suka, Rama spoke to the monkeys, who were about to kill him, saying, Do not kill him. And again stationing himself on the welkin, that night-ranger said. O Sugrīva, O you gifted with great energy, O you of great prowess, what shall I speak to Rāvana, dreaded by all people? Being thus addressed, that mighty king of monkeys the bull among them, of unwearied energy, spoke to that emissary—the nightranger, Suka, saying. O Rāvana, you are not my friend or an object of pity. You are not my benefactor, not are liked by me. You are Rāma's enemy, and you did therefore deserve to be slain by him like Vāli along with your friends and relatives. I shall therefore slay you, O king of nightrangers, together with your sons, friends and relatives. And I shall have the whole city of Lankă reduced to ashes by my mighty force. You shall not be able to escape Rāghava, O Rāvana, O you who have lost your sense, even if you are protected by the celestials. And you shall with your brother be slain by Rāma, even if you did fly into the sky, enter into the regions under the earth, or seek shelter of Mahādeva. I do not behold any in these three worldsPiśāca, Rākşasa, Gandharva, or Asura, who can protect you. You have slain the monarch of vultures, who had grown decrepit through age.* You have carried off the large-eyed Sītā from the vicinity of Räma and the neighbourhood of Lakṣmaṇa; but, having captured her, you understand not (your native strength). Nor did you understand that foremost of Raghus, high-souled, possessed of great strength, and incapable of being repressed even by the celestials, who shall take your life. *The commentator has a queer and characteristic note on farduridha-decrepit through age. One that is old, may stave off decrepitude through some drug, while a youthful person may come by the same in consequence of some curse. Then spoke that best of monkeys, Angada, son of Vali, O highly wise one, this is no emissary. This one clearly appear to me as a spy. He has come to form and estimate of your entire army. Take him. Let him not go (back) to lanka. This is indeed what I would, Thereat, commanded by the king, the monkeys, springing up, seized (Suka) and bound him, as he burst out bewailing like one forlorn. On being sorely handled by the relentless monkeys, Suka cried to the high-souled Rāma, son of Daśaratha, 'They by main force sever my wings, and they pierce my eyes. If I lose my life, may all the evil deeds that I have committed between the night when I was born and the night when I shall die, be your! Hearing this pitiful cry, Rāma prevented (the monkeys); and he said to them, Let go this envoy, who has come here.