Those, kings, man and monkey, that monkey the Wind-god's son, Jāmbavān-sovereign of bears—the Rākşasa, Vibhīşaņa, the son of Vālī, Angada, Sumitrā's son, the monkey, Sarabha, Susena along with his friends, Kumuda, Nala, and Panasa, arriving at the dominions of the enemy, assembled together, began to deliberate. Yonder is that Lankā ruled by Rāvana, invincible even to the celestials, serpents and Gandharvas. Let us, keeping before us success in the enterprise, consult together for the purpose of arriving at a decision. We are here daily nearing Răvaņa, lord of Raksasas. As they were speaking thus, Ravana's younger brother, Vibhīşaņa, said in a pregnant speech free from provinicialism. Anala, Panasa, Sampāti and Pramāti— all courtiers of mine-having gone up to Lanka, have come back here. Wearing the forms of birds, they entered into the hostile forces; and, having seen the measures that had been adopted (by them, have come (back). O Rāma, hearken to me as I tell you truly anent the provisions which they have related, made by the wicked-minded Ravana. In the Eastern gate stay Prahasta along with his forces; in the Southern, the exceedingly powerful Mahāpārsva and Mahodara, and in the Western. Ravana's son, Indrajit, supported by innumerable Räkşasas, equipped with pattiśas, swords and bows, and bearing darts and maces in their hands, surrounded by heroes carrying various weapons. And, backed by many thousands of Räkşasas wielding weapons, and accompanied by Rākşasas conversant with counsel, Rāvana himself, his heart agitated to the height, gaurd the Northern gate of the city. Virüpākṣa with a powerful force accoutred in javelins, clubs and bows, protects the garrison in the centre. Having seen these hosts thus disposed in Lankä, my counsellors have speedily come back here. There are ten thousand elephants, an Ayuta cars, two of horses, and abouta koti of Raksasas, powerful and strong, and equipped with arms in conflict.* *These are, remarks the commentator, the leader. These night-rangers are ever the favourites of the Raksasa ruler. And, O kine, a koti of forces accompany each of these Rākşasas in battle. Having conveyed this information concerning Lankā, which had been communicated by his counsellors, the mighty-armed Vibhīşaņa showed (to Rama) those Raksasas themselves. In company with his counsellors, Ravana's graceful younger brother, ever striving for the welfare of Rama, by way of answer communicated everything that was going forward in Lankā to Räma, having eyes resembling lotus leaves. O Răma, when Rāvana battled with Kuvera, sixty lacs of Raksasas marched forth (to meet him). In prowess, energy, vigour, exceeding fortitude, and hauteur, they resembled the wicked-minded Ravana himself. In this matter, you ought not to grow wroth, I only arouse your wrath, and do not endeavour to frighten you. You can subdue even the celestials by your prowess. *i.e. You ought not to be angry with me; for I do not frighten you, but rouse your wrath against Ravana. Therefore you, environed by a mighty army, having arrayed the monkey-forces in order of battle, shall thrash Ravana (in battle) When Rāvana's younger brother had spoken thus, Rāghava, said these words with reference to his beating the foe. Let that foremost of monkey, Nila, surrounded to by an immense number of monkeys, cope with Prahasta at the Eastern gate of Lankā. And, engirt by a mighty force, let Angada, son of Válī, resist Mahăpărśva and Mahodara at the Southern gate (thereof). And let that son of the Wind-god, Hanuman, backed by innumerable monkeys, (beating the host stationed) at the Western gate, find entrance (into the city). I myself, determined compass the destruction of the lord of Räkşasas, who, waxing powerful in consequence of the boon he has received, has brought about the destruction of high-souled saints resembling gods and Dänavas, and who goes round all regions, oppressing people, will, along with Sumitra's son, smiting (the foe), occupy the Northern entiuile., where Rāvana with his army is stationed. And let the powerful king of monkeys, and the puissant sovereign of bears, and the younger brother of the Raksasa-chief, manage the soldiery posted in the centre. In this battle, the monkeys need not assume the forms of human being. And let this serve for a sign that the monkeys, in order to the recognition of our own forces, appear with their proper monkey-marks. We seven only shall battle with the foe in human shapes, viz. I along with my brother, the exceedingly energetic Lakşmaņa, and my friend Vibhīşaņa counting for the fifth in company with his own following. Having said this to Vibhísaņa for attaining success in the enterprise, that lord, the intelligent Rāma, seeing the sides of Suvela more beautiful (than other places), intended to ascend it. Then, environed by a mighty host, the highsouled and magnanimous Rāma, his features mirroring forth high exultation, overshadowing the entire Earth (with his forces), set out for Lankā, determined upon destroying the enemy.