Like to a pond in the summer both the armies became gradually reduce. Beholding his own army and Virupaksa slain Ravana, the lord of Raksasas, was doubly excited with ire. Observing his army reduced and slain by the heroic (monkeys) he perceived ill omens in the fight and was accordingly pained at heart, He addressed Mahodara who was near him saying, you of great arms, all my hopes of success are now centred in you. Do you slay the enemy's force, O hero, and display your prowess. Now has come the time of returning the favours of your master. Do you fight bravely. Being thus accosted that Räkşasa chief Mahodara saying "so be it” entered the enemy's army like to a fly entering into a flame. Excited by his master's command and empowered by his won prowess that (Rākşasa) gifted with great strength began to assail the monkeys. The highly powerful monkeys too taking up huge crags dashed against the dreadful army of the enemies and crushed all the Rakşasas. And Mahodara, greatly angered, severed in that mighty encounter, with his arrows feathered in gold, the hands, feet and thighs of the monkeys. Then the monkeys in fear of the Rākşasas, fled away to different quarters and some sought shelter of Sugriva. And beholding his powerful monkeys force thus assailed in the conflict, Sugrīva dashed for ward and fronted Mahodara. And taking up a huge and dreadful crag resembling a mountain, the monkeys-king hurled it with great vehemence to slay him. Thereupon finding that crag about to fall, Mahodara fearlessly severed it with his arrows. And being sundered into a thousand pieces by the arrow of that Rākşasa, it fell down on the earth like to a band of vultures. Beholding that crag thus severed, Sugrīva was beside himself with ire; and uplifting a Sála tree hurled it; and the heroic Räkşasa the slayer of enemy's force, severed it into several pieces with his arrows. Thereupon excited with wrath he saw a parigha on the ground. And hurling that flaming Parigha and displaying his (light-handedness) he stuck his excellent horse there with. And having his horse slain, that hero the Rakşasa Mahodara, ascended his car, and in great anger took up his club. Those two heroes, with club and parigha in their hands, engaged in battle, roaring like two bulls or clouds accompanied with lightning. Thereupon the night-ranger Mahodara, inflamed with ire, hurled at Sugrīva, the club flaming like the Sun. Beholding that dreadful club about to fall the highly powerful Sugrīva-the lord of monkeys, uplifting his parigha struck it there with. And parigha, being sundered, fell quickly down on the earth. Thereupon the effulgent Sugrīva picked up from the ground musala made of iron and ornamented with gold. Taking that musala up he hurled it at the Räkşasa and who again hurled a club; and both of them being severed fell down on the earth. Having their weapons baffled thus, those two heroes, gifted with great prowess and effulgence and resembling the burning fire, were ready to interchange blows. They emitting roars again and again, stuck each other down on the earth with their clenched fists. Then rising up speedily they again assailed each other. Thus those two heroes unsubdued, struck each other with their arms. Thereupon both of them, highly proficient in fighting with arms, were greatly exhausted. Thereupon they took up daggers. Then uplifting them (those two heroes) with their persons trembling in ire, proficient in fighting and skilled in the use of weapons dashed on roaring. The both of them enraged with each other and anxious to score success, moving in circle on each other's right side, addressed themselves for action. Thereupon the vicious-minded, heroic Mahodara, gifted with great vehemence and proud of his own heroism flung his dagger at (the monkey's) armour. And as he was about to extricate his dagger from the armour, that foremost of monkeys severed with his dagger that Rākşasa's head with helmet and kundalas. Beholding the Rākşasa chief fall down on the earth with his head off, his forces fled away from the field. Slaying him that monkey-chief, delighted, began to roar along with other monkeys. There upon the Ten-necked one became highly enraged and Rāghava greatly delighted. All the Räksasas with their hearts broken and countenances rendered poorly and stricken with fear fled away to different quarters. Slaying and striking down on earth Mahodara like to a portion of a mighty hill severed that son of the Sun appeared resplendent in his own effulgence and became irrepressible like to the Sun. And winning victory in the action that lord of monkeys was espied by the celestials Siddhas and Yaksas along with all creatures on earth, having their eyes flushed with joy.