Hearing his speech, Rāghava, overwhelmed with grief, could not perfectly comprehend what was said by the Rākşasa. Then, summoning up patience, Rāma-captor of hostile capitals, spoke to Vibhisana, seated near the monkeys. O lord of Naiſtas, I once more wish to hear what, O Vibhisana, you have said. Hearing Raghava's words, Vibhisana, skilled in speech, again spoke these words, saying. O mighty-armed one, I have stationed the forces, O hero, agreeably to your directions. The entire force has been divided around; and the leaders have also been placed properly. Further, O mighty master, listen to what I have to say. On your having been causelessly aggrieve, we all of us were seized with grief. It this anxiety of your conduce to the joy of the enemy, do you cast it off. and, O hero, bestir yourself, and summon up spirits. If you are to have Sītā, and if the nightrangers are to be slain by you, do you, Raghu's son, listen to my profitable speech. Let Sumitra's son go forth, environed by a mighty force, for slaying in battle the son of Ravana, who has gone to Nikumbhila; with shafts resembling Venomous serpents, discharged from the round* of his bow. *The bow drawn to its full stretch, becomes circular. By virtue of his austerities, that hero, from a boon conferred by the self-sprung, has obtained the Brahmasira weapon, together with steeds coursing at their will. Now he with his army has gone to Nikumbhilā; and when, having finished his rites, he gets up, know that all of us are slain. When not reaching Nikumbhilā, and not having finished your offerings to fire, you, equipped with arms, are slain by a foe, O enemy of Indra, that is your death. Thus, O mightyarmed one, did the lord of all creatures confer a boon (on Indrajit), and, o king, thus was the death of this intelligent one ordained. O Rāma, for compassing the destruction of Indrajit, do you commission a mighty force. On his being slain, know that Rāvana along with his retainers are slain. Hearing Vibhīşana's words, Rāma said, “O you having truth for prowess, I know the illusion of that fierce one. Without doubt, the is skilled in the Brahma weapon, is potent in illusion and, is possessed of exceeding strength. In conflict, he deprive of consciousness even the celestials with Varuņa (at their head). As that illustrious (one) go about in the welkin on his chariot, none, can perceive his course, like the course of the sun when the sky is covered with clouds.” And Raghava, being well acquainted with the illusive energy of his wicked-minded foe, addressed the renowned Laksmana, saying. Environed by the entire host of the lord of monkeys, accompanied by the leaders, O Laksmana, headed by Hanuman, with Jambavan, king of bears-and girt round by the forces, do you slay this son of the Raksasa, possessed of the strength of illusion. And accompanied by his counsellors, this high-souled night-ranger shall follow at you back, in this engagement with that one skilled in illusion. Then hearing Rāghava's words, Lakşmaņa endowed with dreadful prowess, with Vibhīşaņa, took up another excellent bow. And donning on his mail, and putting on his armour and his sword, and furnished with arrows, and a bow in his left hand, Sumitrā's son, touching Rāma's feet, feeling elated, addressed Rāma, saying. Today the shafts discharged from my bow, piercing Ravana's son, shall fall into Lanka, even as swans drop into a tank. This very day shall my arrows, shot from my redoubtable bow-string, rive the body of that terrific one. Having spoken thus, the effulgent Lakşmana, eager to slay Rāvana's son, went before his brother. Having saluted at the feet of his superior and went round him, Lakşmaņa set out for the sacrificial ground (named) Nikumbhila, protected by the son of Rāvana. Accompanied by Vibhīşaņa, that powerful son of the king-Lakşmaņa-after his brother had offered up prayers in his behalf, set off with all speed. Surrounded by thousands of monkeys, Hanumān as well as Vibhīşaņa together with his counsellors speedily went in the wake of Lakş mana. And strongly encompassed by that mighty monkey-host, (Laksmana) saw the forces of the bear-king stationed on the way. Having proceeded far, Sumitra's Sumitra's son-enhancer of the delight of friends, from a distance discovered the forces of the Rākşasmonarch, drawn up in battle-array. That subduer of enemies-Raghu's sonbearing his bow in his hand, coming upon him whose martial might lay in illusion, stopped (there) for conquering his foe agreeably to the ordinance * of Brahma. *The ordinance was that Indrajit should be slain while remaining outside Nikumbhilā, his rites not yet finished. Accompanied by Vibhīşaņa, the heroic Angada, and the Wind-god's offspring, the powerful son of the king dived into the forces of the foe, various, blazing with burnished arms, dense with standards, and thronging with mighty cars,* capable of striking terror (into the hearts of the spectators), instinct with immeasurable energy, and resembling darkness. *Maharathai (ab.) may also mean with mighty carwarriors.