Then the exceedingly energetic Rāma possessed of prowess, taking his bow, saw Kumbhakarņa, having a huge body and decked with a diadem. Seeing that foremost of Rākşasas looking like a mountain; filling all the heavens as formerly Nārāyaṇa had done; resembling clouds charged with rain; and adorned with golden Angadas, the mighty army of monkeys began to run away at the top of its speed. Seeing the army scamper and the Rākşasa swelling, Rāma struck with surprise, said to Vibhisana. mass Who is that tawny-eyed one, decked with a diadem, and looking like a hill? And in Lankā the hero appear like a of clouds embosoming lightning. And alone he seem like an ensign of the Earth; and seeing him the monkeys dart away hither and thither. Tell me who he is, whether a Rākṣasa or an Asura. The like of him mine eyes had never before lighted on. Accosted by the king's son-Rāma of untiring deeds-the exceedingly wise Vibhīşaņa said to Kakutstha. By whom in battle Vivasvata's offspring* and Vasava himself had been vanquished this is hethe wondrous powerful Kumbhakarņa, son to Visravā. No Rākṣasa is there that equals this one in size. *Yama-son of Vivasvata or the Sun. O Rāghava, this one in battle has brought down Dānavas and Yakşas and Serpents' and flesh-feeders and Gandharvas and Vidyādharas and Pannagas by thousands. 1. Bhujanga:-semi-divine serpents. 2. Semi-divine serpents. The immortals themselves thinking the darthanded and fierce-eyed Kumbhakarņa possessed of great strength, as the Destroyer himself, were overwhelmed with stupor and were foiled in their exertions to slay him. The exceedingly powerful Kumbhakarņa is mighty by nature: the strength of other redoubtable Rākşasas is owing to boons obtained by them. As soon as this high-souled one was born and was a babe, he began to devour up countless creatures by the thousand. On these having been devoured, creatures, afflicted with affright consequent on those having been eaten up, sought the shelter of Sakra and told him what had happened. Thereat the great Indra, waxing wroth, smote Kumbhakarna with the whetted levin. And hit at with Sakra's thunder bolt, that high-souled (hero) shook, and in wrath set up roars. Hearing the roars of the Raksasa-Kumbhakarna, as he kept crying, creatures, seized with fear, were greatly agitated. Thereat, enraged with the great Indra, the mighty Kumbhakarņa plucking a tusk of Airāvata, hurled it at Vāsava's chest. With blood overflowing his person, Vāsava looked as if aflame. Thereat, all of a sudden the gods and the Brahmarşis and the Dānavas were dispirited. Then ſakra Then Śakra alongwith alongwith others proceeded to the abode of Brahma. Then they informed the lord of creatures touching the ravages of Kumbhakarna, and informed the gods about Kumbhakarna's devouring up, destroying asylums and outraging others, wives. If this one devour creatures constantly, in a short space the world would be empty of any. Hearing Vasava's speech, the Great-father of all creatures called up* the Rākṣasas and saw Kumbhakarņa (before him). *By reciting a certain scriptural formula. Seeing Kumbhkarņa, Prajāpati* was seized with exceeding great fear. And then pacifying Kumbhakarma, the Self-sprung addressed him, saying. *Lit. lord of creatures. Forsooth for compassing the destruction of creatures, have you been begot by Paulasta* Therefore from this day forth, you shall lie down as one dead. *ViSravana. Stricken with the of Brahma, Kumbhakarma fell down before the Lord. Then, "extremely agitated, Ravana said. curse You hew down a golden tree when about to bear fruit. O lord of creatures, you ought not to curse thus your own grandson. Your words will never go for naught; sleep he will, without doubt. But do you appoint a time for his sleeping and one for his awaking, Hearing Rāvana's speech, the Self-sprung said, "having slept for six months, he shall wake for one day. And for a single day, that hero, coming under the influence of hunger, shall range the earth, opening his mouth wide open, and devouring people like a fire that has spread far and wide. Now king Rāvaņa struck with terror at your prowess, encompassed with peril, has waked up Kumbhakarņa. That hero possessed of dreadful prowess, wrought up with high wrath, sallying forth from his camp, rush about, eating up monkeys. Soon as the monkeys see Kumbhakarna, they fly away. And How can they resist in battle the enraged Kumbhakarna? Do you tell the monkeys this is an uplifted engine. Thus assured, the monkeys shall take heart. Hearing Vibhīşaņa's words informed with reason and tending to the good (of the monkeys), Rāghava then addressed general Nila, saying. Let you, monkeys, equipped with weapons and holding hill tops in your hands, and furnished with mountain-summits and trees and rocks, stay, occupying the highways and the bridges. Thus instructed by Rāghava, that powerful monkey, Nila-general of the forces-accordingly issue I his orders to the monkey-hosts. Then Gavākṣa and Sarabha and Hanumān and Angada, themselves endowed with the splendour of mountain-summits, taking up mountain-tops, drew towards the gateway. Hearing Rāma's words,* the heroic monkeys inspired with intrepidity, fiercely fell on the foe with trees. *Namely, "that is an uplifted engine.” Then that dreadful army of monkeys, upraising crags and holding trees in their hands, appeared like mighty masses of scowling clouds bordering a mountain.* *This is apt, seeing that Larika was situated on a hill.