Hearing Hanumăn's speech duly from the beginning, the exceedingly energetic Rāma having truth for this prowess, said. What you say 'I shall speedily destroy the city of this dreadful Raksasa,' is true, I tell you. Therefore, at this very moment arrange for Sugrīva's march. The Sun has attained his meridian at this proper moment, capable of conferring victory.* *The moment is named abhijit. Let Rāvana carry away Sītā (to his own country), whither shall Ravana, living, repair? Like a dying person who has taken a deathdispelling drug and drunk ambrosia, Sītā, hearing of my preparations for war, shall inspire hope of life. To-day the Northern Phālguni (is in the ascendant); and to-morrow the moon shall be in conjunction with Hasta.* O Sugriva, shall we set our, surrounded by the entire host? *Hastā sprung from Punarvasu is the star of doom, portending death to Rāvana. The Northern Phālguni, is Sita's natal star. The expedition begun during the influence of this star, augurs deliverance to Vaidehi. The omens I witness, augur, that, having slain Ravana, I shall bring back Janaki. The upper lid of my eye throb; and it betook that my desire has indeed been had. Then honoured by the monkey-king as well as Lakşmaņa, the righteous Rāma, understanding the import of things, again said. Surrounded by hundreds and thousands of fast-speeding monkeys, let Nīla go ahead of this force, for surveying the route. O Nīla, do you, O general, expeditiously take the army by a path furnished with fruits and roots, having cool waters of the woods, and replenished with honey. The wicked Raksasas vitiate* fruits, roots and water along the way. You, ever not the alert, should preserve these from the Rākṣasa. *By means of poison, etc. And, bounding down into hollow places, mountain-fastnesses, and woods, let the rangers of the wilds, spy the posted detachments of the enemy. Let those that are incompetent, stay here. This business is dreadful, and we should apply our best strength in conducting the same. Therefore let the foremost monkeys gifted with prodigious prowess lead forth like a host of terrible ocean, the choice portion of the army, numbering hundreds and thousands. And let Gaja resembling a hill, and the exceedingly powerful Gavaya, and that monkey, Gavaksa, master of the leaping ones,* like a haughty bull among kine, go in the van of the monkey-host. *i.e. monkeys. And let that foremost of monkeys, Rşabha, go, protecting the right wing (of the army); and let Gandha, irresistible like an elephant with the fragrant temporal juice trickling down, and the vehement Gandhamādana, go,* protecting the left wing (of the monkey-army). *The verb is singular, instead of dual, as also the qualifying epithet, Pārsamadishthita. But the sense is clear. on And, cheering the army, I myself, mounted on Hanumān, like the Lord (mounted) on Airāvata, shall march in the midst of the forces. Like the lord of wealth and master of riches, mounted Sārvabhauma, let Lakşmaņa resembling the Destroyer, march forth, mounted on Angada. And let that king of bears, the long-armed Jāmbavān, Sușeņa, and the monkey, Vegadarci, protect the rear (of the forces). Hearing Rāghava's words, that foremost of monkeys and lord of the army, the exceedingly energetic Sugrīva, issued his orders. And anon those highly powerful monkeys issuing up from caves and mountain-summits, began to bound (on all sides). Thereafter, honoured by the king of monkeys and also Laksmana, the righteous Rāma, accompanied by his forces, set out in a southerly direction. He marched, surrounded by hundreds and thousands, Koțis and Ayutas of monkeys resembling elephants. The marching was followed by the mighty host of monkeys' and all those maintained by Sugrīva were filled with joy and betrayed demonstrations of delight. Bounding by way of guarding the flanks of the forces, and leaping in front of the army for pioneering, blustering, emitting leonine roars, and uttering cries, the monkeys made towards the south. And some partook of perfumed honey and fruits, and some bore mighty trees, holding the sprouts. And some in pride (of strength) suddenly raised others and threw them down. And some fell and were anon up, and some brought others down. We shall slay Rāvana, as also all the rangers of the night'; thus did the monkeys, roar out in the presence of Rāghava. Before (the army), Rsabha, the heroic Nila, and Kumuda, along with many monkey, went on clearing the route. In the middle were king Sugrīva, Rāma and Laksmana, environed by innumerable powerful and terrible monkeys. The heroic monkey, Satabali, surrounded by ten Kotis (of troops), alone on all sides protected that monkey host. Accompanied by an hundred Kotis, Kesari, Panasa, Gaja* and Arka, by means of many protected that host on every side. *Some other than the first mentioned Gaja. Taking Sugriva before them, Susena, and Jāmbavān, surrounded by innumerable bears, protected the rear (of the army). That foremost of rangers possessed of excellence, and of restrained senses, the heroic Nīla, general (of the army), kept going round the ranks. Valimukha, and Prajangha, Jambha and the monkey Rabhasa, vent everywhere, urging on the monkeys. While thus marching, breathing pride of strength, those tiger-like monkeys saw that foremost of mountains Sahya crowned with hundreds o trees, and weary expanses laughing with flowers, and beautiful tanks. Knowing the order of Rāma of dreadful wrath, that terrible and mighty host, exceedingly terrific and resembling the bosom of the deep, cowed down through fear, leaving behind cities and villages and provinces, went like the deepsounding sea. At the side of Daſaratha's son those heroic monkeys resembling elephants, proceeded by bounds, like noble horses, spurred on. Those foremost of men, mounted on the monkeys, looked beautiful like this Sun and the Moon half eclipsed by the two mighty planets, viz., Rahu and Ketu. Then well honoured by Sugrīva and Laks maņa, the righteous Rāma proceeded towards the South, accompanied by his army. Then Lakşmaņa, furnished with consummate sense and promptitude, who was mounted on Angada spoke to Rāma, inviting words, fraught with import. Speedily recovering Vaidehi, who has been carried away, and slaying Rāvana, you will, your end attained, return to Ayodhyā, who shall also have her desire. O Rāghava, I see all the great auspicious omens on earth and in the sky, signifying success to you. Mildly and grateful does the blessed breeze blow behind the army, inspiring pleasure. And the birds and beasts are crying in sonorous voices. And all the points (of the compass) appear pleasant; and the lord of day is cloudless. Bhrgu's son, Usanas also wear for you an auspicious aspect, and Dhruva is without blemish. And all the Rșis, pure and furnished with lustre, go round Dhruva. And before us shine the grandfather of the high-souled Ikşavākus; the spotless Rājarși Trisaiku, with his priest.-And stainless and free from disturbances appear Visākhā. This is the racial star of us, the high-souled Ikșwākus. Nairta, the radical star of the Nairtas, is sore afflicted and, touched by the rod-bearing Dhumaketu is in trouble. All this is for the destruction of the Rākşasas. At the fated time, those that are in the clutches of Death, have their stars afflicted by the planets. The water is dear and tastes sweet; and the woods are stocked with fruit. And the odorous gale does not blow strongly; and the trees are furnished with all blossoms of the season. O lord, this host of monkeys appear splendid to the height, as did the celestial host on the occasion of the destruction of Tāraka. Seeing all this, you should, O noble one, feel delighted. Having thus consoled his brother, Sumitrā's son, feeling enlivened, said this. The monkeyhost went on, covering the earth. The mighty dust raised by bears, monkeys, and tigers, having for their weapons nails and teeth, with the foreparts of their feet and hands, enveloped the world, and the splendour of the sun was obscured. And as clouds envelope the sky, the mighty monkey-host went on, covering up the Southern quarter with its mountains, woods, and sky. As they marched covering many a yojana, the streams seemed as if they flowed in an opposite direction.* *Kataka remark-"As when clouds, drift past, the Moon it is that seems to send accross the sky, as the monkey-army marched on, the rivers seemed to flow in an opposite direction.” Rāmānuja says that the waters of the streams dashed by the monkeys, held an opposite course. The former interpretation is hardly satisfactory, and Rāmānuja seems to be right. They while proceeding, took rest by pools of clear water, on mountains covered with trees, on plains and in forests teeming with fruits. Some moving straight, some moving askance, and some moving on the earth, that enormous monkey-host went on covering the entire earth. They were all of delighted countenances and gifted with the velocity of the wind. And these monkeys devoted all their energy to the accomplishment of Rāghava's work. They were displaying to each other their joy, prowess and energy. And influenced with the vanity of youth they set up diverse cries. Some proceeded with speed, some leaped, some set up cries expressing joy, some were uplifting their tails, and some were striking the ground with their feet. Some, stretching forth their arms, were breaking the hills, and others the trees. And other were ascending the tops of the hills. Some began to make terrible sounds, and other made a tingling noise. And many others blasted the creepers with the velocity of their thighs. Some were engaged in sporting with trees and rocks. And thus was the earth enveloped with millions and koțis of fearful monkeys. Thus the enormous monkey host went on day and night. And all those monkeys, delighted, guided by Sugrīva, and taking delight in battle, went on speedily. And they did not take rest even for a moment, desirous of rescuing Sītā. Thereupon, getting at the mount Sahya covered with various trees and forests, those monkeys ascended it. Rāma went on beholding the variegated forest, rivers and fountains of the mount Sahya and Malaya. Those monkeys broke down various treesCampakas, Tilakas, mangoes, Prasekas, Sinduvaras, Tinisas and Karaviras, Asokas, Karanjas, Plaksas, Nyagrodhas, Jambukas and Amalakas. And seated on picturesque rocks, various forest trees, shaken by the wind, showered flowers on them. There blew in those forests filled with the smell of honey, a wind of pleasant touch, cool as the Moon, accompanied by the hummings of the bees. That mount was richly embellished with diverse metals. And dust issuing from these metals and thickened by the air, enveloped on all sides the huge monkey-host. There blossomed in that picturesque mountain-vale Ketakis, Sinduvāras, beautiful Vasantis, Madhavis, Gandhapurnas, Kundas, Cirivilvas, Madhūkas, Vañjulas, Bakulas, Ranjakas, Tilakas, Nagas, mangoes, Patalikas, Kovidāras, Muculindas, Arjunas, “insapas, Kutajas, Hintālas, Tinisas, Curnakas, Nipakas, Nila-asokas, Saralas, Ankolas and lotuses. All these trees were greatly disturbed by those monkeys, delighted with their view. There were in that mountain many a picturesque lake and pond filled with Cakravākas and Kārandavas, ducks, Krauñcas and the mount abounded on all sides with boars, deer, and terrible bears, lions and tigers and various other fearful animals, and it was beautified with full blown lotuses, Jilies, Utpalas and various other fragrant trees growing in the water. Various birds set up their musical choir on the summit of that mount. And bathing and drinking, these monkeys sported in the water. Ascending the mount these monkeys continually bounded. And excited with drink, they crumbled into pieces the ambrosia-smelling fruits, roots and flowers of the trees. And those monkeys yellow as honey, delighted, feasted on mangoes, long and measuring a Drona. Breaking down the trees, blasting the creepers, bounding from one tree to another and making the mount Sahya echo, those leading monkeys went on delighted and excited with drink. Some ascending the trees, and others drinking, the whole earth was enveloped with those monkeys, and seemed as if beautified with ripe paddy crops. And reaching the mount Mahendra, the largearmed Rāma, having eyes like lotuses, ascended the summit adorned with diverse trees. Getting at the top, Daśaratha's son espied the vast deep filled with tortoises and fishes. There upon, passing by the mounts Sahya and Malaya and arranging their enormous host, they* by and by reached the roaring deep. *The monkey leader. And descending therefore, Rāma, the foremost of those who minister happiness to all, accompanied by Lakṣmaṇa and Sugrīva, entered the forest situate on the banks of the ocean. Reaching the expansive banks having rocks there on and continually washed by the rising billow, Rāma spoke these words. O Sugrīva we have arrived at the abode of Varuņa. Now has arisen in my mind what I had not thought of before. This ocean, the lord of the streams, whose other side is not seen, cannot be crossed over without some excellent measure. Let the monkey-host be encamped here therefore, and then concert a plan by means of which they might get at the other side. And reaching the shores of the ocean, the large-armed Rāma, stricken with grief for Sītā, ordered their encampment, saying. O foremost of monkeys, do you encamp your host on the bring of the ocean. Now has arrived the hour for counsel, when we should devise some plan for crossing over the main. I fear the Rākşasas at every step, for they are greatly illusion creating, let the leaders therefore go to their own hosts and let them not proceed anywhere else, renouncing them. Hearing the words of Rama, Sugrīva along with Lakşmana, encamped the army on the brink of the ocean, covered with trees. Stationed near the main, the monkey-host in consequence of their resemblance in colour with blue contents of the deep, looked like a second ocean. There upon, reaching the shore, those leading monkeys engaged in concerning a plan to cross over the vastly deep. The tumult, of that monkey-host encamped there, was heard above the roaring of the deep. That huge army of the monkeys commanded by Sugrīva, and set up in three divisions, were deeply concerned with the accomplishment of Rāma's work. And reaching the shore of the vastly deep, that monkey host, delighted, beheld the ocean moved by the Wind. They waited there beholding the deep of unimpeded expanse, having its distant shore inhabited by the demons, and thronged with various aquatic animals. While up heaving its foam on the approach of eve, it appeared laughing and setting up its surges, it appeared to dance. It increased with the rising of the Moon and he reflected himself on its breast. That abode of Varuna was infested with gigantic sharks, whales and Timingalas, disturbed with the fury of the Wind, filled with serpents having flaming frames, and various aquatic animals and rocks, and was fathomless deep. It had picturesque fortresses on its marge and its other shore was hard to get at. And the Makarasand serpents living therein were moved by the Wind. The waters, as if delighted, were rising and falling. And having serpents of flaming frames underneath, it appeared as if sprinkled with scintillations of fire. And that terrible abode of the demons extended down to the regions inhabited by the Nāgas or serpents. The deep resembled the welkin and the welkin the deep, and there appeared no difference between them. 1. A large fabulous fish. 2. A marine monster confounded usually with the crocodile and shark. The sky crested with stars and the deep filled with gems resembled each other. They sky enveloped with clouds and the ocean overflowing with surges presented no contrast whatsoever. The waves of the mighty deep beating at each other continually, set up a sound resembling that of a trumpet in the sky. It was filled with diverse gems and its water was poisoned by means of the air. It was filled with various aquatic animals, and up heaving its billows, it appeared as if excited with ire. There beheld those high-souled monkeys the mighty main agitated by the Wind and muttering as if with the Upheaval of the waves. There upon, overwhelmed with surprise, those monkeys, stationed there, espied the main brimming with rolling waters and moving as if (off its place).