Thereupon having placed her palms on his head Bharata, the enhancer of Kaikeyi's joy spoke to his elder brother Rāma, having truth for his prowess, saying. Abiding by my mother's request you did confer this kingdom upon me; I do return you the kingdom you did give me. Like to a young one unable to carry a heavy burden thrown off by a powerful bull I am unable to carry this huge burden of the kingdom). I do consider this kingdom infested with thieves, difficult to govern, as it is difficult to reconstruct a bridge broken down by a powerful current of water. As an ass cannot follow the course of a horse and a crow cannot follow that of a gander, so I am unable, O hero, O slayer of foes, to follow your footsteps. If a tree, planted in the inner apartment of a house, growing huge with a big trunk and many branches, is dried up as soon it blossoms without bearing fruits, his object for whom it is planted, becomes fruitless? And this simili, O you of long arms, shall prove good in you, if did you not, our master, govern us, O lord of men, who are your servants. Let the world, O Raghava, behold you installed (today) liku to the powerful midday Sun burning in effulgence. Do you sleep and rise up with the sound of stringed instruments, women's girdles and Nupuras and charming songs. Do you govern the people as long as the solar system exists and as far as the earth extends. Hearing the words of Bharata, Rāma the conqueror of enemies cities, saying, “So be it" sat on an excellent seat. Thereupon at the command of Satrughna, expert, skilful and quick-handed barbers gathered round Rāghava. At first, Bharata, the highly powerful Laks maņa, Sugrīva the lord of monkeys, and Vibhīs aņa the lord of Rākşasas bathed. Thereupon shorn of his matted hairs, bathed, with paste excellent garlands and precious clothes on, he appeared there shining in grace. The valiant and graceful Śatrughna the upholder of the dignity of Ikşvāku race, himself got ready the dresses for Rāma and Lakşmaņa. All the high-minded wives of Dasaratha with their own hands decked Sītă with various charming (ornaments). Thereupon Kausalyā, delighted and fond of her son, herself with great care, decorated the wives of monkeys. Thereupon at the words of ſatrughna, the charioteer by name Sumantra got ready the perfectly beautiful car. Beholding that celestial car, bright as the fire of the sun, stationed before him, Rama, having long arms, the conqueror of enemies cities, ascended it. Sugrīva and Hanuman, graceful like Mahendra, bathed, dressed in celestial clothes and wearing excellent kundalas, proceeded (to view the city). Then went Sītā and all the wives of Sugrīva decorated with all ornaments and wearing excellent Kundalas, anxious to behold the city. All the ministers of king Dasaratha in Ayodhyā began to hold consultation respectfully with the priest. Asoka, Vijaya and Siddhārtha, with undivided mind, consulted with each other about the welfare of Rāma as well as that of the city. (Thereupon they ordered the servants) saying, Do you collect materials necessary for the auspicious installation of the high-souled (Rama) worthy of being crowned with victory. The priest and the ministers having ordered thus all speedily issued out of the city to behold Rama. Like to the thousand-eyed Indra in his car, drawn by horses the blameless Rāma; seated in his car, proceeded towards the excellent city. Bharata took up the reins, ſatrughna held the umbrella and Lakşmaņa began to fan him on the head with Chowries. Vibhīşaņa, the lord of Rākşasas standing on one side, took up the white Chowrie shining like the second moon. There was audible the sweet encomium of Rāma chanted by the crowd of ascetics in the sky, the celestials and the Marutas. Thereupon the highly effulgent Sugrīva, the foremost of monkeys, got up upon an elephant named Śatruñjaya resembling a mountain. And riding nine thousand elephants proceeded the monkeys assuming human shapes and adorned with various ornaments. And with the music of conches and bugles that foremost of men entered the city abounding in houses. They (citizens) beheld Raghava enter the city with a graceful person and seated in the car. They having bowed to that descendant of Kākutstha were welcomed by him. And they followed that high souled one encircled by his brothers. And surrounded by his courtiers, Brāhmaṇas and subjects Rāma appeared beautiful like to the Moon encircled by stars. He went preceded by men who play on stringed instruments, by people with Karatal and Sustika in their hands and by men chanting delightedly auspicious songs. Persons with Aksata and gold in their hands, kine, girls, Brāhmaṇas and persons with Modaka in their hands went before Rāma. Thereupon before the ministers Rāma began to describe the friendship of Sugrīva, the prowess of the Wind-gods son and the works accomplished by the monkeys. Hearing of the amazing works of the monkeys and the prowess of the Rākşasas, the inhabitants of the city of Ayodhyā attained to astonishment. Having related thus (the works of the monkeys) the graceful Rāma encircled by the monkeys entered (the city of) Ayodhya abounding in delighted and plump persons. Thereupon the citizens hoisted up flags upon every house and he reached the picturesque abode of his ancestors inhabited by the descendants of Ikşvāku. Having reached and entered his ancestral palace and bowed to Kausalyä, Sumitra and Kaikeyī, the high-souled prince, the enhancer of the joy of the descendants of Raghu, addressed Bharata the foremost of the pious, with sweet words instinct with meaning, saying. Kākutstha, living in the forest of Dandaka with bark and matted hairs, for whom you are lamenting, has, “Do you set apart for Sugrīva my huge and excellent palace abounding in pearls and Vaiduryas." Hearing those words, Bharata, having truth for his prowess, taking Sugrīva by the hand, conducted him to the palace. And commanded by Śatrughna, (servants) speedily entered (that palace) with oil, lamps, bedsteads and beddings. Thereupon the highly effulgent younger brother of Raghava spoke to Sugriva, saying, "Do you, O lord, order some (to bring water) for Rama's installation." Sugrīva conferred upon four leading monkeys four golden jars crested with diverse jewels and said to them. "Do you so conduct, O monkeys, that you may return by the dawn with the jars filled with the water of the four oceans." Being thus addressed by the high-souled (Sugrīva) the monkeys resembling the elephants speedily rose up in the welkin like to quick coursing vultures. Jambavan, Hanumān, the monkey Vegadarsi and Rşabha brought the jars filled with water and another monkeys brought the water in jars from five hundred rivers. Suşeņa, gifted with prowess, brought that jar crested with gems, filled with water from the Eastern Ocean. Rşabha speedily brought water from the southern Ocean. Gavaya brought from the great Western Ocean in that golden jar, water perfumed with the fragrance of red sandal and camphor. The virtuous-souled Wind-gods son, gifted with all accomplishments and the prowess of Garuda and Wind-god, brought, speedily from the Northern Ocean, water in that large jewelled jar. Beholding water thus brought by the leading monkeys for the installation of Rāma, Satrughna, with his ministers, communicated that to the leading priests and friends. Thereupon the self-controlled Vasistha, stricken in years, along with other Brāhmaṇas placed Rāma with Sītā on a jewelled seat. Vasistha, Vijaya, Jabali, Katyayana, Gautama and Vāmadeva, sprinkled that foremost of men, with clear and fragrant water as Vasus did the thousand eyed Vasava. Ministers, soldiers and the merchants all delighted. (Thereupon with the juice of Oshadhis (he was sprinkled by) the celestials stationed in the sky, the deities presiding over four quarters and all other celestials collected. Having placed him on a seat crested with various jewels in the arena decorated with gold, various jewels and rich parapharnalia, (he placed on his head) the jewelled crown made by Brahmā, brilliant and with which in the days of yore Manu and other kings, born in his race, were installed. And being decked by the highsouled Vasistha with that crown, Rāghava was afterwards dressed with the celestial garments by the Rtvigas.* *A domestic chaplain a family priest. Śatrughna held the white and excellent umbrella and Sugrīva the lord of monkeys took the white Chowrie. And Vibhīşaņa the lord of Rákşasas took up another Chowrie resembling the moon. The wind commanded by Väsava conferred upon Rāghava, a garland or hundred golden lotuses, shining in their native lustre. And the wind commanded by Sakra conferred upon that lord of men a jewelled garland crested with diverse gems. The intelligent and worthy Rāma being installed the celestials and the Gandharvas sang and the Apsaras danced. The earth was filled with crops, the trees with fruits and the flowers were fragrant on the occassion of Rāghava's installation. That foremost of men conferred upon the twice-born ones one million of horses, hundred thousand cows and hundred thousand bulls. And Rāghava again conferred upon the Brāhmaṇas thirty crores of golden coins and diverse costly ornaments and clothes. Thereupon that lord of men conferred upon Sugriva a celestial garland brilliant like the rays of the Sun and crested with gold and jewels. And he, gifted with intelligence, conferred upon Angada, Vali's son, two Angadas (A kind of ornament worn on upper arms.) brilliant as the rays of the moon and made of Vaidurya. Rāma conferred upon Sitā an excellent pearl necklace crested with precious jems, celestial clothes and various excellent ornaments. And taking off the necklace from her person Vaidehi, the daughter of king Janaka, conferred it upon the Wind-god's son remembering the services (rendered by him) and cast her looks again and again upon her lord and the monkeys. Beholding that (Rāma) capable of reading the gestures, spoke to the daughter of king Janaka, saying, "O fortunate and beautiful lady, do you confer this necklace upon him with whom you are pleased." Thereupon the lotus-eyed (Sitā) conferred that upon the Wind god's son. And Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys, in whom perpetually exist, energy, forgiveness, fame, skilfulness, prowess, humility, tactics, manliness, valiance and intellect, appeared with that necklace like a mountain beautified with the rays of the moon and white clouds. All other elderly and leading monkeys were respectively honoured with clothes and ornaments. Being honoured by Rāma of unwearied actions with enough of jewels and other wishedfor objects, Vibhisana, Sugriva, Hanuman, Jambavan and other leading monkeys, delighted, returned to their respective habitations. Thereupon, the lord of earth and the slayer of foes conferred, all wished for things, upon Dvivida, Mainda and Nila. Beholding (the installation of Rāma) the highsouled monkeys, taking leave of the lord of earth, went to Kiskindha. And beholding the inauguration of Răma, Sugrīva, the foremost of monkeys, honoured by Rāma, repaired to the city of Kiskindhā. Having obtained his own kingdom, the greatly famous and virtuous souled Vibhīşaņa, with all the Rākşasas, repaired to the city of Lankā. Having slain his foes, the highly generous and glorious Rama, ruled in great delight, the kingdom extending all over the earth. And Rama, fond of the pious, spoke to Laksmana, conversant with piety, saying- O you conversant with piety, do you with me and four fold forces, govern this kingdom, ruled by our predecessors. Like to our ancestors do you now carry the burden of an associate in the throne. When the son of Sumitrā did not accept the heir apparentship albeit solicited earnestly again and again, the high-souled (Rāma) conferred upon Bharata that dignity. That son of king performed various sacrifices such as Paundarika, Asvamedha', Vajimedha and other of various kinds. 1. A kind of sacrifice. 2. A kind of Sacrifice in which a horse is slain. And governing the kingdom for ten thousand years Rāghava performed ten horse-sacrifices with excellent horses and profuse presents. That highly powerful Rāma, having his arms extended up to the knee-joint, having a spacious breast and Lakşmaņa as his attendant, ruled the earth (in this.wise). Obtaining that excellent kingdom, the virtuous souled Raghava performed many sacrifices with his sons, brothers and friends. Rāma governing the kingdom, the widows were not distressed and there was no fear from voracious animals or from diseases. The people were saved from the thieves and there was no other trouble. And the old were not constrained to perform the funeral ceremonies of the children. All were delighted and devoted to pious observances. And beholding Rāma they did not envy one another. Rāma governing the kingdom, (people) lived for thousand years and had thousand children, they were freed from diseases and sorrow. The trees bore fruits and flowers perpetuallythere were showers at will and the wind blew pleasant. The people delighted engaged in their respective works and the subjects grew pious and truthful, under Rāma's regime, and were devoted to the observances of all pious works and gifted with all auspicious marks. And Rāma ruled the kingdom for ten thousand years. This sacred Epic, the first of its kind, affording piety, fame, and long life, and describing the conquest of tire kings, was composed by Vālmīki in the days of yore. He, who on this earth, shall hear (this story) shall be divested of sins. People, wishing for children, shall obtain the same and those, wishing for riches, shall get by them. Thus people on this earth shall attain to their wished for objects hearing of this Răma's installationthe king may conquer the earth and subdue his foes. Females may obtain sons (in the same way) as Kausalyā gave birth to Rāma, Sumitrā to Lakşmaņa and Kaikeyi to Bharata. Hearing the story of this work describing the victory of Rāma of unwearied actions one may attain to a long life. He, who with devotion and having his anger subdued, shall hear the story of this epic written by Vālmīki in the days of yore shall get over all troubles. Hearing the story of the Epic composed by Vālmīki in the days of yore, one living in foreign countries, shall return home and enjoy in the company of his friends. Hearing this people shall secure all their wished for objects from Rāghava and the celestials shall be greatly delighted. When this book is kept in a house it becomes free from the disturbance of evil spirits. Hearing this a king may conquer the earth, and one living in a foreign country fare well. If a female, during her monthly course, hears the story, she shall give birth to an excellent son. By reading and worshipping this ancient history people are freed from all sins and attain to a long life. The Kșatriyas, bending low their heads, should hear this daily from the Brāhmaṇas. Hearing or reading the whole of Rāmāyaṇa, forsooth shall people get sons and riches. Rāma is ever pleased with him. He is the ever existing Visnu-the first God, the huge-armed Hari, Narayana and Lord. This ancient work produce such fruits. May good betide you. Do you openly declare that Visnu's prowess may increase. The celestials shall be greatly delighted for reading or hearing this story of Rāma and the progenitors shall be always pleased. Those, who shall write this story of Rāma first recorded by the Rși (Vālmīki) shall reach the region of Brahma. Hearing this poem of great merits, people attain to, on this earth, multiplied relations, increased wealth and crops, beautiful wives, excellent happiness, and the accomplishment of all desires. They attain to long life, health, fame, intellect, prowess, and good brothers. Therefore it behove those good men, who wish for prosperity, to hear this story perpetually.