Thereupon bowing to Rāma, the foremost of bowmen, having eyes, resembling lotus-petals, the highly wise monkey said. It behove you now to see Maithili, stricken with grief for whom you did initiate all these works and the fruit whereof has now been attained. Hearing of your victory Maithilī, possessed by grief and having eyes full of tears, expressed her desire to see you. I was told by her, confident of her previous trust, with profuse tears in her eyes, “I wish to see my husband." Being addressed by Hanuman Rāma the foremost of the pious being bathed in tears, engaged instantly in meditation. Thereupon sighing hard and casting his looks upon the ground he spoke to Vibhīşaņa resembling clouds, who was near him. Do you speedily bring Sītā here-the daughter of the king of Mithila-bathed, sprinkled with celestial pasted and adorned with celestial ornaments. Being thus addressed by Rāma, Vibhişaņa hastened on and entering the inner apartment sent information to Sītă through the female attendants. Beholding the great Sītā, the graceful lord of Rākşasas-Vibhīşaņa humbly and placing his joined palms on his crown, said. O Vaidehi, may good betide you; sprinkled with celestial paste and adorned with celestials ornaments do you ascend this car: your husband wish to see you. Being thus addressed Vaidehi replied to Vibhisana, “O lord of Raksasas, without bathing even I wish to see my husband." Hearing those words VibhIşaņa replied, "It behove you to do what your lord Rama has said." on a Whereto the chaste maithilee, regarding her husband as God and filled with devotion to her husband, replied saying "so be it." Thereupon placing Sta, bathed, performing the due rites wearing valuable clothes and adorned with valuable ornaments, palanquin, carried by many a capable Rākşasa, brought her (to Rama). Thereupon approaching the high-souled Rama, who, bearing informed of (Vibhisana's approach) was engaged in meditation, Vibhīşaņa bowing down and delighted communicated to him the arrival of Sită. Hearing of her arrival who had lived long in the abode of the Raksasas Rāghava, the slayer of enemies attained (simultaneously) to anger, delight and depression. Considering Sīta who was in the palanquin, over whelmed with grief, Raghava delighted addressed Vibhīşaņa with the following words. O lord of Rakşasas, O gentle (king) O you ever engaged in encompassing my success, do you speedily bring Vaidehī nearer to me. Hearing these words of Raghava, Vibhīşaña, conversant with piety speedily cleared (the people out of that place). Attendants with armours and head-dresses on and with cane and drums in their hands began to move about driving away the crowed thereform. The crowds of bears, monkeys and Rākṣasas being driven on all sides began to fly at a distance. They being thus driven there arose a huge noise resembling that of the ocean when agitated by the wind. Beholding the monkeys driven on all sides and troubled Rāghava out of anger and compassion prevented him. Thereupon as if burning (ever thing) with his angry eyes Rāma addressed the highly intelligent Vibhīşaņa with the following angry words. Why did you insult' me by destroying all these? Do you remove their anxiety-they are all my own men. Neither the houses, clothes, walls nor reception like these are the veils of women. There is no sin consequent uponi seeing women in danger, difficulty, war, Svayamvara* sacrifice and marriage. *It is a form of marriage in which the bride selects a bridegroom foe herself. She is now in great danger and difficultythere is no sin in seeing her specially in my presence. Therefore leaving behind the palanquin let her come here on foot and let the monkeys behold Vaidehī in my presence. Being thus addressed by Rāma, Vibhīşaņa, being sorry, humbly brought Sītă near him. There upon hearing Rāma's accents Lakşmaņa, Sugrīva and the monkey Hanuman were greatly sorry. As if hiding herself in her own person in shame Maithili, following Vibhisana, approached her husband. She, having a gentle countenance and always regarding her husband as her god, fixed her looks upon her lord's face out of surprise, joy and love. Beholding the gentle countenance of her dearest lord, resembling the full moon the removed her mental distress. Thereupon she appeared (beautiful) having the countenance of the clear moon.