Being thus commanded, Hanumān, the son of Maruta, worshipped of the night-rangers, entered the city of Lanka. Entering the city with Vibhișana'a permission, Hanumān, again permitted, entered the vşkşa Vatika.* *A garden in the city of Lankā. Entering there duly, the monkey, who was already known to Sītā, espied her, having her person not cleaned, like Rohiņi oppressed by Rāhu, sitting at the foot of a tree, devoid of joy and encircled by she-demons. And approaching her and bowing to her, he stood there humbly and unmoved. Beholding the highly powerful Hanuman arrived there the worshipful dame stood silent for sometime and then recognising him became greatly delighted. And beholding her gentle countenance, Hanumān, the best of monkeys, began to relate to her what Räma had said. O Vaidehī, it is all well with Rāma Sugrīva and Lakşmaņa. He has enquire after your welfare. He has accomplished his end subdving his enemies and his enemy is slain. O worshipful dame, the powerful Răvaņa has been slain by Rāma, helped by Vibhīşaņa and accompanied by the monkeys and Lakşmaņa. I do relate to you this pleasant news, O worshipped dame; I do again delight you; it is by your grace, O you conversant with piety, O Sītā, victory has been gained, Do you be consoled and relieved of your anxiety. The enemy Rāvana has been slain and the city of Larikā has been brought under submission. (Rāma said), "For discomfiting your enemy a bridge was constructed over the sea by me who was determined and who didnot sleep (for days) and thus my promise has been fulfilled. Do you not be afraid for living in Rāvana's abode for I have placed at Vibhīşana's hands the sovereignty of Lanka. Do you be consoled thinking as if that you are living in your own house. To behold you, Vibhisana, delighted, shall soon proceed. Being thus accosted the worshipful Sītā, having a moon-like countenance, and her voice choked in delight, could not utter any thing. Beholding Sītā incapable of replying the foremost of monkeys said, “What are you thinking of O worshipful dame? Why are you not welcoming me?" Being thus addressed by Hanuman Sītā, ever treading the paths of monkey, greatly delighted, replied with words suppressed by tears. Hearing this pleasant new concerning the victory of my husband-and being brought under the control of joy I am speechless for sometime. O monkey I do not perceive any such thing which I can confer upon you in return, for this pleasant news. I do see any such thing on this earth which can match your pleasant tidings and bestowing which upon you I may be happy. Silver, gold, or diverse jewels or the kingdom of the three worlds-nothing is a becoming return for your speech. Being thus addressed by Vaidehi the monkeys replied-folding his hands with delight and stationed before Sītā. O blameless damsel forsooth this excellent speech become you, who is ever engaged in the welfare of your husband and ever desirous of his victory. I do consider, O worshipful dame, these words of your, far greater than the wealth, jewels or even the sovereignty over the celestials. Forsooth I have gained the kingdom of the celestials and other things since I have beheld Rāma, slay his enemy. victorious and peaceful. Hearing those words of (Hanuman) Maithili the daughter of king Janaka spoke to the Wind-god's son far more excellent words. You are capable of speaking words, chaste, pleasant and significant of eight sorts of knowledge. You see the praiseworthy son of the Wind-god and greatly virtuous; strength, mindedness, energy, forgiveness, patience, endurance, humility and many other excellent qualities crown you. Thereupon not being elated the least he again humbly folding his hands with delight and stationed before Sītā, said. If did you permit me I may say all these shedemons who had tortured you before, distressed you in the forest of Asoka, stricken with grief of your lord, and who are cruel, have grim eyes and who perpetrate always dreadful deeds. worshipful dame, I have heard that these grimvisaged she demons distressed you greatly with harsh words at the command of Rāvaņa. I desire to slay all these dreadful crooked, ugly she-demons having fearful eyes, meting out to them various punishment. I wish to slay all these she-demons, who had used harsh words and had always offended you, stricking them with fists, fingers, arms, dreadful knee-joints, teeth, chopping off their ears and noses, and pulling them by their hairs; do you confer upon me this permission. O far famed lady, I shall slay them by these various means, by whom dreadful as they are, you had been distressed before. Being thus addressed by Hanumăn, she, ever kind to the poor, thinking and meditating, said to him. O foremost of monkeys, why are you angry with these she-slaves, who subject as they are to the command of their lord, have done this in accordance with another's order. I or my adverse fortune and vicious deeds perpetrated in another birth I have been subject to such a plight and been suffering the consequence thereof. Do yon not speak thus, O you of huge arms. Such is the course of Fortune. Forsooth by my ill-luck I have met with (this misfortune). I forgive, out of pity, all these she-servants of Rāvaņa; they used to torture me at the command of that Raksasa. And he being slain they shall not repress me any longer, O son of the Wind-god. Do you, O monkey, hear of a śloka, related in a Purana and pregnant with religious import, which was uttered by a boar to a tiger. No one teke upon himself the iniquity of a perpetrator of vicious deeds. So it behove the pious crowned with an excellent character to observe the rules (of piety). “So it is proper to show compassion even upon these who perpetrate crimes and are worthy of being slain. Who is there who does not commit a crime? It is not proper to act cruelly even by them who take delight in killing men, although they commit various iniquitous deeds. Being thus addressed by Sītā, Hanumān, skilled in speech, spoke to the blameless Rama's spouse, saying. You are the worthy spouse of Răma, religiously wedded and crowned with many qualities. Permit me, O worshipful dame, to proceed where Rāghava is. Being thus accosted by Hanumān, Vaidehi, the daughter of king Janaka, said, “I wish to see my lord, ever fond of those who are devoted to him." Hearing these words, the high-minded Hanumăn, the son of Maruta, pleasing Maithili said. You shall behold Rama, having a countenance like the full moon, with Laksmana, surrounded by his friends and having his enemies slain as ſaci behold Indra the king of the celestials. Addressing these words to Sītă appearing like Sree herself the highly effulgent Hanuman returned where Rāghava was. Thereupon Hanumān, the foremost of monkeys, related duly all what did the daughter of king Janaka say to Räghava resembling the lord of the celestials.