After gradually regaining his senses, Rāvana, urged on by the force of the Finisher, getting into a furious passion, with his eyes reddened in wrath, addressed the charioteer, saying. perverse sense, disregarding me as devoid of prowess, and incompetent, and bereft of vigour-as cowardly, light, nerveless and shorn of energy, and as divorced by the power of illusion and debarred by arms, you act on your own understanding. Wherefore disregarding me, and not minding O you of my purpose, have you taken away my car from before the presence of the enemy? O abject one! by you have my long earned renown and energy and prowess and credit been brought to naught. In the very sight of an enemy of renowned prowess, and one capable of being gratified with valorous deeds, have you made me, burning for battle, look as if I were a coward. As, O wicked minded one, you did not even through heedlessness, take the car to the field of batile, I infer for certain that you have been bribed by the foe. The act that you have done, does not appear as that of a friend seeking our welfare; but today you have acted like an enemy. If you have been maintained by me, if you remember my merit, do you swiftly turn the car before my enemy has departed. Thus admonished by him of slender sense, the charioteer possessed of intelligence, humbly spoke to Råvaņa words fraught with good. I am not afraid, nor stupefied, nor have I been bribed by the foe, nor am I negligent. And I have not forgotten your affection or your good offices. And studious of your welfare, I have saved your fame; and with a mind overflowing with affection I have done (to you) this unpalatable good. O mighty monarch, for this, you should not, like a frivolous and base one, criminate me that am ever engaged in what is good and dear to you. Listen! I shall render you reason why I turned away from the field the car, rushing like a river when the sea is swelled up* *On the ascension of the Moon. I knew that you had been fatigued in consequence of your mighty exertions in the fight. And I could not perceive that your prowess then stood superior (to that of the foe).* *Two negatives in this verse amounting to an affirmative. This is the only instance of double negatives in Valmiki. The steeds of my car were worn out by-carrying it; and they were battered, and helpless and perspired like kine in a shower. And bad omens fast sprang up before us. And on these occurring, I perceived that things would go against us. O you endowed with exceeding might, a charioteer should be conversant with season and place, with omens, and the expressions of emotions; as also with depression of spirits, exhilaration, and grief. And he should have a knowledge of low, lever and uneven grounds, and the time for conflict, and he should be able to perceive the shortcomings of the enemy. And a charioteer mounted on a car, should know when to draw near an enemy, when to turn away from him when to stay; and when to turn round from before the foe-all these (he should know). What I, for bringing respite to you as well as the horses of the car, have done by way of removing the terrific exhaustion, is proper. I did not, O hero, turn away the car of my own sheer will. What I have done, O lord, had been dictated by my affection for you. Command me. What you say, O destroyer of foes. I will do every way, O hero with my whole soul. Thereat, well pleased with the speech of the charioteer, Ravana, eager for encounter, after praising him in various ways said. O charioteer, do you swiftly take the car towards Rāghava. Without slaying his foe in fight, Ravana turn not away (from the field). Speaking thus Råvaņa-lord of Rākşasas-gave the charioteer on the car an excellent ornament for the hand. Hearing Ravana's words, the charioteer drove the car. And urged on by the speech of Rāvana, the charioteer drove on the steeds, and in a moment the mighty chariot of the Rākşasa-chief appeared before Rāma in the field of battle.