Hearing those words affording great delight, Bharata, the slayer of enemies, having truth for his prowess, delighted, ordered Satrughna, (saying). Let all people being purified worship all the deities and altars of the city with fragrant garlands and diverse music. Let all the bards conversant with the chanting of the pedigree, the flatterers, all those conversant with music, the dancing girls, the queens, the courtiers, the soldiers with their wives, Brāhmaṇas, Kşaatryas, and people of all other castes, issue out to behold the moon-like countenance of Rama. Hearing the words of Bharata, Śatrughna, the slayer of enemies, divided the work among the servants, (saying), "Do you level the high and low ground from nandigram to (Ayodhyā). Do you perfectly water the ground with cold water. Thereafter sprinkle all the places with flowers and dried paddy; hoist up flags all over the city; decorate all the houses, before the rising of the moon with garlands, jewels, flowers of gold and things of five other colours. Let hundreds of men watch the thoroughfares. Hearing the command of Satrughna, issued out with delight Dhrsti, Jayanta, Vijaya, Siddartha, Arthasadhaka, Asoka, Mantrapala and Sumantra. Thereupon issued out men on horse back and in cars with thousands of mad elephants welldecked with pennons and she-elephants with golden seats (on their back). Some heroes proceeded encircled by thousand excellent steeds and persons carrying Sakti, Rşti, maces and pennons and thousands of infantry. Thereupon proceeded Sumitrā and all other wives of Dasaratha placing kausalya before them and seated in excellent conveyances. And hearing of the return of his brother and attaining to delight, the high-souled and pious Bharata, reduced with fasting poorly, wearing bark and skin of an antelope and conversant with religion, issued out to receive back Räma in the company of his counsellors and encircled by the twice born ones, the people of diverse castes, his own relations and kinsmen and ministers with garlands and Modaka* in their hands, eulogized by the bards, having his arrival announced with the sound of conchs and bugles and placing the sandals of his worshipful brother on his head and taking white umbrella adorned with white garlands and white Chowries decked with gold and worthy of being used by the kings. Thereupon with the sound of the horses hoofs and cars, conchs and hugles the earth shook. And the whole city went to Nandigrāma. And beholding the Wind-god's son, Bharata said. Did you not resort to the usual fickleness of the monkeys? We do not behold the worshipful Răma, the descendant of Kākutstha the slayer of foes. Nor do we behold the monkeys assuming shapes at will. Having been addressed with those words, Hanumăn replied, communicating to Bharata, having truth for his prowess, the truth. Having reached the trees, covered by the favour of Bhardvaja, with fruits and flowers and pouring honey, the monkeys are emitting noise like maddened black bees. O slayer of foes, this boon was granted him (Rama ) by Vasava (Bharadvāja) is treating him with his army with all hospitality. Hear the dreadful noise of the delighted monkeys. Methinks the monkey host has crossed the river Gomati. Behold the huge upheaval of dust towards the Sala forest. Methinks the monkeys are agitating the graceful Săla forest. Behold there at the distance the car resembling the Sun. This celestial car Puspaka, constructed by Brahma's mind, was obtained by the high-souled (Rāma) after having slain Rāvana with his friends. This celestial car, resembling the newly risen Sun, coursing at will and carrying Rāma (was gained) by the favour of the Giver of wealth. (There are) the two heroic brothers-the descendants of Raghu with Vaidehi, the highly effulgent Sugriva and the Räkşasa Vibhīşana. Thereupon with the sound of there is Rama' there arose a joyous noise reaching the abode of the celestials from among women, children, the young and the old. Thereupon descending upon the earth from chariots, elephants and horses all people beheld him (Rāma) stationed on the car like to the moon in the sky. Facing Rāghava and with folded hands Bharata delightedly worshipped him with agreeable words, Arghya and water to wash his feet. There appeared in the car constructed by Brahmā's mind the elder brother of Bharata having expansive eyes like the immortal wielder of thunder-bolt. Thereupon Bharata humbly saluted his brother Rāma seated on the top of the car like to the Sun on the summit (of the mount Meru). Commanded by Rāma that excellent car drawn by ganders got down on the earth with great velocity. Ascending that car, Bharata, having truth for his prowess, reaching Rāma, delighted, again bowed to him. Raising Bharata up who had been seen after a long time and placing him on his lap Kākutstha, delighted, embraced him. Thereupon Bharata, the slayer of foes, bowed to Vaidehī and welcomed Lakşmaņa. The son of Kaikeyi (then in turn) embraced Sugrīva, Jāmbavān, Angada, Mainda, Dvivida, Nīla and Rşabha. He then embraced Sușeņa, Nala, Gavākşa, Gandhamadana, Sarabha, and Panasa. And assuming human shapes, those monkeys, assuming shapes at will, delightedly enquired after Bharata's well being. Then embracing Sugrīva, the foremost of monkeys, the highly effulgent prince Bharata, the foremost of the pious, said. O Sugrīva, you are our fifth brother. From brotherliness grow friendship and doing injury is the sign of an enemy. Bharata then addressed Vibhiṣaṇa with soothing words, “It is by fortune that through your help he has accomplished such a difficult work." Thereupon the heroic Satrughna saluting Rāma and Lakşmaņa, respectfully bowed to Sitā. Having approached his mother, pale and pulled down with grief, Rāma humbly touched her feet and enhanced her delight. Thereupon saluting Sumitrā, famed Kaikeyi and all his mothers he approached the priests. Thereupon all the citizens with folded hands welcomed him saying, “Welcome are you, O you of long arms! O you the enhancer of Kausalya's joy!" The elder brother of Bharata observed the folded hands of the citizens like so many blown lotuses. And himself taking the sandals of Rāma, Bharata, conversant with piety, placed them at the feet of that lord of men. Thereupon Bharata with folded hands spoke to Rāma, saying. This all your kingdom, which you did leave to my care, I return you. Blessed is my birth today and accomplished is my desire, since I behold you again as king in Ayodhyā after your return. Do you examine your wealth treasury, palace and army. By your favour I have increased all these ten fold. Hearing Bharata speak in that wise and beholding him devoted to his brother all the monkeys and the Rākşasa Vibhîşana shed tears. Thereupon placing Bharata, in delight, on his lap, Raghava, with his army in that car, proceeded towards Bharata's abode. That time reaching Bharata's palace Räghava from the top of the aerial car with his army descended upon the earth. Thereupon Rāma said to the excellent car, Do you (now) go to Vaisravana, I do permit you. Thereupon being thus commanded by Rāma, that excellent car, proceeding towards the north, reached the abode of the Giver of wealth. That celestial car Puspaka had been taken away by the Raksasa (Ravana); but now at the words Rāma it reached (again) the Giver of wealth. And touching the feet of his priest the powerful Rāghava sat on a separate and excellent seat like to Sakra, the lord of immortals (by the side of) Brhaspati.