Having brought that car Puşpaka, adorned with flowers and having stationed himself at a distance, Vibhīşaņa the lord of Rākşasas, being incited to hurry on, humbly and with folded hands, spoke to Rama, saying, "What shall I do, O Rāghava? Hearing those words the highly powerful Rāghava, in the presence of Lakşmaņa, gave vent to the following accents out of affection. All these monkeys and bears have brought about the accomplishment of my work with great care. Do you, satisfy them, O Vibhisana, with diverse jewels and riches. With these and you, I conquered the city of Lanka, O lord of Raksasas. They all fought with a delighted heart, having renounced all fear of life and who did never go away from the battlefield. Do you, with a gift of riches and jewel, make good the work of these monkeys and bears who encompassed the accomplishment (of my end). Being honoured and delighted by you grateful, all these leading monkeys shall repair (to their, respective quarters). (If you are found to be) sacrificing, self-controlled, compassionate and (the just) collector of revenues, all shall be attached to you. For this I do address you (thus). O lord of men, the soldiers, disgusted, renounce that king who is void of all royal accomplishments, and who uselessly slays soldiers in the conflict. Being thus accosted by Rāma, Vibhīşaņa with a distribution of jewels and riches, honoured all those monkeys. Beholding all those leading monkeys worshipped with jewels and riches Rāma ascended that excellent car, taking the bashful, and high-minded Vaidehi on his lap and accompanied by his powerful brother Laksmana, a skilled bowman. Being stationed the Kakutstha honouring all the monkeys, the highly powerful Sugriva and Vibhisana, said. O foremost of monkeys, you have performed a friendly service-it has been appreciated by medo you repair to your wished-for quarters. O Sugrīva, you, ever afraid of impiety, have performed all that a loving and well wishing friend should do. on car Do you, encircled by your army, proceed towards Kiskindhā. Do you, O Vibhisana live in your kingdom, Lankā, conferred upon you, by me. Not even the celestials, headed by Indra shall be able to assail you. I wish to return to Ayodhyā, the capital of my father's (Kingdom). I wish to obtain your permission (and for this, I have invited you all. Being thus addressed by Rāma, all the leading monkeys bears as well as the Rākşasa Vibhīşaņa said with folded hands. We wish all to go to Ayodhyä. Do you take us. We shall all range with delight at forests and gardens. Beholding you installed and bowing to Kausalya, we shall soon return to our respective homes, O foremost of kings. Being thus accosted by the monkeys with Vibhisana, the virtuous-souled Rama, spoke to them and Sugriva and Vibhisana, saying. Dearer than the dear, I shall attain to, when returning my city, along with you all, I shall enjoy in the company of all my friends and relatives. O Sugrīva, do you soon ascend the car along with the monkeys. Do you ascend too, O Vibhisana, lord of Raksasas, with all your courtiers. Thereupon ascended that celestial car Puş paka, Sugriva, greatly delighted with the monkeys and Vibhisana, with his courtiers. They all having got up, the excellent car, of Kuvera at the command of Raghava, rose up in the welkin. And in that car coursing at will land drawn by effulgent ganders, Rāma greatly delighted appeared like Kuvera (himself). All the monkeys, bears and the highly powerful Rákşasas sat in that celestial car unobstructed and at their pleasure.