Being commanded by Räma, that excellent car, drawn by ganders, with a huge noise, rose high up in the welkin. Casting his looks on all sides, Rama, the descendant of Raghus, spoke to Sītā, the daughter of the kind of Mithila, having a moonlike countenance, saying. O Vaidehi, do you behold Lanka, situate on the summit of the mount Citrakūta, resembling that of Kailasa and constructed by Viswakarma. Behold, O Sītā, that huge arena of battle, bathed in the blood and flesh of the monkeys and Raksasas. Do you behold, O you having expansive eyes, Rāvaņa, the lord of Rākşasas, the repressor of people and who obtained a boon, lying there, slain by me on your account. Kumbhakarna was slain there, the night ranger Prahasta, as well, and Dumraksa, were slain by the monkey Hanuman. Vidyunmāli was slain there by the high souled Susena-and Indrajit, the son of Ravana, was slain there in the encounter, by Laksmana. The Rākşasa named Vikața was slain there by Angada-and Virūpākșa, hard to look at and Mahāpārśva and Mahodara. The powerful Akampana was slain (there) and all other Raksasas-Trisira, Atikaya, Devāntaka and Narāntaka-and the two leading and powerful Rākşasas, mad after conflict-the sons of Kumbhakarna Nikumbha and Kumbha, Vajradanşțra, Danstra and many other Räkşasas were slain and the irrepressible Makarākṣa was slain (there) by me in the conflict. Akampana was slain and the powerful Sonitakşaa. And Yüpākṣa and Prajangha were destroyed (there) in the great conflict. The grim-visaged Räkşasa Vidyutjihva was slain there and Yajñaśatru and highly powerful Suptaghna. (And there was slain) Suryaśatru and Brahmaśatru (And there bewailed for Rāvana) his spouse Mandodarī, surrounded by his thousand other wives. O you having an excellent countenance, do you behold the descending place of the ocean, where I spent the night after crossing the deep for you. O you having expansive eyes, for you, this difficult construction of the bridge was made by me over the deep by the help of Nala. Do you O Vaidehī, behold the unagitated deep-the abode of Varuņa, appearing as if without the other end, roaring and abounding in conchs and pearl oysters. O Maithili, do you behold the golden mount, which rose above the deep for affording a resting place to Hanumăn. On the bank of this ocean I halted with my soldiers. And here Mahadeva, the lord of the celestials, was propitiated with me. It behove you to behold this descending place as of the high souled Ocean, known Setubandha,* worshipped of the three worlds, highly sacred and destroying even the worst sin. There, Vibhīsaņa, the king of Rākşasas first came to me. *This is still to be seen in the shape of a delapidated bridge near Rameswar a place of pilgrimage. Pilgrims go there Via Madura, a district in South Madras. The Raja of Ramnud in whose Zemindarī it is situate is called Setupati. Do you behold, O Sita, Kiskindha, having beautiful gardens, the pleasant city of Sugrīva, where Vālī was slain by me. Beholding the city of Kişkindhā, ruled over by Vālī, Sitā, incited by her love, addressed Rāma, with worthy words, saying O king, I wish to repair to Ayodhyā your capital with you, in the company of Tārā, the dear wife of Sugrīva as well as of the wives of other leading monkeys. Being thus addressed by Vaidehi Rāghava replied-saying, "this shall be done" and getting at Kişkindhă he stopped the car. And having beheld the car stationed he spoke to Sugriva, saying. O foremost of monkeys, do you speak to all the leading monkeys that they may go to Ayodhyā accompanied by their wives. O you of great strength they may all go with Sīta. Do you hurry them on, O Sugrīva. We shall (soon) go, O you the lord of monkeys. Being thus addressed by Rāma, of unmitigated prowess-the beautiful lord of monkeys, encircled by them, entered speedily the inner apartment and beholding lārā there, said. O dear, at the command of Rāghava and the kind desire of Sītā, do you soon go, taking with you the wives of all the high-souled monkeys. We shall see Ayodhyā and the wives of Dasaratha. Hearing the words of Sugrīva, Tårā, having a perfectly beautiful person, assembling all the wives of the monkeys, said. You have been ordered by Sugrīva to repair (to Ayodhyā) with the monkeys; to behold Ayodhyā, is also a dear object of mine. (“I shall behold) Rāma enter the city with the citizens and villagers and the wealth and riches of the wives of Dasaratha. Being thus commanded by Tārā, the wives of the monkeys, putting on all their ornaments and circumamubulating (her) ascended the car, with a view to behold Sitā. Beholding the car going up with them all, Rāghava again spoke to Sītā, near the mount Rishyamuka, saying. Do you behold there, O Sītā, the huge and foremost mount Rishyamuka abounding in gold and various metals, like to clouds accompanied with lightnings. There I was joined by Sugrīva, the lord of monkeys. And there I entered into an agreement, O Sita, for the destruction of Vali. There is (the lake) Pampa abounding in lilies and skirted by picturesque forest where separated from you, I bewailed piteously. And on its bank I beheld the pious Savari. And you I slew Kabandha and Yojanabāhu. Behold there, O Sítā, a beautiful tree, in janasthāna, where, O you ever used to luxuries, for you, the highly powerful and energetic Jag ayu, the foremost of birds, was slain by Ravana. Do you behold there, O you of a beautiful person, O you of auspicious looks, our hermitage and the beautiful cottage of leaves, where from you had been carried away by force by the lord of Raksasas. Do you behold there the beautiful and sacred river Godāvarī having clear water and the hermitage of Agastya, surrounded by plantain trees. Do you behold there, O Vaidehi, the great hermitage of Sarabhanga, where came the thousand-eyed, Sakra, the subduer of enemies cities. O worshipful dame, O you having a middle stature-among all those ascetics you behold, there lived Atri, the lord of our familyresembling the fire of the Sun. There was slain the huge bodied Biradha by me. There you did behold, O Sītā, the female astectic (the wife of Attri) ever performing pious observances. There come in view, O you having a beautiful person, the king of mountains, Citrakūta, where to propitiate me, came the son of Kaikey. Behold the beautiful Yamunā, Yamunā, having picturesque forest on its bank and the pleasant hermitage of Bharadvāja. Behold there the sacred river Ganges, dividing itself into three branches. Behold there the city of ſîngavera, where I made friendship with Guha. Behold there, O Sītā, the capital of my father. Do you bow to Ayodhya, O Vaidehi. Thereupon all the monkeys and Rākşasas along with Vibhīşaņa rose up delightedly and saw the city. Thereupon the monkeys and Rākşasas beheld the city abounding in white houses having spacious compartments, filled with elephants and horses and looking like Amarāvati, the capital of Mahendra.