Beholding Rävaņa Slain by the high-souled Rāghava Räksasaees, stricken with grief, issued out of the inner appartments. Stricken with grief and with dishevelled hairs they rolled in the dust albeit prevented again and again like to cows separated from their calves, And coming out by the northern gate along with the Rakssas entering the dreadful arena of battle and searching their slain lord the shedemons cried piteously. O lord, O husband, O our all" and moved along the battle field soaked in blood and filled with headless corpses. With eyes full of tears and overwhelmed with the grief of their husband they began to move about like she-elephants without the lord of their herd. Thereupon they beheld there on the earth the huge-bodied and the highly powerful and effulgent Rävaņa slain like red collyrium. Beholding their lord lying down on the battlefield they all fell on his body like creepers tom assunder. Some wept embracing him respectfullysome holding his feet and some placing themselves around his neck. And some taking up his hand rolled on the ground and some were beside themselves (with grief) beholding the slain (Ravana's) countenance. And some placing her head on his lap, and beholding his face, wept, bathing it with tears like a lotus enveloped with snow. Seeing their husband Rāvaņa thus slain on the earth, they stricken with grief bewailing again and again in sorrow, wept profusely. He by whom the king Vaisrabana was deprived of his flower car, who terrified the high-souled Gandharvas, ascetics and the celestials in battle field, who did not know of any fear from the Asuras, celestials, and the Pannagas, has now been overpowered by a man. He whom the celestials, the Dānvas and the Rākşasa could not slay, has been slain in conflict by a man walking on foot. He, who was incapable of being killed by the celestials, Yaksas and Asuras, has met with death like one devoid of prowess at the hands of a mortal. Speaking in this wise, the she-demons, over powered with sorrow wept and bewailed again and again (saying). Not hearing (the counsels) of your friends, always pointing out your welfare, you did bring Sītā, for your destruction as well as that of the Raksasas. Although your brother Vibhīşana addressed you with words pregnant with your welfare-you, for your own destruction, out of your misgivings, did excite his anger and have (now) seen (the result thereof). Have you returned Sītā the daughter of the king of Mithilā to Råma, this mighty and dreadful disaster, destroying the very root, would not have befallen us. Rāma's desire would have been encompassed his friends would have been successful (through Vibhīşaņa) we would not been widowed and out enemies would not have got their desires fulfilled. By there, Sītā was kept by force in captivity in a ruthless manner, and the Rākşasas, ourselves and yourself-all three equally have been slain. O foremost of the Rākşasas, forsooth this is not your own folly-it is Accident that unite all things and it is accident again that bring about destrucion. O you of huge arms-the destruction of the monkeys and the Rākşasas as well as that of yourself has been brought about by Accident. When the course of accident is about to bring about result-wealth, desire, prowess or command-nothing is capable of with standing it. Thus wept piteously the wives of the lord of Rakşasas like to so many she-elephants-rendered poorly, stricken with grief and with tears in their eyes.