Then the charioteer fully drove with speed Rāvaņa's car, capable of bringing down the hosts of foes, resembling in form a city of the Gandharvas having elevated streamers, yoked with surpassingly superb steeds, engarlanded in gold: stocked with war-like implements; furnished with ensigns and standards; appearing to devour the welkin; making the earth herself resound; destructive to hostile host; and filling its own party with delight. And as it speedily descended, the monarch of men beheld that Raksasa-king's resounding car, having huge standards, yoked with black chargers, and endowed with fierce splendour; as if flaming in the firmament; having the resplendance of the Sun himself; with thronging lightning pennons; displaying the glow of Indra's weapon* showering arms; and resembling rain-charged clouds. *The rain-blow. Seeing the enemy's car resembling a mass of clouds having a chatter resembling the sounds sent by a cleaving mountain riven by the thunder, Rāma, vehemently drawing his bow curved like the infant moon, addressed Mătalicharioteer to the thousand-eyed (deity) saying. *Indra. O Mătalī, behold the enraged chariot of my foe as it course on. From the furious speed with which he is again wheeling at my right, it appear that he has set his heart of slaying me in encouter. Do you therefore heedfully drive the car right against the vehicle of my foe. I wish to destroy this one even as the wind scatter clouds that have appeared. Do you with all your wits about you, without trepidation, and holding your heart as will as your eye in calmness, swiftly drive the chariot ruled by the reins. Worthy of Purandara's car, you ought not to be taught by me. Desirous of encounter and my whole soul bent on fight, I simply remind younot teach you. Pleased with these words of Rāma, the excellent celestial charioteer-Mātalī-drove the car. Then leaving Ravana's mighty car on the right, he enveloped Rāvana with the dust raised by the wheels. Thereat the Ten-necked one, enraged, with his eyes coppery and dilated (in passion), covered with arrows Rāma staying in front of his car. Enraged at the smiting. Rāma, with his ire aroused, but summoning up patience, took up in the encounter the bow of Indra endowed with exceeding vehemence; well as highly impetuous shafts having the resplendence of the solar rays. And then there began a furious encounter between those (two) eager for slaying each other confronting each other like to flaming lions. Then desirous of destruction of Rāvana, celestials with Gandharvas, and Siddhas and supersaints assembled to go to behold the encounter taking place between the two cars. For the destruction of Råvana and the success of Rāghava, there occurred round about the cars terrible bodements capable of making people's down stand on end. as The god poured down showers of blood on the car of Rāvana; and a violent tornado eddied on his right. And a mighty swarm of vultures, wheeling in the heavens, pursued the car wherever it moved. And Lankā was enveloped with evening resembling the red Japā flowers and even in day appeared ablaze. Lightnings and firebrands accompanied by a terrible sound began to fall down on all sides. And beholding these omens inauspicious to Rāvana all the Rākşasas were greatly sorry. And wherever Rāvana moved the earth shook an the hands of all the Rākşasas fighting were as if paralysed. The copper coloured, the yellow, the red, and the white rays of the sun falling before Rāvaņa appeared like melted metals of a mountain. The jackals followed by vultures, vomiting forth fire and casting their looks at him, began to emit inauspicious cries. And in that battle-field the unfavourable wind began to blow raising dust and obstruction the vision of the king of Rākşasas. On the Raksasa host on all sides dreadful lightnings were showered without the sound of the clouds. All the quarters were enshrouded with darkness and the welkin became invisible being covered with darkness. Setting up a dreadful quarrel hundreds of terrible Särikās* began to fall down on his chariot. *A kind of bird (Turdus Salica, Buch). The horses emitted forth sparks of fire from their hips and tears from their eyes. These and various other dreadful omens arose there announcing the destruction of Rāvaņa. There appeared on all sides many an auspicious and good sign intimating the approach of Rāma's victory. And beholding all those auspicious marks announcing Rama's success, Laksmana was greatly delighted and considered Rävaņa as slain. Thereupon beholding all those auspicious signs, Raghava, well qualified to decipher them attained an excess of delight an became anxious to display a greater prowess.