Seeing the heroic Lakşmaņa brought down by the dart discharged by the powerful Rāvana and lying drenched in blood, he (Rama) after having fought furiously with the wicked-minded Ravana-and having showered vollies of shafts, addressed Susena, saying. This heroic Lakşmaņa brought down to the earth by the prowess of Rāvana, Leith like a serpent, enhancing my sorrow. Seeing this hero dearer to me that life, what power have I, with my soul overwhelmed with dole, to fight? If this brother of mine graced with auspicious marks, delighting in battle, breathe his last, what shall life avail me or happiness? My prowess is ashamed; my bow fall off from my hand; my arrows droop; my sight is dimmed with tears; my limbs weaken as do those of men in a dream; thought racks me; and I even desire death. Seeming his brother wounded by the wickedminded Rāvana, crying in preternatural accents and sore stricken in his vitals, (Rāma) overcome by a mighty sorrow, lamented with his senses wildered. Seeing my brother, Laksmana, wounded, and laying over the dust of the field, even victory, O hero, does not seem to me sweet. If the Moon is hid from the sight, whom does he then delight? What have I to do with battle? What have I to do with life? I have no more to do anything with fighting, seeing that this Laksmana wounded, Leith in the field of battle. As this highly effulgent one had followed me into the forest, so will I in the same way follow him to the abode of Yama. Ever seeking my welfare and ever devoted to me, he has been reduced to this pass by Rākṣasas fighting in crooked ways. In land after land one meets with wives, in land after land one meets with friends, but country find I none where a uterine brother may be met with. What, О irrepressible one, shall I do with the kingdom without my Lakşmaņa? And what shall I say to mother Sumitra, fond of her son? I shall never be able to bear the reproach Sumitrā shall cast upon me. And what shall I say to Kausalyā and what to mother Kaikei? What shall I say to Bharata, and what to the exceedingly powerful Satrughna? You had gone to the woods with him. Why then did you come (back) without him? It is better (for me) to renounce my life here, instead of bearing the censure of friends. What a sin had I committed in another birth, seeing that my virtuous brother, staying before me, has been slain? Ah, my brother! You best of me! O master, who were the foremost of heroes! Why, forsaking me, did you repair to the other regions. Wherefore brother, did you not speak to me, who am lamenting? Get up See! Why did you lie down? Look on me with your eyes. O mighty-armed one, in the woods and mountains you did ever use to cheer me, tried by grief and pining in despondency, with my mind overwhelmed (with woe). As Rāma was speaking thus with his senses overwhelmed with emotion, Sușeņa, soothing him, spoke these pregnant words. O foremost of men, cast off this train of thought tending to overwhelm your understanding, this anxiety giving birth to grief, and resembling the shafts of foes in the van of the embattled forces. Lakşmaņa enhancer of auspiciousness is not dead. His face is not distorted or blackened. Do you look at his countenance, which is beautifully bright and cheerful. His hands have palms resembling lotus-petals, and his eyes are pleasant. O king, one dead does not look thus. (Therefore,) O hero, do not grieve. O subduer of enemies this one is instinct with life. As he is lying down on the ground, stretched at length, his respiration. Having spoken thus to Răghava, the highly wise Suşeņa thus addressed the mighty monkeys, Hanumān, saying. O placid one hieing hence to the mountain, Mahodaya, which, O hero had formerly been mentioned to you by Jāmbavan bring hither the mighty drug sprung at it right summitVisalyakarani by name, and Savarnyakarani.* and Sañjīvakaraņi O hero, and the potent medicine-Sandhāni. Do you bring (these) in order that the hero-Laksmana-May be revived. *Lit.-that which restores the former complexion. Having been thus in strutted, Hanuman, repairing to the medicinal mountain, was wrought up with anxiety not knowing the drugs. Then the thought sprang up in the mind of the Wind-god's offspring of immeasurabie prowess, I shall go, even taking this (entire) summit of the mountain. In this very summit must that delightful drug have sprung. This I inter, inasmuch as Susena had forsooth said so. If I fail to take Visalyakaraṇī, I shall come by disgrace, and if I spend much time (in thought), that would be fraught with evil.)* *Explains the commentator: 'If I take any other medicine by mistake, I shall make a fool of myself; if I spend much time in though, Laksmana may die. Having reflected thus the exceedingly powerful Hanumăn, foremost of monkeysswiftly drawing up to that best of mountains and giving three shakes to the mountain filled with various flowering trees-raised it up with his hands. And taking that summit of the mountain resembling dark-blue clouds charged with rain, Hanumān from the earth bounded up in the sky. Arriving (at his quarters) that wondrous vehement one putting down the mountain-peak, and reposing for a while, spoke to Susena. I did not find the drug, O best of monkeys; and therefore have I brought this entire summit of the mountain. When the Wind-god's offspring had spoken thus, that foremost of monkeys-Susena-praising him uprooted the herb and secured it. Seeing Hanuman's feat incapable of being done by even the celestials, the choice of the monkeys were amazed. Then crushing the healing herb, that best of monkeys-the exceedingly effulgent Sușeņa, made Laksmana smell the same. Thereupon the wounded Lakşmana, slayer of hostile heroes-smelling it, curd of his wound and ailments, speedily rose up from the ground. Seeing Lakşmaņa rise up from the earth, the monkeys, exceedingly rejoiced, honouring Laks mana, exclaimed, “Excellent! Excellent!" “Come!” said that slayer of hostile heroesRāma and with his eyes filled with tears, he deeply embraced Lakşmaņa. Having embraced Sumitra's son, Raghava then addressed him saying, “By good fortune it is that, O hero, I see you returned from (the mansion of ) Death. Verily my life, or Sită, or Victory is worthless (without you). And you being dead what is my life worth? When the high-souled Raghava had spoken thus, Lakşmaņa, aggrieved on account of the words (of Rāghava) expressive of infirmity of purpose, said. Having bound yourself by that vow, it does not, O you having truth for prowess, behove you to speak like one fickle and feeble. Those speaking the truth, never falsify their promise: the mark of a great one is even observance of vow. O sinless one, do not suffer yourself to be overcome by despair on my account. Do you today by slaying Rāvaņa, make your promise good. Your foe coming within the sway of your shafts will not hence, living, even like a mighty elephant coming before a sharp-toothed roaring lion. I wish the speedy destruction of this impious one, ere the maker of day, having performed his work, has ascended the Setting-hill. If you wish to slay Råvaņa in battle, if your desire to recover the princess, then, O noble one, O hero, today speedily set about what I say. I wish the speedy destruction of this impious one, ere the maker of day, having performed his work, has ascended the Setting-hill. If you wish to slay Råvaņa in battle, if your desire to recover the princess, then, O noble one, O hero, today speedily set about what I say.