Being thus addressed by Rāghava, enraged, with those harsh words Sīta was greatly pained. Hearing those words of her lord, unheard of, before the great assembly Maithili was greatly humiliated with shame. As if entering to her own person (with shame) and greatly pained with these arrow like words the daughter of king Janaka began to shed tears. Thereupon wiping the tears off her countenance, she with sorrowful words, addressed her husband. Why did you, O hero, like a common man addressing an ordinary woman, make me hear these, harsh and unbecoming words painful to ears? O you of long arms, I am not what you have taken me to be. Do you believe me-I do swear by my own character. Seeing the ordinary women you are distrusting the whole sex. Do you renounce this suspicion since you have tried me. O lord, though my person was touched by another-but it was not in my power; nor was it an wilful act (of mine); accident is to blame in this. My heart is under my control and that is in you;-and what could I do of my body which was subject to another and of which I was not the mistress. O you the conferrer of honour-our affection towards one another was increased by our living continually for a long time; even then if you have not been able to understand me I am ruined for ever. O king, when the great hero Hanumān was despatched by you of Lankā to see me why did you not renounce me then? Had you deputed the monkey with that message I would have renounced my life there and then, O hero. You would not have been required to undergo this toil at the risk of your own life and giving unnecessary trouble to your friends. O foremost of kings, being subject to ire-you did not perceive anything but womanhood in me, like an ordinary man. Although I am known to have a father but in fact I am born of the earth. You did not sufficiently honour my character, O you conversant with character. are Your marriage with me in boyhood shall be disproved and you not sufficiently considering all my devotion and good conduct to you. Saying thus with accents choked in tears and weeping Sītā spoke to Lakşmaņa, poorly and engaged in meditation. Make a funeral pyre for me, O Saumitri, that is the only remedy for this disaster. Being thus branded with an unfounded stigma I do not like to keep my life. To adopt the proper course for me who had been renounced before this assembly by my disaffected husband I shall enter this. Being thus addressed by Vaidehī, Lakşmaņa, the slayer of enemies, being possessed by anger, looked towards Rāghava. And understanding Rāmas intention by gestures and at his command the powerful Saumitri prepared a funeral pyre. None dared there request, speak with or even look at Rāma like to Death, at the time of dissolution. Thereupon circumambulating Rāma, standing with his head down, Vaidehi approached the burning fire. The three worlds-the celestials, Gandharvas and Dänavas saw her fallen like to a celestial from the heaven when imprecated. She having entered the fire, lamentations, unheard of before, rose from all sides from the Rākşasas and monkeys. Bowing to the celestials and Brāhmaṇas, Maithilī, with folded hands, spoke before the fire. As my heart has never gone away from Rāghava, may you protect me, O fire, the witness of the people. As Rāghava consider me vile, who have got a pure character, may fire, the witness of the people, protect me on all sides. Saying this and going round the fire, Vaidehi, with undaunted heart, entered the flaming fire. The great assembly there, young and old, overwhelmed with grief, saw Maithili enter the flaming fire. And (Sītā) resembling the burning gold entered the flaming fire in the presence of all people. All beheld Sita, having expansive eyes, enter fire like to a golden altar. The ascetics, celestials and Gandharvas saw that great damsel enter fire like to a full oblation in the sacrifice. Beholding her fallen into the fire like to Vasudhārā, sanctified by Mantras in a sacrifice, all the females began to weep. The three worlds-the celestials, Gandharvas and Dänavas saw her fallen like to a celestial from the heaven when imprecated. She having entered the fire, lamentations, unheard of before, rose from all sides from the Rākşasas and monkeys. Bowing to the celestials and Brāhmaṇas, Maithilī, with folded hands, spoke before the fire. As my heart has never gone away from Rāghava, may you protect me, O fire, the witness of the people. As Rāghava consider me vile, who have got a pure character, may fire, the witness of the people, protect me on all sides. Saying this and going round the fire, Vaidehi, with undaunted heart, entered the flaming fire. The great assembly there, young and old, overwhelmed with grief, saw Maithili enter the flaming fire. And (Sītā) resembling the burning gold entered the flaming fire in the presence of all people. All beheld Sita, having expansive eyes, enter fire like to a golden altar. The ascetics, celestials and Gandharvas saw that great damsel enter fire like to a full oblation in the sacrifice. Beholding her fallen into the fire like to Vasudhārā, sanctified by Mantras in a sacrifice, all the females began to weep.