Beholding his brother defeated, slain and lying down on the battle-field, Vibhisana overpowered with the weight of his grief, began to lament. O hero, well-known for your prowess, wise and conversant with polity, you were used to excellent beds, why did you lie down on the earth spreading (on the earth) your long and actionless arms always adorned with Angadas and being shorn of your helmet having the resplendence of the Sun. O hero you have come by what I had anticipated and what did not please you who were possessed by delusions. Prahasta, Indrajit Kumbhakarma, Atikāya, Atiratha, Narāntaka, yourself and others-none of you paid heed, out of haughtiness, to what I had said which has now been brought about. Oh! the bridge of the pious has been broken, the figure of the virtue has been spoiled, the refuge of the strong and powerful has disappeared and you have attained to the state of the heroes! The sun has fallen down on the earth, the moon has been shorn of its lustre, the fire has been extinguished and virtue has desisted from its action, this hero, the foremost of those using weapons, falling down on the earth. O you the foremost of the Rakşasas lying down in the dust on the battle field like one asleep whom else have these remaining (Raksasas) deprived of their power and energy, got? The huge tree of the lord of Räkşasas having patience for its leaves velocity for its flowers the power of asceticism and heroism for its firm roots, has been uprooted by the Rāghava wind. Mad-elephant-like Ravana, having prowess for its tusk, family rank for its back bone, anger for its legs, and delighedness for its trunk, has been laid low on the ground by the lion of the Iksvāku race. The powerful Räksasa-fire having prowess and energy for its rays, angry breath for its smoke, own strength for it power of burning, has been extinguished in battle by Rāma like cloud. The Räkşasas bull ever defeating others and powerful as the wind having Rākşasas for its tail hump an a horns, and fickleness for its ears and eyes, has been slain today by Rāma-tiger. Hearing these words pregnant with sound reasonings from Vibhīşaņa and beholding him overwhelmed with grief Rāma said. (This lord of Rākşasas) of dreadful prowess has not been slain in battle disabled. he is gifted with great prowess and energy and devoid of the fear of death.' * i.e. he has accidentally met with death. The heroes abiding by the virtues of the kş arriyas, who fall at the battle field for enhancing their glory, when dead, should not be mourned for. This is not the time to mourn for him although possessed by death, by whom gifted with intellect Indra with the three worlds was terrified in conflict. Besides success in battle is not perpetual; either one slays his enemy or meets with his destruction at his hands in the conflict. This procedure of the Ksatryas was laid down by the ancient preceptors that a kşatrya, when slain in battle should not be mourned for. Beholding this to be certain and attaining calmness, do you be freed from your sorrow an think what should be done now. Thereupon Vibhișaņa stricken with grief addressed the powerful son of the king speaking thus with words ter ting to his brother's wellbeing. You have, like ine ocean breaking down its banks, broken him down, who had not been are this even defeated by Basava and the celestials. By him were conferred many a gift on those who wanted them, were enjoyed many a luxury, were maintained many a servant distributed wealth to friends and slain the enemies. He propitiated fire, performed great austerities, was conversant with the Vedas and the great performer of sacrifices. I desire to perform, by your instructions, his becoming obsequies. Being thus addressed by Vibhīşaņa with piteous accents, the high-souled son of the lord of men. gifted with great energy, ordered him to perform his obsequies and said. With death our enmity has terminated and our object has been accomplished: he is as dear to me as to you: perform (therefore) his funeral rites.