Hearing the lamentations (of the Rākşasas and monkeys) the virtuous-souled Rāma, with a poor heart and having his eyes full of tears, engaged in meditation for some time. Thereupon the king Vaiśravaņa, Yama with his progenitors, the thousand-eyed lord of the celestials, Varuna, the lord of water, the threeeyed graceful Mahădeva-the rider of bull, Brahmă the creator of the world and the foremost of those conversant with the knowledge of Brahmā-all these arriving at the city of Lankă in their cars bright as the rays of the sun, approached Rāghava. Thereupon raising up their huge hands, decked with various ornaments and folding them, those foremost of the celestials said to Raghava. O lord, you are the preserver of all the worlds and the foremost of the wise, why did you neglect Sītā entering into fire? Why did you not understand yourself the foremost of the celestials? You were before the Patriarch of all Vasus, by the name of Rtadhāmā. And you are yourself, O lord, the creator of the three worlds. *A kind of demi-god of whom eight are enumerated. You are the eighth of the Rudras and the fifth of the Sādhyas;-the Asvinis are your two ears and the sun and the moon are your eyes. 1. A demi-god-an inferior manifestation of Śiva: they are eleven in number. 2. An inferior deity or demi-god, one of a class of twelve. O slayer of enemies, you appear at the beginning and the end of the creation. Why did you neglect Vaidehī like an ordinary man? Being thus addressed by the deities presiding over quarters, Rāghava, the lord of people and the foremost of the pious, spoke to those leading celestials, saying. I know myself to be man-Rama, the son of Dasaratha. Let the great Patriarch tell me, who I am and whence I have come. Thereupon Brahmā, the foremost of those conversant with the knowledge of Brahmā, spoke to Kākutstha, who had spoken thus, saying, "Do you hear my true words, O you having truth for your prowess. O lord, you are the great and effulgent, Nārāyaṇa holding discus and mace; you are the boar having one tusk; you have conquered the past, present and future; you are undecaying and without end, O Rāghava; you are the great virtue of the pious-you are the propounder of all laws and are four-armed; you are the holder of bow of time-the subduer of senses-the excellent Puruşa (person), unconquerable by sins; you are Vişņu holding dagger, Krşna and of incomparable strength; you are the army, the minister-the universe-the understanding, forgiveness and control of passions; you are the creation and destruction; Upendra and the slayer of (demon) Madhu; you are the creator of Indra; you are Mahendra; you have a lotus-like navel and you are the slayer of enemies. The celestials and the great saints style you as the refuge of those who seek for shelter. You are the foremost of Vedas with its thousand branches and hundred regulations. You are yourself the creator of the three worlds, O lord. You are the refuge of the Siddhas' and Sadhyas, you Purvaja, ja, the sacrifice, Vasatkara, Om and Paratpara. No one is conversant with your birth and destruction-you are manifest in all creaturescows and Brahmins-an all quarters, in the sky, in the mountain, and in the river. You are gifted with thousand legs, thousand heads and thousand eyes. You did uphold all creatures, the earth and all the mountains. You appear like the great serpent in the water underneath the earth. O Rāma, you did uphold three creations-the celestials, the Gandharvas and the Dănvas. O Rāma I am your heart, the worshipful Sarasvati (Goddess of learning) is your tongue and all other celestials, O lord, created by Brahmă are your down. The closing of your eye is the night and the opening is the day. The Vedas are significant of your desire and the control thereof-none has got independent existence but you. The whole universe is your body, the earth is your patience, the fire is your anger-the sun and the moon are your delight; you have got Śrīvatsa (a peculiar curl of hair); you did before tread the three worlds with your three foot steps; you did get the dreadful Vālī bound and make Mahendra king: Sītā is Lakşmi and you are Krşņa and Vişnu the Preserver of people. For Rāvana's destruction you have assumed the human shape. You have accomplished that work of ours, O you the foremost of the pious. O Rāma, Răvaşa has been slain. Do you go up to heaven delighted. Sure is your godly energy and never goes for nothing your prowess. O Rāma, never is fruitless your view and the chanting of your glory. And always successful shall be these persons on earth who shall be devoted to you. Those who shall be devoted to you at one with Purana and the excellent Purasha, shall attain all their desires both in this worlds and the next. 1. A class of writings considered seared by the Hindus. 2. Great or supreme spirit-Purusa meaning that which abides or is quiescent in body. Those persons shall never be unsuccessful both in this world and the next who shall chant this theme-excellent, instinct with the knowledge of Brahmă and describing the old history.