Hearing the words uttered by Lakşmaņa, that slayer of hostile heroes-Raghava-endued with prowess, taking his bow, set shafts on it, and in the brunt of battle began to discharge dreadful arrows at Ravana. And mounted on another car, Rāvana-lord of Rakşasas-rushed against Käkutstha, even as Svarbhānu rush against the Sun. Even as a mass of clouds poured down torrents on a mighty mountain, the Ten-necked one, mounted on his car, smote Rāma with shafts resembling thunder-bolts. In the encounter Rāma, concentrating his thoughts, showered on the Ten-necked one arrows embellished with gold and looking like living fire. And celestials and Gandharvas and Kinnaras declared that there had been no other battle like to the encounter of Rāma stationed on the ground and the Rākṣasa mounted on his car. Then the foremost of celestials-ſakra-hearing their ambrosial speech, summoning Mätali, said. Taking my car, hie to the best of the Raghus. And reaching the earth do you welcoming (him) bring about great good to the gods. Thus accosted by the sovereign of the celestials, Matali-celestial charioteer bending down his head, addressed that celestial saying. Speedily shall I go o lord of the celestials; and I shall also do the office of a charioteer (to Raghava). Then yoking with steeds that best of cars, curiously wrought with gold; adorned with hundreds of small bells; resembling the Sun new risen; having its pole studded with lapises: yoked with excellent horses caparisoned in gold; furnished with white chowris, drawn by steeds resembling the Sun; decked with golden networks, and provided with a golden standardthe graceful car of the sovereign of the celestialsMātalī commanded by the king of the immortals, ascending the car went out of the celestial regions and came to Käkutstha. With his hand holding the reins, the charioteer car, of the thousand-eyed (Deity) with joined hands addressed Rāma: saying. O Kākutstha, in order that you may obtain the victory, the thousand-eyed (god) has sent you his car. O exceedingly powerful one! O graceful (hero)! O you that slays your foes! this is the redoubtable bow of Indra, and this is the mail resembling fire, and these are the arrows looking like the very Sun; and this is the dart shining and fraught with fair fortune. Ascend you this O hero Slay the RākşasaRāvaņa, with me as your charioteer, even as the lord of the celestials slay Dānavas. Thus addressed, Rāma, going round the car and saluting it, ascended the same, illumining the worlds with his splendour. The encounter that took place between the two cars with the mighty-armed Rāma (on one side) and the Rākşasa-Rāvana (on the other) was wonderful to behold. Rāghava highly proficient in weapons with a Gândharva weapon resisted the Gandharva weapons of the Rākşasa king and with a celestial weapon, his celestial weapon. Then that lord of Raksasas-the night-rangerfired with high rage, again discharged an exceedingly dreadful Rākṣasa, weapon. The gold-decked shafts shot from Ravana's bow, becoming furiously venomous serpents covered Kakutstha. And vomiting living flames they of terrific aspect, having flaming faces, showered over Rāma with gaping mouths. Those flaming venomous serpents having the feel of Vāsuki himself, covered all sides and enveloped all quarters. Seeing those serpents descending in the encounter, Rāma employed a dreadful Garuda weapon. Discharged from Rāghava's bow, those arrows plated with gold at the feathered parts and furnished with the splendour of peacocks, becoming golden birds-began to range (the field of battle) as the enemies of the serpents. The shafts of Rāma capable of wearing forms at will, turned into birds, destroyed all the exceedingly swift coursing arrows having the forms of serpents. On his weapon having been baffle, Ravanalord of Rākşasas waxing wroth poured tremendous showers of shafts on Räma. Smiting Rama of untiring deeds with thousands of shafts, (Ravana) pierced Matali with vollies of arrows. And with an arrow, Rāvana severed the standard; and having brought down the golden standard on the floor of the car, Rāvaņa wounded even Indra's steeds with a net-work of arrows. were Seeing Rāma hard pressed, celestials and Gandharvas and Carañas along with Dänavas, and Sidhas, and the supreme saints were overcome with sadness; and the foremost monkeys together with Vibhīşaņa aggrieved. Seeing a moon of Rāmacandra in the grasp of a Rāhu of Rāvana that bringer of evil to creatures-Buddha-stood, assailing the Prājāpatya star-Rohini-beloved of the Moon. The enraged Ocean, heaving with smoking surges and flaming as it were swelled up seeming to the touch the Sun. The Sun was blackened and assumed a stern aspect, with his rays dimmed. And he was seen with a head-less trunk on his lap and he was in conjunction with a comet. That star of the Kośalas, relating to the deities-Indra and Agni-Angaraka-stood in the sky, attacking Visakha. The Ten-necked one having ten faces and twenty arms, equipped with his bow, looked like the mountain-Mainaka. Rāma reduced to sore straits by the Tennecked Rākṣasa, could not discharge his arrows in the conflict. Then the enraged Rāma with his eyes slightly red flew into a tremendous passion as if burning up the Rākşasas. Seeing the face of the enraged Rāma endued with under standing all the creatures were overwhelmed with fear and the Earth herself shook. And mountains abounding with lions and tigers began to tremble, and trees to shiver. And even the deep-lord of streams-was wrought up wondrously. And rough and terrific clouds in the sky sent forth fierce roars. And stormy clouds rumbling went about the heavens. Seeing Rāma wrought up with a mighty passion, and the fearful disastrous omens, all creatures were possessed by fright and Rāvana was stuck with dismay. Then stationed in the sky celestials and Gandharvas and mighty serpents and saints and Dānavas and Daityas and those related to Garuda-fowls-beheld that conflict like to the universal tumbling as the two heroes faught on with various dire arms. As they looked on the mighty encounter, the celestials and the Asuras, who had come to the conflict, from feeling of regard,* Cheerfully spoke (these words). *i.e. each party out of regard for the warrior to whom it wished well. The Asuras staying there said to the Tennecked one, Be victorious and the celestials again and again said to Rāma, 'Be victorious'! In the meantime, the impious Rāvaņa, desirous of slaying Rāghava, from wrath took up a mighty weapon, fraught with the essence of the thunder bolt; sending terrible sounds; capable of destroying all foes-furnished with forks resembling mountain-peaks; tending to strike terror to mind and sight; sharp-pointed resembling the smoking fire rise at the hour of universal dissolution; exceedingly terrible; irresistible (in battle); unbearable even by the Destroyer-the terror of all creatures-terrific; and competent to rive (all things). Flaming up with wrath, Ravana took this dart. And fired with furious wrath, that powerful one took the dart in the encounter, surrounded in that contest by many heroic Rākşasas. And uplifting (the dart), the huge-bodied Ravana, with his eyes reddened in passion, emitted mighty roars. And the shouts ofd the Rākşasa sovereign made the earth and the sky and the cardinal quarters and all sides tremble. And at the roars of that wicked-minded and huge-bodied one, all creatures were struck with terror, and the sea was vexed.* *The still-vexed Bermoothes.'-Tempest. The exceedingly energetic Rävaņa, taking that mighty dart, and sending up furious shouts, addressed Rāma in a harsh speech, saying. O Rāma, I in wrath uplift this dart having the strength of the levin. This will utterly deprive of life you who are assisted by your brother. O you, that delight in battle, today swiftly slaying you, I shall make you even with those heroic Rākşasa slain in the van of the forces. Stay now, O Raghava, you shall I slay with this dart. Saying this, the lord of the Rākşasas hurled the dart. And discharged from Ravana's hand, (the dart), surrounded with garlands of lighting furnished with eight bells, sending mighty roars, rising to the sky, looked exceedingly splendid. Seeing the dart, flaming and of terrific aspect, Raghu's son-Rāma-endowed with prowess, drawing his bow, discharged arrows. And with vollies of shafts Räghava resisted the descending (dart), even as Vāsava extinguish the fire of doomsday with his showers. Then even as a flame consume insects, the mighty dart of Rāvana burnt up those shafts shot from the bow of Råma. Seeing those shafts reduced to ashes and crushed on coming in contact with the dart, as they were coursing in the sky, Rāghava was transported with passion. Then waxing wondrous wroth, Raghu's sonRāghava-took up a javelin, liked by Vāsava himself, brought by Matali. On being wielded by that strong one, the javelin, resonant with bells, made the welkin blaze up, like a burning meteor on the occasion of universal rack. And when hurled, it alighted on that same dart of the Raksasa chief. And thereat, with its splendour lost, the mighty dart, riven, dropped (to the earth.) Then Rama, shooting straight-speeding arrows, pierced his (Ravana's) exceedingly fleet steeds. Then he pierced Rāvana in the chest with whetted arrows. And the energetic Rāghava hit (Rāvaņa) in the temples with three feathered shafts. Thereat with all his limbs pierced (with arrows), and his body laved in blood, the lord of Räkşasas furnished with many limbs, looked like a flowering Asoka. With his person pierced with the shafts of Rāma, the lord of night-rangers having his body drenched with blood, was stricken with sadness in the midst of his forces, and was also overwhelmed with terrific wrath.