Thereupon beholding Ayodhyā, Råma, the descendant of Raghu, of light movements and desirous of affording delight to others, thought of welcoming (them). Thinking thus the intelligent and effulgent (Rāma) cast his looks towards the monkeys and spoke to Hanumān, saying. O foremost of monkeys, speedily repairing to Ayodhyā do you learn of the welfare of all people in the palace of the king. Arriving at the city of Śộngavera, do you communicate to Guha, the king of Nişādas* having the forest as his kingdom, my well-being, at my command. *A low cast aboriginal Hindu corresponding to our Cāņdālas always living in the forest. The Raja of Ramnud in the district of Madura in Madras traces his descent from this Guha. Hearing that I am hale and hearty and relieved of all troubles, Guha, my friend like my own self, shall attain to delight. Guha, the lord of Nişādhas, delighted, shall inform you of the way to Ayodhyā and the well being of Bharata. Do you ask of Bharata his well being at my words, and communicate to him my (arrival) with Lakşmaņa and my spouse after having made good the vow(of my sire)-the carrying away of Sītā by the powerful Rāvana-the friendship with Sugrīva and the destruction of Vāli in the conflict-the search of Maithili instituted by you having got over the huge lord of rivers-the advance (of the monkeys) to the banks of the deep-the view of the ocean, the construction of the bridge-the destruction of Rāvaņa, the grant of boon by Mahendra, Brahmā and Varuņa-my meeting with my father by the favour of Mahādeva. Do you, O gentle one, communicate to Bharata, my arrival here with the lord of Räks and king of monkeys. (Tell him) ‘vanquishing his foes and attaining to excellent fame Rāma has arrived at the gate of the city with his valiant friends, having satisfied the vow (of his sire). You should read the signs expressive of joy or asas sorrow that Bharata shall display on hearing this and infer therefrom his attitude towards me. You should know, from the colour of his countenance, his looks and his words, all the movements and actions of Bharata. Whose mind does not change obtaining such an ancestral kingdom, filled with all prosperity and abounding in elephants, horses and chariots? If the effulgent Bharata, the descendant of Raghu, ruling over it, wish the kingdom for himself, let him lord over the entire earth. Therefore, O monkey, it behove you to come back speedily apprised of his intention and movements, before we proceed further. Being thus commanded, Hanumān, the son of Wind-god, assuming a human shape speedily proceeded towards Ayodhyā. Hanumān the son of Maruta rose up in the welkin with velocity like to Garuņa ready to fall upon a huge serpent. Then crossing the Wind-path and the abode of the birds, getting over the terrible confluence of the Ganges and Yamunā, reaching the city of Śțrgavera and meeting Guha, the energetic Hanumān, delighted (addressed him) with the following excellent words. Your friend Rāma, the descendant of Kākutstha, having truth for his prowess, with Sītā and son of Sumitrā, has enquired of your welfare. Having spent five nights* till today, he, having obtained permission from the ascetic Bharadvāja, shall proceed to-morrow. *Having spent five nights after the expire of fourteen years old exile be is living at the hermitage of Varadwaja. He shall leave that place tomorrow. Having said this the highly energetic monkey, not caring for the exhaustion of travel, greatly delighted and with hairs erect, rose up with great velocity. Beholding the holy river sanctified with the name of Parasurama, the rivers-Balukini, Varuthi, Gomati, the huge forest of Sala trees, the various countries populated with thousands of people, and proceeding a great distance speedily, that foremost of monkeys got at the trees near Nandigrāma* like to those of Caitraratha, the garden of the lord of celestials the flowers whereof were being plucked off by many a damsel accompanied by their children decked in various ornaments. He saw at a distance of one crosa from Ayodhyā Bharata wearing the skin of an antelope, poorly, greatly reduced, living in a hermitage, wearing matted hairs, having his body covered with dirt, greatly pulled down in consequence of his brother's disaster, living on roots and fruits, self-controlled, living the life of an ascetic, observing pious observances, with a bundle of clotted hairs on his head, wearing bark and deer skin, having control over his passions and senses, effulgent like Brahmarşis, ruling the earth always placing the sandals before him, protecting people of four Varnas against all fear, with courtiers, priests leading a holy life and soldiers all wearing red clothes around him. *The country of Bharata's maternal uncle. All those citizens, fond of piety, did not like to use good clothes beholding the prince use bark and deer skin. Thereupon Hanumān, the son of Māruta spoke with folded hands to him, conversant with piety like virtue incarnate, saying. (He was then sprinkled by) the Rittigas, Brāhmaṇas, maidens enquired after your welfare. Do you, O worshipful sire speak out your welfare and renounce the dreadful grief. You shall in this moment be reconciled to your brother Rāma. Slaying Ravana, and regaining Maithili, Rāma, having accomplished his end, has arrived here with his valiant friends. The highly effulgent Lakşmaņa and the famed Vaidehi (have also come). Sītā fare well with Rāma like to Sacī in the company of Mahendra. Being thus addressed by Hanumān, Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, delighted, fell down all on a sudden in a swoon of joy. Thereupon rising up in no time, and welcoming him, Bharata, the descendant of Raghu, spoke to Hanuman communicating the pleasant tidings, the following words. And embracing the monkey respectfully the graceful Bharata sprinkled him with profuse tears not out of grief but of joy. He said, Are you a man or god who have kindly come here? O gentle one, I shall confer upon you, who have communicated to me this pleasant tidings, hundreds and thousands of kine, hundreds of prosperous villages, sixteen young wives, pious, wearing excellent Kundalas, golden-hued, having beautiful noses and breast, having mor i like countenances, decked with all ornaments and born of respectable families. And hearing from that leading monkey of that wonderful return of Rāma, the son of the king, delighted became anxious to behold him and again addressed joyously Hanuman with the following words.