The foremost of the wives of the Rākşasas (king) bewailing piteously cast her looks poorly towards her husband. And beholding her Tennecked husband slain by Rāma of Inconceivable actions Mandodarī bewailed there piteously. O you of huge arms! O younger brother of Baishravana! Even Purandara feared to stand before you when enraged. The great Rşis-the far-famed Gandharvas and the charanas, fled away to different quarters in your fear. Then (how) have you been overpowered in battle by Rāma who is a mere man? Why is it that you are not ashamed of it, О king, O lord of the Raksasas? Conquering the three worlds with your prowess you did attain your glory; and it is unbearable, that a man, ranging in the forest, has slain you. You who are capable of assuming shapes at will have been slain in conflict by Rāma, in the city of Lankā unapproachable by men. I do not believe that your destruction, who had always been crowned with success, before the forces, is work of Rāma. (Methinks) Death (himself) came there in the shape of Rāma and spread illusions unconsciously for your destruction, O you of great strength. Or you have been slain by Väsava (no) what power has he got to face you in the conflict gifted with great strength, prowess and energy and an enemy of the celestials as you are? It is evident that the great ascetic Vişnu having truth for his prowess-the soul of all beings ever existing, without beginning, middle or end, greater than the great, the Preserver of the Nature, holding conch discus and club having Śrīvatsa* on his breast, always beautiful, incapable of being conquered, without destruction, devoid of end, and the lord of all men, assuming this shape of a man and encircled by the celestials, assuming monkey shapes, has for the behoof of mankind, slain (you) the dreadful enemy of the gods with all (your) family and Rākşasas. *A particular mark usually said to be a curl of hair on the breast of Vişnu. The emblem of the tenth jina or the mark above ascribed to Vişņu or Kṛṣṇa. Subduing all your passions, you did conquer the three worlds-remembering their grudge they have now over powered you. Rāma is not a man since he slew at Janasthāna your brother Khara encircied by many a Rāks asas. We were sore-distressed when Hanuman, by his own prowess, entered the city of Lanka incapable of being approached even by the celestials. I prevented you from creating enmity with Rāghava but you did not pay heed to my words and this is the result (thereof). O foremost of Rākşasas-0 you of a vicious understanding, for the destruction of your wealth yourself and your relatives, you did suddenly cherish amour for Sitā, greater than-Yeven) Arundhati and Rohiņi. Forsooth you did perpetrated an unbecoming deed by distressing the adorable Sitā ever devoted to her lord, an earth* even to Earth herself and a Śrī (Śrt is the goddess of wealth and good fortune-but Sitā is more fortunate than fortune herself-) even to Śrī herself. *The Earth is an emblem of patience but Sítā is more patient than the earth. Having brought in a false guise from the solitary forest the sorrowful and chaste Sītā, having a blameless person, you did bring on the destruction of your family. You did fail to encompass your desire for the company of Sītā. But now, forsooth, O my lord you have been burnt down by her devotion who is devoted to her husband. *i.e. that you were not burnt down there and then shows her greatness of mind. You were not burnt down when you did captivate that middle-statured (damsel) whom fear all the celestial headed by Indra and Agni. (The god of Fire). O husband, (proper) time appearing the perpetrator gets the result of his vicious deeds: there is not the least doubt in this. The performer of the good receives good (result)-the perpetrator of the vicious (deeds) meets with bad (result). Vibhisana has attained to happiness and you have met with this your end. There are damsels in your sergalio far more beautiful than she but you possessed by cupid could not perceive this. Maithili is not my equal nor superior either in birth, beauty or accomplishments, but you did not perceive this by your misgivings. Death does not always visit all men without any cause-and Maithili is the cause of the death. And death, in consequence of Maithili, has taken you far away. And she, shorn of all sorrow, shall enjoy in the company of Rāma, and I, of limited piety, am now sunk in the ocean of grief. Roaming at large with you in a car unequalled in beauty on the hill Kailāsa Mandara, Meru, in the garden of Caitraratha and all other celestial gardens, beholding many a country, wearing variegated clothes and garlands, I have been deprived of all pleasures and enjoyments, O hero, by your death. I am a widow now O fie on fickle fortune! O king, in lustre of countenance you are like the Syn, in grace like the Moon in beauty like the lotus; you are graceful, O you having excellent brows; you have got excellent skin, high nose and your countenance is graced with a brilliant crown and Kundalas. Oh how beautiful you did look with various garlands when your eye whirled with intoxication on the drinking ground and how beautiful were your smiles, O lord. Your countenance does not shine now-being severed with Rāma's shafts, bathed in a pool of blood, having your back-bone and brain deranged and covered with the dust raised by the wheels of the chariots. Alas! by my ill-luck I have attained to that after state making me a widow which I did never think of. My father is the king of Dănvas, my husband the lord of Rākşasas, and my son the subduer of Śakra. I was greatly proud of this and always confident that my protectors were undaunted dreadful, repressors of the enemies and famous for their strength and manliness. O you foremost of the Rākşasas, how could this fear from man overwhelm you all who were so powerful. (This your body) is cool green like Indranila, high like a huge mountain, and adorned with Keyūra, Angada, jewels and garlands of flowers. It was graceful in places of enjoyments and incapable of being looked at in the field of battle. It was brilliant, being decked with ornaments like to clouds accompanied by lightnings. This your person has been pierced with shafts today; (and knowing) that it is not easy of attainment for me I am incapable of embracing (it) covered with shafts piercing through the very vitals. O king (this your body) green-hued (but now) blood-red is now lying on the ground like to a mountain shattered with thunder-bolts. That you wouldst be slain by Rāma was like a dream, but it has proved true! You were like death to Death himself, why have you been possessed by him then? You were the enjoyer of the three worlds wealth and dread to them; you were the conqueror of the deities presiding over various quarters; you did shake Saikara (himself) you were the subdure of the proud and your prowess was well-known you did repress the people and slay many a pious man-you did, by your prowess, use to give vent to haughty words before the enemies; you were the maintainer of your kinsmen and servants and the slayer of many perpetrating dreadful deeds; you were the destroyer of thousands of celestials, Dänavas and Yakşas; you were the subbuer of Niváta Kavachas in the encounter, your did hinder the perfrrmance oí many sacrifices and were the protector of your relatives; you were the obstructer of pious observance creator of illusions in conflict and you did bring away from hither and thither the daughters of the celestials, demons and men; you did aggrieve the wives of your enemies; you were the leader of your own men the protector of the island of Lanka and the performer of many a dreadful deed; you did confer upon us the enjoyment of many a pleasure-and were the foremost of car-warriors Beholding such a husband slain by Rāma, I am, deprived of my dear lord still maintaining my being; (forsooth) my heart is very hard. O lord of Raksasas, used are to many a valuable bed, why are you sleeping on earth covered with dust? When my son Indrajit was slain by Lakşmaņa in conflict I was greatly pained-but today I am slain. Deprived of my friends and relatives, separated from you O my lord, deprived from the enjoyment of many pleasures I shall lament for you perpetually. You have, O king. reached the way long and hard to be treaded-do you take me. who am stricken with grief and who shall not be able to live without you. Why did you wish to go leaving me behind who have been rendered poorly? Why did you not welcome me, unfortunate and poor, who am bewailing? Why are you not angry, O lord beholding me, having put off my veil, walk out on foot by the city-gate. O beloved of your wives do you behold your wives-who have thrown off their veils. Why are you not angry seeing them all come out (of the city)? I was your companion in sports, O my lord; I long for having you; why are you not consoling and welcoming me? O king, being imprecated by those damsels, not one devoted to their husbands, pious and ever engaged in attending upon their superiors, who had been widowed by you, you have been overpowered by your enemy. The curse, proceeding from them who had been ill-treated by you has born fruit. O kin, the saying, that the tears of chaste damsels do not uselessly fall on the ground, has been verified (here) forsooth. O king, conquering the worlds with your prowess, how could you, always honoured by the king, cherish the vile desire of stealing away women? Taking away Răma and Lakşmaņa from the hermitage by an illusionary dear you did steal away Rāma's spouse. I remember to have never heard you lament in battle. Forsooth, it is our misfortune and the sign of impending death (that you did of this) conversant as you are with the past present and future. Beholding the daughter of the king of Mithila brought (in the city of Lanka) what, your younger brother Vibhīşaņa, thinking and sighing, said has now proved true, O you of long-arms. This destruction of the leading Rākṣasas has proceeded from the disaster arising from your anger and lust. For your (vicious) deeds all our good fortune is lost-(and from them) has proceeded the great disaster exterminating the race. And by you all the Raksasa families have been deprived of their lords. You well-known for your strength and manliness, are not worthy of being grieved by me. On account of my effeminate nature my understanding is possessed by sorrow. Carrying your pious and iniquitous deeds you have attained to your own state-I am only lamenting for me who have been sorry for your destruction. O Ten-necked one, you did not hear the words of your friends and brothers, who spoke those well meaning words out of affection. You did not obey the words uttered by Vibhisana, duly and mildly, pregnant with meaning and reasoning and tending to your welfare. Maddened with your own prowess you did not hear the word of Mārīca, Kumbhakarņa as well as those of my father-and this is the result thereof. O you resembling the red clouds O you wearing yellow cloth and excellent Angada, stretching your person on the ground why are you in the long run bathed in blood? Why did you not like one asleep welcome me who am stricken with grief? I am the grand-daughter of the highly powerful Rākşasa Sumālī who never flies away from the field of battle; why did you not welcome me. Rise up! rise up! why did you lie down (on this occasion of) new discomfiture? Today have the rays of the Sun entered fearlessly the city of Lanka. The parigha, by which, brilliant as the rays of the Sun, you did distress the enemies in conflict which was always adored by you like the thunder of the wielder of thunder-bolt, which slew many in battle, and which was adorned with golden nets now Leith shattered into thousand pieces by arrows. Why did you lie on the battle-field embracing her like your beloved spouse? Why did you not wish tr welcome me like one not beloved to you? Ok fie on this heart of mine which is not sundered into thousand (pieces) albeit distressed with the grief of your death! Bewailing thus, she with profuse tears in her eyes and with her heart overflowing with affection became senseless. And being beside herself she flung herself on Ravana's breast, like to the bright lighting appearing on red evening clouds. Thereupon the other wives of Rāvaņa greatly distressed and weeping and rasing her up who was greatly weeping, began to console her saying. You not know, O worshipful dame, that the life of beings is very uncertain, and with adverse circumstance even the royal fortune become fickle? Being thus accosted she again wept aloud bathing with tears her breast and beautiful countenance. In the meantime Rama said to Vibhrsana, “Do you perform the funeral ceremonies of your brother and console his wives." Where to the intelligent Vibhīşaņa replied with the following words-pointing out wealth and Piety, and judging by his understanding what is proper. "I do not think it proper to perform his cremation ceremony who had renounced all pious deeds was wicked cruel, liar and who had ravished others' wives. He is my enemy in the shape of a brother ever engaged in doing injury to others and Rāvana is not worthy of my adoration albeit he is adorable by virtue of his being my elder brother. O Rāma, perhaps people of this earth will call me cruel but they will again recognise my act as good when they will hear of his vicious deeds. Hearing those words, Rāma, the foremost of the pious and conversant with the skill of speech greatly delighted, spoke to Vibhisana (equally) skilled in speech. It behove me to encompass your welfare since by your help I have gained the victory. I lord of Räkșasas, forsooth, you should hear my wellmeaning words. Although this night-ranger perpetrated many vicious and impious deeds still he was ever powerful, heroic and strong in warfare. I have heard that this high-souled Ravana, gifted with strength and a dread to all people was not defeated (even) by the celestials headed by the performer of hundred sacrifices. Enmity extend up to death-so it has ended; there is no necessity (of carrying it on). Do you (therefore) perform his cremation ceremony-he is to you as he is to me. O you of long-arms it behove the to perform speedily with due rites and religious ceremonies his funeral ceremony-you shall be the object of praise (to people). Hearing the words of Rāghava, Vibhīşaņa hastened on and began to make arrangements for the cremation of his slain brother Råvana. Then entering the city of Lanka, Vibhisana, the lord of Raksasas, speedily got out Ravana's Agnihotra,' carts, brass utensils fire (and brought) Yājakas? sandal-wood, other woods expenses, Agura other fragrant substances, precious stones, pearls and corals. 1. A pot for preserving sacred fire. 2. The Brahmins who perform obsequies. Thereupon arriving immediately accompanied by Rākșasas and Mālyavān he engaged in the performance of cremation ceremony. Thereupon the twice-born ones, with tears in their eyes, covered the Rākşasa-king Rāvana's body, with a silken cloth and placed it on a golden celestial litter. With the sound of various bugles they began to chaunt his praise. And taking up this litter adorned with various charming paintings and flags and carrying fire woods, all the Räksasas headed by Vibhīşaņa proceeded towards the south.* *Cremation-place. The Brahmins, versed in Yajur Veda and with burning fire in their hands, proceeded and were followed by the attendants. The damsels of the seraglio followed speedily leaping (being ever unused to walking). And placing Rāvana on the cremation ground, they, greatly stricken with grief, prepared the funeral pyre according to due rites with sandalwoods, Padmakas, Uśiras? and sandal and spread an antelope skin thereon. They (then) performed the excellent obsequies of the manes of the lord of Rākşasas. 1. A sort of drug commonly called Padmakas. 2. The root of fragrant grass. And raising an altar at the south-east corner they placed fire at the proper place. They then poured curd and clarified butter upon Rāvana's) shoulders. And placing Sakata on his legs, Ulukhala* on his things, and the brass utensils, Arunis and Musals in their proper places, they celebrated (the obsequies of his manes). *A wooden mortar used for cleaning rice. Thereupon slaying beasts according to the rites laid down in Sastras and pointed out by the great saints, the Rākşasas (made a coverlet dipped in their marrow and clarified butter) And placed it on the face of the lord of Räkşasas. And decking Rāvana with fragrant garlands and various clothes, the friends, of Vibhisana, with depressed heart and tears in their eyes, showered dried paddy (on his person). Vibhīşaņa according to due rites put fire to his (funeral pyre). Bathing and with wetted cloth, offering duly linseed and sacrificial grass mixed with water and consoling (Ravana's) wives again and again, he entreated them to go back. They then entered the city. And those damsels having entered the city, Vibhisana, the lord of Rākşasas, approaching Rāma, stood by his side gently. Rāma too, along with his army, Sugrīva and Lakşmana, was greatly delighted after slaying (the demon) Vitra. Thereupon leaving aside his bow with arrows, and the huge armour conferred by Mahendra and renouncing ire after the destruction of his enemy Räma assumed gentlemen.