Beholding the destruction of Rāvaņa the celestials, Gandharvas and Dänavas ascending their respective cars went away chanting this excellent theme. Talking of Rāvana's dreadful destruction, Raghava's prowess, the excellent warfare of the monkeys, the counsels of Sugrīva, the devotion and prowess of the Wind-God's son and Lakşmaņa and Sītā's devotion to her husband, those high souled ones, delighted, repaired to their respective quarters. Rāghava, having long arms, permitting the charioteer Mātali to take back the celestial car bright as the sky sent by Indra, honoured him greatly. And being commanded by Rāghava Mātali, the charioteer of Sakra taking the celestial car, rose up in the welkin. That charioteer rising up into the celestial region, Rāghava, the foremost of car-warriors, greatly delighted, embraced Sugrīva. Embracing Sugrīva, bowed to by Lakşmaņa and worshipped by the monkey he repaired to the camp of his soldiers. Thereupon Kakuthsha spoke to Lakşmaņa-the son of Sumitrā gifted with auspicious marks who was near him, "O gentle one, take this Vibhīşaņa to the city of Lankä ever devoted and attached to us, and who had done us good. This is my great desire that I may behold Vibhīşaņa the younger brother of Rāvana installed on the throne of Lankā. Being thus addressed by the high-souled Raghava, the son of Sumitra, saying, “So be it" and greatly delighted, brought a golden jar. And placing that jar at the hands of the lord of monkeys, that one, gifted with great energy, ordered them to bring water from the Ocean. And repairing speedily those excellent monkeys came back with water from the ocean. Taking that jar and placing him on an excellent seat Saumitri with that water sprinkled Vibhīşaņa as king of Lankā in the presence of all the Raksasas, at Rama' command. And (Laks maņa) encircled by friends sprinkling him according to rites laid down in the Vedas, all the Rākşasas, devoted to him, his counsellors and the monkeys attaining incomparable delight, sang the glory of Rāma. Beholding Vibhīşaņa the lord of Rākşasas installed in the city of Lankä, Räghava along with Lakşmaņa attained to an excess of delight. And consoling his subjects he went to Rāma. And the monkey citizens, delighted, brought him curd, fried grain, sweetmeats, fried paddy and flowers. Taking all those things indicating auspiciousness, he, irrepressible and gifted with energy, conferred them upon Råghava and Lakşmaņa. Beholding Vibhīşaņa crowned with prosperity and success, Rāma accepted them all for his satisfaction. Thereupon Rāma spoke to the heroic monkey Hanumān, resembling a mountain and standing before him humbly with folded hands saying. O gentle on obtaining permission from the king Bibhshana, do you enter the city of Lankā and enquire after Maithili's welfare. Do you, O foremost of monkeys, inform Vaidehr of the destruction of Rāvana in conflict after communicating to her mine health as well as that of Lakşmaņa and Sugrīva. O lord of monkeys, it behove you to return with the tidings of Vaidehi after informing her of this pleasant news.