Rāma having spent that night happily and risen up the next morning, Vibhisana, chanting his victory, spoke to that slayer of foes, with folded hands, saying. Here are various articles for bathing, pastes, clothes, ornaments, sandal and various excellent garlands. Here are present women having eyes like lotuses and conversant with the are of decking, Let them perform their duty, O Rāghava. Being thus accosted Kākutstha replied to Vibhīşaņa, saying: Do you invite all these monkeys headed by Sugrīva to bath. The virtuous-souled Bharata, having huge arms and ever used to comforts, is greatly distressed on my account. Without Bharata the son of Kaikeyi, ever performing pious rites, I do not value bathing or these clothes and ornaments. Do you so manage that we may go to the city of Ayodhyă speedity. For difficult is the way leading to Ayodhyā. Being thus accosted Vibhīşaņa relied to Kākutstha, O son of the lord of earth, may good betide you, I shall soon take you to that city. The car Pușpaka resembling the Sun, belonging to my brother Kuvera, was brought by the powerful Răvaņa. you of unequalled prowess, that celestial and excellent car, going everywhere at will, since the destruction of Rāvana in battle, is ready for you. That car resembling the cloud is in the city of Lanka, in which you shaft, relieved of your anxiety, repair to Ayodhyā. If I am worthy of being favoured by you, if remember any accomplishment of mineif you have any friendship for me, do you, o wise one, wait here with your brother Lakşmaņa and spouse Vaidehi till I accomplish all my desires by worshipping you. And then you shall go (to Ayodhyā). O Rāma, I shall worship you with great delight and do your, O Rama, with your friends and army, accept that adoration. did you O Rāma, out of love, honour, and brotherly feeling, I do crave your premising. I am a servant I cannot command you. Being thus addressed, Rāma replied to Vibhīşaņa in the presence of all the Rākşasas and monkeys, saying. I have been worshipped by you, O hero, with your excellent counsels, with your earnest endeavours and with your great friendship. Do not think,O lord of Raksasas, that I do not comply with your request-my heart hastens me to behold my brother Bharata, who, to take me back, did come to the mount Citrakūța, who laid low his crown at my feet and whose words I did not keep. (I am anxious to see) Kausalyā, Sumitrā, Kaikeyi, with my friends, citizens and villagers. Do you regard me, O Vibhīşaņa, O gentle one, as worshipped. O friend do you be not angry-I request you. Do you speedily bring the car for me, O lord of Räkşasas my work is done-how can I wish to live here long. Being thus addressed by Rāma, Vibhīşaņa the lord of Rākşasas, speedily brought the car resembling the Sun. Thereupon arrived there the car adorned all over with gold paintings, altars crested with Vaidurya jewels having upper rooms, silvered all over, adorned with white flags and flag-staffs, beautified with gilt lotuses, adorned with golden houses, covered with a network of girdles, having windows made of pearls and jems, girt on all sides with a net of bells, giving forth melodious sound, resembling the summit of the mount Meru, constructed by Viśvakarmā (the architect of the celestials) adorned with huge apartments beautified with silver and pearlshaving its base created with crystal, containing excellent seats made of Vaidūrya, abounding in valuable coverlets and immense wealth, incapable of being broken down and coursing at will. And communicating to Rāma (the arrival of that car) Vibhīşana waited there. Beholding that flowery car, coursing at will and resembling a huge mountain, Rama, of a generous spirit, along with Saumitri, attained to an excess of astonishment.