On that weapon of his hvaing been baffled, Rāvaņa lord of the Rākṣasas-was fired with double fury, and the highly effuigent Rāvaņa from wrath set about discharging at Rāghava a dreadful Rudra weapon, which had been। conferred on him by Maya. And from his bow began to issue forth in large numbers darts and maces and clubs, flaming and having the might of thunder; and various kinds of sharp clubs and diggers and nooses and flaming thunderbolts began to i descend like to the winds at the universal tumbling. Thereupon the graceful and exceedingly effulgent Rāghava-foremost of those accomplished in noble arms-resisted that weapon with a powerful Gandharva weapon. On that weapon being baffled by the highsouled Raghava, Rävaņa, with his eyes rendered coppery with passion took up a Solar weapon. Thereupon from the bow of the wondrous vehement and intelligent Ten-necked one rushed out discuses flaming and mighty. The firmament all round blazed up with those impendent (arms) as blaze up the cardinal quarters on the Sun and the Moon and the planets dropping down. Thereat Rāghava in the van of that army by means of vollies of shafts cut off Rāvana's wonderful weapons and discuses. Seeing that weapon destroyed, Ravana-lord of Rakşasas-with ten arrows pierced Rāma all through his vitals. And pierced by Rāyaṇa with those ten shafts discharged from his mighty bow the exceedingly powerful Rāghava did not so much shake. Then Rāghava-victor fight-waxing wondrous wroth, with countless shafts pierced Ravaņa all over his person. In the meanwhile Raghava's younger brother, the mighty Lakşmaņa-destroyer of foes-growing enraged, took up seven arrows. With those highly impetuous arrows that exceedingly effulgent one severed the humanheaded standard of Råvaņa. The mighty and graceful Lakşmaņa with a shafts cut off the head of the Nairta's charioteer, illumined with ear-rings. Then with five sharpened arrows Lakşmaņa severed the bow the bow of the Räkşasa-chief, resembling the trunk of an elephant. Vibhīşaņa, bounding up, with his mace despatched Ravana's excellent steeds, resembling hills or dark-blue clouds. Thereat leaping down from his mighty car, whose horses had been slain, Råvana was fired with high wrath against his brother. The powerful lord of Raksasas endowed with immense strength, hurled at Vibhīşaņa a dart resembling the flaming thunder-bolt. Ere the dart had reached its destination, Laks mana severed it with three shafts; and thereat in that mighty conflict there arose a mighty uproar from the monkeys. The dart dight with networks of gold fell down in three fragments, as dropped a mighty meteor from the firmament, flaming and shooting out scintillations. Then (Ravana) took up a huge dart, glowing in its own energy, celebrated as being irresistible, and incapable of being borne by the Destroyer himself. On being whirled by the impious and strong Rāvana, the dart possessed of exceeding energy, flamed up In the mean while the heroic Lakşmaņa swiftly come to the side of Vibhīsaņa, * whose life was placed in peril. And in order to save him that hero-Lakşmaņa drawing his bow, covered the dart, handed Rāvana with showers of shafts. On being covered with arrows shot by that high souled one, Rāvaņa with his prowess baffled, make up his mind to let (his brother) go. *The commentator explains; Himself coming before the dart Lakşmaņa saved Vibhîşaņa. Seeing his brother delivered by Lakşmana, Ravana, facing Laksmana spoke these words. O you proud of your prowess! as Vibhīşana has this wise been delivered by you, passing by the Raksasa, this dart, discharged from my bludgeon of an arms, will depart depriving you of your life. Having said this, Rāvana waxing furiously enraged, discharged at Laksmana that dart forged by Maya with his power of illusion, furnished with eight bells, having might sounds,t Incapable of being resisted, competent to finish foes: and flaming in energy-and shouted simultaneously. And hurled with terrific force the dart sending sounds resembling that of Vajra of the thunder-bolt, vehemently alighted at Lakş maņa in that encounter. Thereat as the dart descended, Raghava addressed it, saying-peace be to Laksmana! Be you frustrated; and let your energy go out of you. *i.e. as Rāmānuja remarks, addressed the deity presiding over it. But the dart discharged in the encounter by the enraged Rāvana, resembling a venomous serpent, dived into the dauntless and heroic Laks maņa; and (the dart) exceedingly splendid and blazing, possessed of dreadful impetuosity and resembling the tongue of the king of serpents, smote Lakşmaņa in his mighty chest. And with his breast riven by the dart driving deep through the force of Rāvana, Lakşmaņa fell down to the earth. Rāghava, standing by seeing Lakşmaņa in that plight, had his heart overspread with sorrow. But reflecting only for a while, he with his eyes surcharged with tears was filled with greater martial ardour, and resembled the fire risen at the universal dissolution. Then thinking. This is not the time to indulge in grief he, gazing at Lakşmaņa, entered into a terrific encounter resolved upon slaying Rāvaņa, laying under contribution his dearest energies. Rāma saw Lakşmaņa with his chest riven by the dart in the mighty conflict lying drenched in blood, and resembling a hill with serpents present in it. In spite of all their efforts, the foremost monkeys failed to extract the dart which had been hurled by the powerful Rāvaņa. And further, they were (all the white) sore assailed with showers of shafts by the foremost Rākṣasa of them all. The dart having pierced Sumitra's son, had entered the earth. In the encounter the mighty Rāma grasping the dreadful dart with his hands, extracted the same the wrathfully snapped it* *The commentator has a characteristic note. This dart, having pierced the foe, used always to return to Ravana. But Rama, whose was the Lord himself, having spoken to it as he did, it could not this time go back; and Rāma snapped it, which none else could do. As he (Rāma) was engaged in pulling the dart out, the mighty Ravana kept pouring marrowpiercing shafts all over his person. Thinking nothing of those arrows. Rāma embracing Lakşmaņa, spoke to Hanuman and the mighty monkey, Sugriva. You foremost of monkeys do you stay here surrounding Lakṣmaṇa. The opportunity for putting forth my prowess which I had sought, is present. I shall slay this wicked minded Ten-necked one, who is resolved to pursue the course of unrighteousness. Even as on the expire of summer the Cătaka is eager for the sight of clouds, I had long been eager to obtain a sight of (Ravana). You monkeys, this I swear to you-this very hour not long after you will see this world without Rāvaņa or Rāma. To-day having slain Rāvaņa in battle, I shall renounce all sorrow arising from the loss of my kingdom, from my sojourn in the woods, from my wandering in Daņdaka, from the ravishment of Vaidehi, from encounter with the Raksasa, all the terrible evils that I have suffered and all the troubles resembling hell. He for whom I have brought over the monkey-forces, made Sugriva king, slaying Vali in battle, for whom I have crossed the ocean and constructed a bridge over the deep-the same has been come at by me in conflict, and the same has come within the range of my vision. Having come within my ken, Răvaņa will not live, even as one coming within ken of a serpent of poisonous sight, does not live; or even as a serpent does not live, coming within ken of Vinatās son. *Garuda. Do you, you irrepressible ones, you foremost of monkeys, seated at the brow of the mountain, behold the battle between me and Rāvaņa. Today let the three worlds with the Gandharvas, and the Siddhas, and the Caranas, see that for which Rāma is Rāma. Today I shall do a deed of which the worlds with the mobile and the immobile and the gods, shall speak as long as the Earth sustain (creatures.) Having delivered himself thus, Rama, concentrating his attention, began to charge the Ten-necked one in encounter with whetted arrows decked with burnished gold. In the same way Rāvana showered on Rama great Nárācas and clubs, even as clouds pour down showers. There arose a tremendous uproar of mighty arrows discharged by Rama and Ravana, smiting one another. The shafts shot by Rama and Rāvana, severed and scattered, with flaming heads dropped to the Earth. The mighty twangs of the bow strings of both, terrifying all creatures, were wonderful to behold.* *Adbhutadarśana-wonderful to behold, wonderful to witness is the sense. Then even as clouds disperse on being trampled by the Winds, Ravana, covered with showers of arrowy networks by that high souled one and reduced to sore straits by that one (Rāma) of a glowing bow, fled away in fear.