Thereupon there ensued a mighty and dreadful encounter of two cars between Rāma and Ravana, creating terror to all people. The army of Räkşasas and the mighty host of the monkeys although they had weapons in their hands, became stupefied (for the time being). And beholding them (Răma and Rāvana) fight, all the Rākşasas and monkeys, having their minds agitated, were greatly surprised. With various weapons and hands uplifted for fight, they, greatly wondered, stood there beholding them and did not address themselves to fight with each other. The Rakşasas beholding Rāvana, and the monkeys beholding Rāma with wonder-stricken eyes, the whole army appeared like a picture. And expieing all omens Rāghava and Rāvaņa began to fight undaunted, firm, resolute and unagitated by anger. And determining that Käkutstha would win victory and Răvana would died, they began to display their own prowess. Thereupon the highly powerful Rāvana, setting his arrows in anger, discharged then at the pennon stationed on Rāghava's car. Those arrows reaching the flag staff of the Purandara chariot and perceiving its might fell down on the earth. Thereupon the highly powerful Rama, wroth, stretching his bow, made up his mind to return the blow, And aiming at Rāvana's flag staff he discharged a sharpened shaft flaming unbearably by its own lustre like a huge serpent.... The effulgent Rāma discharged a shaft aiming at (Ravana's) banner which, piercing the Tennecked demon's flag fell, down on the earth. Beholding his flag staff thus broken down the highly powerful Răvaņa became ablaze as if burning down the everything with his unbearable ire. And being possessed by wrath he began to make a downpour of shafts. Ravana then, with flaming arrows, pierced Rāma's steeds. The celestial horses were not bewildered thereby nor their course was slackened. And they remained thoroughly unagitated as if they were stricken with lotus stalks. Beholding the steeds thus unmoved Rāvana was again exercise with wrath and began to discharged afresh his various weapons-gadás parighas, chakras and musalas, mountain tops trees, darts and parashus and thousands of other shafts by virtue of his illusive powers. And unmoved was his energy. That downpour of various weapons became huge and terrible in the conflict creating terror and making a dreadful noise. Thereupon leaving aside Rāghava's car he began to assail the monkey-host and enveloped the sky with a continual discharge of arrows. The Ten-necked demon let loose many a weapon even at the risk of his own life. Beholding Rāvana in the encounter thus actively engaged in the discharged of arrows, Kakuthstha, smiling set up pointed shafts, and discharged them by hundreds and thousands. Beholding them Rāvaņa again filled the welkin with arrows-and thus with shafts discharged by them both another flaming sky was crated. None (of the arrows) missed the aim, none of them failed to pierce another and none of them was fruitless. And the arrows discharged by Rāma and Rāvana striking each other fell down on the earth. They standing on their right and left began to make a continued downpour of Arrows and enveloped the sky entirely. They opposing each other, Rāvana slew Rāma's steeds and Rāma in his turn slew Rāvana's. They thus enraged fought with each other and for sometime there ensued an terrible encounter capable of making ones down stand on end. The highly powerful Rāvana and Rāma *fighting with each other in the conflict by means of sharpened arrows, the lord of Rākṣasas beholding his flag staff broken down became enraged with the foremost Raghus. Rāma and Rāvaņa thus opposing each other in battle all the animals beheld them, stricken with astonishment. And those two great heroes, highly angered, began to dash towards and assail each other; and being determined to slay each other they looked greatly dreadful. And their charioteers drove the cars on, displaying their skill by moving in circles, in rows and diverse other ways. and those two excellent heroes, discharging their shafts and influenced by illusions, assailed each other proceeding and receding, Rāma attacking Rāvana and Ravana withstanding him. And these two cars coursed the earth for sometime like clouds accompanied by showers. *The epithet in the text is Laksmana's elder brother. Displaying many a movement in the conflict they again stood facing each other, the forepart of one car touching that of the other and the heads of the steeds touching each other; and then pennons stationed on one touched those of the other. Rāma with four sharpened arrows shot off his bow, removed the flaming horses of Rāvana to some distance. And finding his steeds thus removed he was exercised with wrath. And the Ten-necked one discharged sharpened arrows at Raghava. And he was pierced by those arrows coming from the powerful Ten-necked demon. He was neither overwhelmed nor pained therewith and he again discharged arrows resembling the thunder-bolts. The Ten-necked demon again discharged arrows at the charioteer, which fell with great vehemence on the person of Mātalī. Mātali was not the least pained or overwhelmed in that encounter. Beholding his charioteer thus assailed Rāma was excited with wrath and overwhelmed his foe with a net of arrows. The heroic Rāghava showered on his enemy's chariot shafts by twentys, thirtys, sixtys, hundreds and thousands. The lord of Raksasas, Ravana, who was stationed on the car wroth, attacked Rāma in the conflict with maces and Musalas. There again ensued a terrible conflict capable of making one's down stand on end. And the seven oceans were overwhelmed with the sound of maces, Musalas, Paraighas and gold feathered arrows. Those inhabiting the regions under the agitated oceans, all the Dănvas and thousands of Pannagas were greatly pained. Greatly shook the earth with her mountains, forests and gardens. The Sun was shorn of its resplendence and the wind blew very rough. Thereupon the celestials with Gandharvas, Siddhas, great saints, Kinnaras and serpents, were all worked up with anxiety. Beholding the dreadful encounter between Rāma and Rāvaņa capable of making people's down stand on end, the celestials with ascetics began to pray, May good betide the Brahmins and cows, may people live in peace and may Rāghava defeat Rāvana, the lord of Räkşasas, in the conflict. The crowd of Gandharvas and Apsaras beholding that wonderful battle between Rāma and Rāvana, said. The ocean resemble the sky and the sky resemble the ocean-forsooth this encounter between Rama and Rāvana befits them only. Thereupon Råma of long arms, the enhancer of the glory of Raghu's race, enraged, set his arrow, resembling a serpent, on his bow, and cut asunder Rāvana's head wearing shinning Kundalas. And that head in the presence of the inhabitants of the three regions fell down on the earth. Instantly there arose another head resembling the former; and it was speedily cut off by the light-handed Rāma. As soon as the second head was chopped off in the encounter by means of shafts another appeared again. And that was again severed by Rāma's shafts resembling thunder-bolts. Thus were severed hundred heads all equal in brilliance. But the end of Ravana's life was not seen by him. Thereupon the heroic Rāghava conversant with the use of all weapons, the enhancer of Kausalya's joy, began to reason within himself in various ways. Verily these are the arrows by which Mārīca was killed and Khara with Dūşaņa was slainVirādaha was destroyed in the forest of Krauñcathe headless demon in the forest of DandakaSālas and mountains were broken the ocean was agitated-and Vāli was killed; I do not perceive the reason, why they were becoming fruitless when discharged at Răvaņa. Thinking thus Rāghava made himself ready in the conflict and began to shower arrows on Rāvana's breast. Thereupon Rāvana too, the lord of Rākṣasas seated in car and highly enraged, assailed Răma in the conflict with a downpour of maces and Musalas. That dreadful and huge conflict, capable of making hairs stand on end, continued for seven nights before the eyes of the celestials, Dānavas, Yaksas, Piśācas, Uragas and serpents stationed in the sky, on the earth or on the mountain-tops. Neither for the night nor for the day, nor for a moment did the fight between Rāma and Rāvaņa cease. And beholding the conflict between Dasaratha's son and the lord of Raksasas, and Ragahava's victory, the high-souled charioteer of the lord of the celestials spade speedily to Rāma engaged in the conflict.