Thereupon Mätali reminding him, spoke to Rāghava, Why did you, o hero, as if not knowing, fear him? Do you, O lord, discharge at him the weapon obtained from the great Patriarch. The time for (his) destruction, as described by the celestials, has arrived. Being reminded by those words of Mätali, Rāma took up the flaming shaft breathing as if like a serpent. The great Rși Agastya first conferred this upon him. This is a huge and dreadful shaft given by Brahma and highly useful in battle. It was made by Brahmä of undecaying prowess for Indra and conferred by him upon the lord of celestials desirous of acquiring victory. In its wings there is wind, in its head there is fire and the Sun, in its body there is the sky and in its weight there are the Chill) Meru and Mandara. It is resplendent by its own lustre, well feathered and adorned with gold-made of the essence of all objects and bright as the rays of the Sun. It is like the fire of dissolution enveloped in smoke-like the flaming serpent, capable of piercing men, serpents and horses and was swift-coursing. (It-can) rend the gateways, Parighas and hillis soaked in blood dipped in marrow, and extremely dreadful. It is hard as the lightningproducing a dreadful sound, assailing various (divisions of the) army creating terror to all, dreadful and (as if) breathing like a serpent. It is terrible as the Death in the conflict and provides food always for the herons, vultures cranes jackals and the Rākşasas. It is the enhancer of the monkey-leaders, joy and the repressor of the Rakşasas and is feathered like to a bird with many a picturesque wing. The highly powerful Rāma, consecrating in accordance with the mantras laid down in the Vedas, that huge shaft-the foremost of all in the world, removing the fear of the Ikşvaku race, destroying the fame of the enemies and conduction to the joy of its own party, set it on his bow. That excellent arrow being mounted on his bow by Rāghava all the animals were stricker. with fear and the earth shook. And (Rāma) highly enraged, and greatly wary, suppressing (his breath) discharged that shaft at Ravana-piercing to the vitals. (That Brahma weapon) irrepressible as the thunder, dreadful as the Death and discharged by Rama, fell down on Ravana's breast. That shaft, capable of bringing about death and gifted with velocity, when discharged, cleft the breast of the vicious-souled Rāvana. That body-ending arrow bathed in blood stealing away the life of Råvana entered the earth. That shaft, slaying Răvaņa soaked in blood and successful, again entered the quiver* humbly. *In some texts there is "na punaravisat" i.e. did not enter the quiver. And from his hand who was deprived of his life fell down instantly on earth his shafts and bow. v And fell down on the earth from the chariot, the highly effulgent Rāvaņa, gifted with dreadful velocity and shom of his life. Beholding him thus fallen down, the remaining night-rangers, deprived of their lord and stricken with terror fled away to various quarters. Beholding the destruction of the Ten-necked (demon) and the victory of Raghava, the monkeys fighting with trees, pursued them on all sides. Being assailed by the monkeys and having their countenances full of tears in consequence of their lord being slain they fled away to Lankā in fear. Thereupon the monkeys being greatly delighted roared out the victory of Rāma. The celestial bugle was sounded in the sky and there blew the excellent air carrying the celestial fragrance. Flowers were showered upon Rama's car which was covered therewith. The celestials in the sky began to chaunt the glory of Rāma and praise him. And Ravana, the dread of all people, being slain, the celestials with the Cäraņas were greatly delighted. And slaying that foremost of the Rākşasas Rāma satisfied the desire of Sugriva, Angada and Vibhisana. Thereupon the celestials attained their peace, the quarters were delighted, the atmosphere was clear, calm air began to prevail all over the earth, and the Sun appeared in its full rays. Thereupon Sugrīva Vibhișana and Lakşmaņa, welcomed Rāma, of unmitigated prowess singing his glory. There appeared beautiful at the battle-field Rāma of firm promise, slaying his enemy and encircled by his army and friends like to the lord of the celestials surrounded by the gods.