Then the revered Agastya. who desirous of witnessing the fight, had along with the deities come there-seeing Rävaņa spent with the toil of conflict, staying in the field plunged in thought, and stationed before Rāma for engaging in encounter-addressed Rama, drawing near to him, saying. Rāma, Rāma, O mighty-armed one, hearken to the eternal secret, whereby my child, you will conquer all foes in fight-Adityahțdya,* sacred, capable of destroying all foes bringing victory the recitation, enduring and in destructible, and supremely good; fraught with all welfare removing every sin, chasing away anxiety and grief, bringing length of days; and excellent. *Lit.-The heart of the Sun-the designation of a Vedic Hymn. Do you worship Vivasvata's offspring-the Sun-lord of the world, furnished with rays, who make people engage in work, and who is bowed down to by deities and Asuras. This effulgent one, producing rays is instinct with the spirits of all the deities; and he with his rays rule all creatures and the hosts of celestials and Asuras. This Sun is Brahmā and Vişņu and Śiva and Skanda (a) and Prajāpati, (b) and Mahendra and Dhanada (c) and the Destroyer-Yama and Soma (d) and the lord of waters: and the Pitris (e) and the Vasus, and the Sādhyas (f) and the two Aśvinis (g) and the Maruts and Manu, (h) and the Wind-god and the God of fie and the creatures and the creator of life and the seasons. (a) The celestial generallissimo. The commentator gives a spiritual interpretation. 'He that by mean of his rays openent up the five organs of perception. (b) The lord of all creatures, by virtue of his bringing forth all beings through his energy. (c) Dispenser of riches, a name of Kubera. (d) Furnished with splendour, a name of the Moon. According to some endowed with energy. (e) Lit. the ancestral manes. Here the generator of everything. (1) An order of semi-divine beings. Here, "he who is adored by the spiritual." (g) In virtue of his omnipresence and his being the healer of all ailments. (h) All-knowing and being the primeval sovereign. He is Aditya (i) Savită (j) Sürya (k) Khaga (l) Pușă (m) Gabhastimān, (a) the Golden-looking and Bhānu (b) Hiranyarertā (c) Divākara. (d) And he is Haridaśva (e) Sahasrārci (1) Saptasapti (g) Maricimăn. (h) and he subdue darkness, and he is Sambhu (i) and Tvașță () Marandaka (k) Ansumān. (1) he Hiranyagarbha, (m) Sisira, (n) Tapana, (o) and Ahaskara (p) Ravi (q) Agnigarbha, (r) Aditi's son,(s) and Sankha, (T) Śisiranāšana, (u) Vyomanātha (v) Tamobhedi (w) the one proficient in Řk, Yajuş and Sāma; and Ghanavịşti, (x) and the friend of the Apas, (a) and he that swiftly course in the Vindhya way. And he is Ātapī (b) and Mandali (c) and Mſtyu. (d) And he is Pingala, (e) and the destroyer of everything, and the Omniscient, and he having the universe for his form, (f) and the exceedingly energetic one, and the beloved of ail and that one, lording it over all kinds of actions. And he is the lord (g) of stars and planets and constellation, and the origin of everything and the one powerful pre-eminently of powerful things, (h) and the one having twelve forms. (i) I bow to you (having these forms and functions). (i) He from whom all derive sustenance. 6) The producer of heart and the spiritual faculties by heat, and corn, etc. by showers. (k) Coursing alone, according to the commentator. It may also means 'He that sets people to work.' (1) Coursing the highest heavens' or says the commentator 'the heavens of the heart." (m) 'The maintainer.' (a) Gabhastimān-'Ray-furnished, or having the allpermeating Spirit of Auspiciousness.' (b) Bhānu-'having brightness' (c) 'Hiranyaretā' instinct with the cosmic energy. (d) Divākara 'maker of day. (e) Haridaśva 'pervading all sides,' or 'having black steeds.' (f) Sahasrārci-thousand-rayed. The commentator explains spiritually, He whose cognition points in infinite directions.' (8) 'He from whom proceed the seven organs of sense of people. Or 'he was has seven steeds. (h) 'Having rays.' (i) 'He from whom proceed the several sorts of happiness.' ) 'He who removes the misfortunes of his votaries.' (k) 'He that infuses life into the lifeless moudane egg.' (1) Having rays. (m) The cause of the creation, preservation and destruction of the Universe. (n) 'Good-natured.' (0) Tapa-means 'wealth.' Tapana-the possessor of all riches. (p) Ahas-day and Kara-maker. (9) Rauti teach-Ravi he that teach. (r) Lit. fire-wombed. He that carries the fire of doom within himself. (s) Aditi-without destruction'-means 'Brahma knowledge.' (t) Supreme happiness. (u) The remover of intellectual stupor or evilmindedness. (v) Lord of the welkin. (w) Dispeller of darkness.) (x) He from whom flow the fruit of acts; or he from whom come downpours. The latter epithet is justified on grounds of Physical Geography, rain being ultimately dependant on solar heat. (a) Apas may mean either the good,' or 'water.' Vindhya may mean either the way known as Brahmacāri or the orbit of the Sun. (b) He that is intent on creating the cosmos. (c) Ray-crowned or adorned with gems. (d) The bringer of death. (e) The motive force of the blood-tube called Pingala (1) Or the ornament of the Universe. (g) i.e. the controller of them, remarks Rāmānuja (h) Such as, observes the commentator, as fire) (i) i.e. the controller of them remarks Rāmānuja.) Salutation to the Eastern mount and the mount of the West. Salutation to the lord of the stellar bodies and salutation also to the lord of day. Salutation and salutation to him that bring victory, and the joy that spring up from victory; and to him of yellow steeds. Salutation, salutation, O thousand-rayed one! Salutation and salutation to Aditya. Salutation to him that keep his senses under subjection; Salutation and salutation to the Hero, (i) and to Saranga (k) and to him that awaken the Lotus (1) (i) Him that lead the senses, and that is endowed with the prowess of slaying Tripura etc. (k) Him that deserve the pranava, the holies formula in all Hindu Scripture. (1) That awaken the external lotus as will as the lotus of the heart. And (salutation) to you O fierce one. Salutation to the Lord himself of Brahmā, Iśána (m) and Achchyuta, (n) and to Sura (o) and to him that constitutes the knowledge of Aditya, and to him that unfold me and not, me and to the devourer of all, and to the form of the destroyer of the darkness of ignorance. Salutation to the destroyer of darkness, and to the destroyer of enemies, and to him of immeasurable Squl, and to the destroyer of the ingrate, and to the deity, and to the lord of all stellar bodies. (m) Siva (n) Visnu. (0) The Sun. And salutation to him that boast of the splendour of burning gold, to the destroyer of all mental obscurity, and to the maker of the universe. Salutation to the remover of darkness; to see illuminator of the Soul; to the allbeholding none of all the words. The lord creat everything an verily destroyet it. And with his rays he suck up, and destroy and create (everything) When all are asleep, this one wake, he is resident in the hearts of all creatures. This one is both Agnihotra as well as the fruit reaped by the sacrifices thereof. He constitutes the gods and the sacrifices and the fruit also thereof, and he is the lord of all acts that are performed by creatures If a person recites this (hymn), he O Raghava, does not come by misfortune, when he is in peril of his life, or is ill, or in a lonely place, or in fear. Do you with concentration, worship this god of gods, this lord of the universe. By reciting (this hymn) instinct with the three virtues, you will obtain victory in battle. This very instant O mighty-armed one, you will conquer Ravana. Having said this, Agastya went whither from he had come. Hearing this that exceedingly energetic one had his grief gone. then, well pleased, Raghava, exerting himself, contemplated (the hymn). And reciting this he beholding the Sun, attained excess of Joy. And sipping water again and again, and becoming purified, that powerful one, taking up his bow, and viewing Rāvana, advanced with a delighted heart, to obtain victory. And he became intent on his death with his dearest energies. Then exceedingly delighted, and filled with rejoicing, the Sun, in the midst of the celestial hosts knowing that the destruction of the Sovereign of the night-rangers was at hand, spoke to Rāma “Bestir yourself.