Hearing those excellent words uttered by Raghava, Mahesvara (Siva) spoke far more important words. O you having lotus-eyes, O you having huge arms and a spacious breast, O you the slayer of enemies, O you the foremost of the pious-it is a good fortune that this has been done by you. It is by good fortune, O Rama, the dreadful Rāghava, has been removed by you in the encounter. Consoling the poor Bharata and the famed Kausalyā, beholding Kaikeyi and Sumitrā the mother of Lakşmaņa, obtaining the kingdom of Ayodhyā, pleasing all your friends, establishing the prestige of your family, you of great strength, performing horse-sacrifices, attaining fair fame and conferring riches upon the Brāhmaṇas do you repair to heaven. This king Dasaratha stationed on the car is your father. He was your superior on this earth, OKakutstha. Obtaining you as his son, that graceful (king) has repaired to the region of Indra. Do you bow to him with your brother Lakşmaņa. Hearing the words of Mahadeva, Raghava, along with Laksmana, bowed to their father who was seated on the top of the car. He with Lakşmaņa beheld their father shining in his own effulgence and wearing an unsullied cloth. Thereupon beholding his son dearer than his life, attaining great delight (in consequence thereof) placing him on his lap and embracing him with his arms, the great king Dasaratha, having long arms and seated on an excellent seat in the car, said. I am now in heaven and am equal with the celestials, but without you, O Rāma, I do not like it-this is true-I do swear by you. O you the foremost of those skilled in speech, I have still in my mind the words which were uttered by Kaikeyi for sending you away to the woods. Beholding you all well and embracing you with Lakşmaņa I am now shorn of grief like to the Sun, devoid of dues. I have been emancipated, O my son, through you-a good and high-souled son, as the virtuoussouled Brāhmaṇa Kahola was by Aștāvakra. O gentle one, I have heard from the celestials, (that you are) the excellent Puruşa in the guise (of a man) for the destruction of Rävaņa. Blessed is Kausalyā, O Rāma, who shall be greatly delighted, on beholding you, the slayer of enemies, gone home from the forest. Blessed are those men, O Rama, who shall behold you installed in the city as the king of the world. I wish to behold you reconciled with Bharata, devoted powerful, pure and performing pious observances. O gentle one, you have spent fourteen years in the forest with Sītā and Lakşmaņa. The term of your exile is over-your promise has been fulfilled; and slaying Ravana, in the conflict you have pleased the celestials. You have performed a mighty deed and attained to excellent fame, O slayer of enemies; and placed in charge of your kingdom do you with your brothers attain a long life. The king speaking thus Rāma spoke to him with folded hands saying, “O you conversant with piety, do you be propitiated with Bharata and Kaikeyi. You did imprecate Kaikeyi, saying, I renounce you with your son, may not that dreadful curse visit her and her son. Saying "so be it" to Rāma with folded hands and embracing Lakşmaņa the great king said to him. O you conversant with piety and fame on this earth, you shall attain to heaven and excellent state there. O you the enhancer of Sumitra's joy-do you attend upon Rāma; may good betide you; Rāma is ever engaged in the welfare of all beings. All these celestials headed by Indra, Siddhas and Great saints, bowing to this high-souled and excellent Purusa, worship him. Rāma, the subduer of foes, is the indescribable and undecaying letter Brahmā, which has been described in the Vedas) as the heart and secret of the celestials. For serving him along with Sītā, the daughter of king Videha, you have attained piety and excellent fame. Addressing Lakşmaņa thus, the king spoke to his daughter-in-law, who was standing before him with folded hands, saying. It does not behove you, O Vaidehi, to be enraged (with Rāma) for renouncing you; for purifying you this was done by him ever wishing your welfare. What you have performed, O daughter, to establish the purity of your character, is hard to perform. What you have done, shall glorify all other females. Though there is no necessity for giving you any instruction as regards your duty towards your husband-still I should say that he is your great god. Having thus instructed his two sons and Sītā, he repaired, in his car, to the region of Indra. Having advised his two sons along with Sītā, ascending the car, and shining in his effulgence, that excellent king, greatly delighted, repaired to the region of the king of celestials.