Beholding Maithili standing humbly by him, Räma began to give vent to his pent-up feelings. O gentle one, destroying all the enemies in the arena of battle I have subdued your enemy-I have done all that can be accomplished by manliness. I have reached the other end of my anger, rubbed off (the insult) for my spouse being taken away by the enemy and have killed simultaneously my disgrace and enemy. My manliness has been displayed today, my laboúr has been crowned with success and today I have fulfilled my promise by my own prowess. That accidental misfortune, under the influence where of you were carried away by the fickle-minded Räksasa in my absence, has been subdued today by me, a man. What is the use of his manliness, who when insulted, cannot remove it? Even if he be a great man he may be called mean. The praise-worthy works of Hanumān-the crossing of the deep and the devastation of Lankā, have been crowned with success today. The labour of Sugrīva with his army, who displayed valour in the encounter and gave me good counsels, has borne fruit today. Today also the labour of Vibhişaņa has borne fruit-who renouncing his brother, devoid of all good Qualities, came to my side. Hearing those words of Rāma, Sītā began to look wistfully like a hind, with eyes full of tears. Beholding his beloved spouse near him and afraid of popular ignominy his heart was broken into two. Thereupon he spoke to the exquisitely beautiful Sītā, in the midst of the monkeys and Räkşasas, having eyes resembling lotus petals and black and curling hairs, saying. As the southern quarter, incapable of being got at by the people, was conquered by the selfcontrolled great ascetic Agasty, so for you slaying Ravana, I (always) anxious to have honour, have removed my insult-as is the duty of a man. May good betide you-do you know that all my labour in the battle-field, backed by the prowess of my friends, is for you. To uphold the dignity of my well-known family, to remove the ignominy consequent upon your being stolen away as well as to wipe off my own insult I have encompassed this. I have suspected your character; you, (Therefore) standing before me, are distressing me like to a lamp before one who is subject to an eye-desease. Do you therefore proceed, O daughter of king Janaka, wherever you like to one of these ten quarters. I permit you, O gentle one. I have nothing to do with you. What powerful man, born in a high family, take back his wife considering her as friend out of lust, who has lived long in another's house? You were taken by Rāvana on his lap, beheld by him with sinful eyes; how can I, taking you back, bring disgrace upon my great family? The object, with which I have gained you back, has been accomplished. I have got no attachment for you-do you go wherever you wish, O gentle one. I speak these to you impelled by my sense of duty. If you wish you may live with Laksmana, Bharatga or Satrughna or with Sugrīva or Räkş asa Vibhisana. Do you settle, O Sita, where you may find your own pleasure. O Sita, (I do not think) Ravana has overlooked you, who lived in his house, beholding you so graceful and beautiful. Thereupon hearing those unpleasant words from her beloved (husband) Sītā, always sensitive and who had never heard such unpleasant words, trembling like a creeper torn by the trunk of an elephant, began to weep shedding tears profusely.