Hearing those excellent words uttered by the great Patriarch rose up Vibhāvasu (The deity of Fire) with Vaidehi on his lap shaking the funeral pyre. With the daughter of the king Janaka, the receiver (Fire) of sacrificial offering, being incarnate, rose up. And carrying on his lap Vaidehī, wearing a red cloth, resembling the newly risen sun, adorned with ornaments of burning gold-having black curling hairs and decked with fresh garments, Vibhāvasu gave her to Rāma. Thereupon the Deity of Fire, the witness of the people, spoke to Rāma, saying, O Rāma, here is your Vaidehi-no sin has visited her. Neither by words, mind, understanding nor eyes, she, good-natured and beautiful-has deviated from you who has got a good character and is heroic. She was in the solitary forest separated from you, poorly and having no control over herself and hence she was carried away by the Raksasa Rāvana having enough prowess in him. Although shut up in the inner apartment-well protected and guarded by the dreadful shedemons she had always her mind in you and was devoted to you. Although tempted in many a way and remonstrated with she did not think of that Rākşasa in her inner mind. Her heart is pure and she is not spoiled with sin-do you therefore take back Maithilī. Do you not speak otherwise-I do command you. Thereupon hearing those words-the virtuoussouled Rāma, the foremost of those skilled in speech, with his eyes agitated with delight, meditated for sometime. Being thus addressed, the highly effulgent and intelligent Rāma, of unmitigated prowess-the foremost of the pious, spoke to that best of celestials saying. Beautiful (Sītā) lived in the inner apartment of Rāvana for a long time so she needs this purification in the presence of all people. If I would take the daughter of Janaka without purifying her, people would say that Rāma the son of king Dasaratha is lustful and ignorant of the morality of the people. I know it full well that Maithili, the daughter of king Janaka, has her mind devoted to me and has not given it to any one (else). As the ocean cannot go beyond its banks so Răvaņa could not approach her having expansive eyes protected by virtue of her own chastity. The greatly vicious-souled one could not even by his mind get Maithili, who was beyond his reach like to the burning flame of fire. Her mind could not have been moved although she lived in the inner apartment of Rāvaņa-she belongs to none else; Sītā is mine as the rays belong to the Sun. Maithili-the daughter of Janaka has been purified before the three worlds-So I am incapable of renouncing her as a self controlled person cannot forsake his (own ) reputation. It behove me to carry out the well meaning words of you all the lords of people who have spoken them out of affection. Saying this, the victorious, highly powerful, well renowned Rāghava, worthy of enjoying happiness, and having his praise chanted in consequence of his noble action, regaining his spouse, attained to happiness.