Dasaratha having repaired, Mahendra greatly delighted spoke to Rāghava, stationed there with folded hands, saying. O Rama,Oforemost of men, this our presence here, must not be fruitless, we are pleased-do you ask for what you wish. Being thus accosted by the high-souled Mahendra-delighted, Rāghava spoke, with a pleased heart. O lord of the celestials, O you the foremost of those skilled in speech, if you are propitiated with me, I shall pray for (my wished for object); do you grant it. Let all these highly powerful monkeys, who have been despatched to the abode of Death, on my account, regaining their life, stand up. O you the conferror of honour, I wish to see all those delighted monkeys, who were separated from their wives and children on my account. O Purandara, do you revive all these heroic and powerful (monkeys) who did not care for death, and who worked hard and were distressed (for me). May all those, by your favour, who were ever devoted to me and did not care for death (even) regain their life-this is the boon I pray for. O conferror of honour, I wish to see all these monkeys, Golarigālas and bears, pale and hurt, unheart and gifted with strength and prowess like before. Let there be flowers, fruits and roots, even out of season wherever these monkeys shall live and let rivers there be full of clear water. Hearing those words of the high-souled Rāghava Mehendra replied with words instinct with delight. O my boy, O foremost of the Raghus, mighty is the boon you have prayed for-my words shall never be falsified, so let them be fulfilled. Let all those bears and Golangulas rise up who were slain in the conflict by Rákşasas and had their heads and arms severed. Let the monkeys gifted with their pristine strength and prowess rise up unhurt and healthy as if after the end of sleep. Being reconciled with their friends, relatives and kinsmen let them attain to excellent joy. O you the wielder of a huge bow, all the trees shall be filled with flowers and fruits and all the rivers shall be filled with water even out of season (wherever they shall live). Thereupon all these leading monkeys who had their persons wounded but now healed up, rose up like those asleep. All those monkeys were greatly wondered, saying, "What is it ?" And beholding Kākutstha of accomplished end and eulogizing Rama and Laksmana, all the celestials, greatly delighted, said, Do you, O king, repair to Ayodhyadespatch all the monkeys-console the famed Maithili, ever devoted to you-behold your brother Bharata observing ascetic vows in consequence of your grief and the high-souled Satrughna and all your mothers,o slayer of foes. And being installed on the throne do you conduce to the joy of all citizens. Having thus addressed Rāma along with Laksmana, the thousand eyed Deity, delighted, went away along with the celestials, in their cars resembling the Sun (in brilliance. Saluting all the celestials, Kākutstha, with his brother Lakşmaņa, ordered the encampment of the army. Thereupon that famous and well-pleased huge army of the monkeys protected by Råma and Lakşmaņa, appeared resplendent on all sides like to a night beautified with the rays of the Moon.