On being greatly harassed by Käkutstha in anger, Ravana, delighting in battle, came under the sway of a towering passion. And with his eyes aglow, that powerful one from wrath and fury assailed Raghava in mighty encounter. And even as clouds pour down from the sky on a pool, Råvaņa showered thousands of arrows of Rāghava. And covered with vollies of shafts discharged from (Ravana's) bow in the conflict, Kākutstha like to a mighty mountain did not shake. That one endowed with prowess stood in the field, resisting those networks of arrows, and took up shafts resembling the rays of the Sun. Then the fleet-handed night-ranger, fired with rage, discharged a thousand arrows at the chest of the high souled Raghava. Thereat in that encounter Lakşmaņa's elder brother, with his body bathed in blood, appeared like a mighty Kinśuka tree in a forest. With his ire aroused by the blows he received the exceedingly energetic Kākutstha took up arrows resembling the sur risen at the time of the universal dissolution. In the darkness spread by the arrows (discharged), Rama and Ravana both fired with wrath could not be discovered of each other. Then that hero-Dasaratha's son, Rāma, Overcome with wrath, addressed Ravana, laughing, in a harsh speech, saying. You vile of Räkşasas, in consequence of having through lack of sense carried off my wife from Janasthana and brought her under your subjection, you have been deprived of your prowess. Having forcibly carried away Vaidehi staying in that mighty forest, forlorn and without me, you think, 'I am hero.' Outraging the helpless wives of others, doing this craven deed, you thinkest, 'I am a hero.' O you having your dignity destroyed! O shameless Wight! O you of volatile character, having through your violence brought destruction on yourself, you think, 'I am a hero.' A great and famous act has been performed by you, a hero, and the brother of the Bestower of riches, surrounded with your forces! Today receive the mighty fruit of that infamous act done through pride, productive of evil.* *Remarks Rāmānuja, 'here and in the next world.' O wicked-minded one, you think of yourself, 'I am a hero; but you that have taken way Sītā like a thief, have no feeling of shame. Had you forcibly outraged Sità in my very presence, you, slain by my Shafts, would have seen your brother-Khara. By luck, O you of an evil soul, you have come within the range of my vision. Today by means of sharp shafts shall I bring you to death's door. Today beasts of pray will drag your head having burning ear-rings, severed by my shafts and covered with the dust of the battle-field. O Ravana, vultures will alight on your breast, as you will lie low on the ground; and, athirst, they will drink the blood gushing out from your wounds. To-day fowls of the air will keep pulling at you pierced with my shafts, and lying lifeless, as birds do serpents. Having spoken thus, that slayer of foes-Rāmashowered arrows on the lord of Rākşasas, staying before. The prowess and strength and spirits and force of arms of Rāma burning for the destruction of his foe, were doubled. All the Weapons* presented themselves before that one cognisant of self; and the fleethandedness of that exceedingly powerful one increased immensely from exhilaration of spirits. *i.e. the presiding deities of them. Seeing all these auspicious omens coming of themselves, Rama, finisher of Raksasas, set about smiting his foe more energetically than ever. Assailed with stones by the monkeys and showers of shafts by Rāghava, the Ten-necked one felt his heart undergoing a revolution.* *Vighurnahrdayah : had his heart paralysed, according to the commentator. I prefer the sense given as more graphic. When through the stupefaction of his innerself, he could not discharge any weapon, or draw his bow, or put forth his prowess, (Rāma) did not persist in smiting him. And the shafts and various arms discharged by him betokened his death; and his last moments were present. And his charioteer, driving his car, perceiving this, calmly took the car away from the field of fight. Then, seeing the king shorn of prowess, and dropt, his charioteer, struck with fear, swiftly turned away his dreadful car having the clatter of clouds, and went away from the field of battle.