I hear the tidings of my brother affording me great delight who has been living in the huge forest for many a year. The saying of the people appear to me as instinct with well meaning that a man, if alive, may attain to joy even after a century. Do you relate truly to me, how and in what country the union between Rāghava and the monkeys was brought about. Being thus accosted by the prince and seated on Kusa, he, thereupon, began to describe Rama's life in the forest. How Råma was exiled, the two boons conferred upon your mother, how king Dasaratha died in consequence of (his) sons' grief, how by emissaries, O lord, you were brought up from the house of your maternal uncle, how you did not wish for the kingdom having entered Ayodhya, how your brother, the repressor of enemies, was solicited by you for accepting the kingdom, repairing to the mount Citrakūta, who have ever wended the track of the pious, the renouncement of kingdom (by him) abiding by the words of the king, your return after taking the sandals of your revered (brother), all these, O you of long-arms, are known to you. I shall relate to you all that happened after your return. Yourself having returned thence, all the bird and animals were overwhelmed with terror and that forest appeared as if distressed. Thereupon he entered the solitary and huge and dreadful forest Daņdaka distressed by the elephants and abounding in lion, tigers and deer. Your entering the dense forest there appeared before them the powerful Virādha* emitting a dreadful sound. *A demon of that name. Taking him up roaring aloud like an elephant Rāma threw him with his arms upwards and face downwards into a pit. Having accomplished that difficult work the two brothers Rāma and Lakşmaņa, arrived in the evening at the pleasant hermitage of Sarabhanga. Śarabhanga having attained to heaven, Rāma, having truth for his prowess, saluting all the ascetics, repaired to Janasthāna. And by the high-souled Rāghava, living there, fourteen thousand inhabitants of janasthāna were slain. In the company of one person only and at the commencement of the fight, by Rāma, within the one fourth part of a day, were exterminated all the highly powerful and valiant inhabitants of the forest of Dandaka always putting obstructions in the way of the ascetics. All the Raksasas were grinded (to death) by Rāghava. Khara was slain in the conflict; Dūşaņa being slain first Triſiră was slain thereafter by him. Thereafter (a she-demon) named Surpanakha, came to the side of Rāma. Thereupon being commanded by Rāma, the highly powerful Lakşmaņa rose up all on a sudden and taking a dagger chopped off her ears and nose. Being thus insulted by him that she-demon came to Rāmana. Thereupor a dreadful Rākşasa named Mārīca-an attendant of Rāvaņa, assuming the shape of a jewelled deer, allured Vaidehī. Beholding it, Vaidehī spoke to Rāma, saying, 'Do you catch it; with it when caught our hermitage shall be more charming' Thereupon Rāma, with bow in his hand, pursued that deer and with one shaft destroyed it. O gentle one, Räghava going out on hunting, and Lakṣmaṇa having issued out of the hermitage, the Ten-necked (demon) entered therein. And he speedily got hold of Sītā, like to Rohiņi possessed by the planet in the sky. Thereupon slaying the vulture Jatayu in the conflict desirous of rescuing her and getting hold of Sītā that Rākşasa speedily repaired (to his capital). Thereupon some monkeys resembling mountains, stationed on the summit of a mountain, stricken with wondrous fear and astonishment, beheld Ravana, the lord of Rākşasas proceed with Sītā. Ascending the car Puspaka, going at will with Vaidehi and hastening his course that highly powerful Rāvana, the lord of Rākṣasas entered Lankā. Entering the huge and excellent golden palace Ravana consoled Maithili with (diverse) words. But she regarded that foremost of Rākşasas and his words as straw. And Vaidehi was placed in the forest of Asoka. Thereupon returned Rāma after having slain the deer in the forest. Having returned and seen the vulture, dearer than his father, slain, Rāma, the descendant of Kākutstha was pained. And searching Vaidehi and ranging at the banks of Godaveri and forest-lands covered with flowers, Rāma with Laksmana, met in that huge forest a Rākşasa named Kabandha. Thereupon at the words of Kabandha, Rāma, having truth for his prowess, repairing to the mount Rishyamuka, was united with Sugrīva. There had grown mutual love in them before they were known to each other. Sugrīva was driven away by his angry brother Váli. And informed of each other's affairs their friendship grew closer. Thereupon slaying the huge-bodied and highly powerful Vāli in the conflict by virtue of the strength of his own arms Rāma obtained (for Sugriva) his own kingdom. Being placed on the throne with all the monkeys, Sugrīva promised to Rāma the enquiry of the Princess (Sītā). Being commanded by the high-souled Sugrīva, the lord of monkeys, ten koțis of monkeys repaired to (various) quarters. Among them some of us lost our way in a cavity of the Vindhya mountain, and were stricken with great terror-and accordingly much time was lost. The powerful brother of the king of vultures named Sampāti communicated to us the residence of Sītā in the palace of Rāvaņa. Thereupon removing the grief of my relatives stricken with sorrow and resorting to my own prowess, I jumped over hundred yayanas and beheld her placed in the forest of Asoka, wearing a red cloth, pale, deprived of all joy and observing strict penances. And then nearing her and beholding her of a perfectly blameless person I bestowed upon her an ensign a ring with Rāma's name engraven on it. And obtaining a jewel as an ensign, I, with my object accomplished, returned. Having returned I presented Råma of unwearied actions with that ensign of a brilliant gem. Hearing (of the news of Vaidehi) Rama regained his life like one on the verge of death regaining his being after drinking nectar. And exciting (his soldiers) for making preparations like to Fire about to destroy all people he made up his mind for the devastation of Lanka. Thereupon arriving at the banks of the ocean he had a bridge constructed by Nala by which the army of monkey heroes crossed (the deep). Nala destroyed Prahasta, Rāghava slew Kumbhakarņa, Lakşmaņa killed the son of Rāvana and Rāma himself slew Rāvana. He was then met by Sakra, Yama, Varuna, Siva, Brahmā and Dasaratha. That graceful descendant of Kākutstha, the slayer of foes, obtained the boon from them as well as from the saints assembled there (celestial and otherwise). Having obtained the boon he, delighted, met the monkeys and in the car Puspaka reached Kiskindha. Again reaching the Ganges he is living with the ascetic; it become you to behold him tomorrow under the auspices of Pushya, without any hindrance. Thereupon being delighted with the sweet accents of Hanumān, Bharata addressed him, with folded hands, with words affording delight, saying, "After a long time my desire has been fulfilled.”