Then Rāma spoke to the ascetic, O Brahmana, how did those exceedingly mighty brothers carry on austerities in that forest; and what kind of penances was theirs? Thereat there Agastya said to Rāma of a complacent mind, “The brothers severally observed the morality proper to each.” And Kumbhakarņa, putting forth his best energies, constantly abode in the path of righteousness, and remaining in the midst of five fires in summer, he practised austerities, and in the rainy season, soaked in water (poured down) by clouds, he sat in the heroic attitude.* And in winter he always remained in the water. *Hindu Yogis practise various attitudes, which are favourable to the regulation of respiration. Thus passed away ten thousand of that one putting forth exertions in behalf of religion, and established in the path of honesty. The virtuous Vibhīşaņa, ever intent on virtue and pure of spirit, remained standing on one leg for five thousand years. When he had completed (his term of restriction), swarms of apsaras danced, and blossoms showered, and the deities hymned (him). And for five thousand years, he adored the Sun, and with his mind concentrated in the study of the Veda, remained with his head and hands raised up. In this wise Vibhīşaņa like a deity in Nandana passed away ten thousand years, observing restrictions. The ten-necked passed ten thousand years without fare. On a thousand years being complete, he offered his own head as a sacrifice to Fire. In this way, he passed away nine thousand years, and nine of his heads entered into Fire. And as in the tenth year he intended to strike off his tenth head, the Great-father (Brahmā) presented himself at that place. Well-pleased, the Pitamaha Brahmā came there along with the celestials. 'O Ten-necked one,' said (the Great-father), 'I am well-pleased with you. Do you, O cognisant of righteousness, at once ask for the boon that you wish to have. What wish of your shall I realise? Your toil must not go for nothing. Thereat, the Ten-necked one, bowing down his head to the deity, said with a delighted heart, his words faltering with ecstasy. O reverend one, creatures have no other fear than (that of) death; and enemy there is none that is like to death. Therefore immortality is even what I crave for. Thus accosted, Brahma spoke to the Tennecked one, 'You can not be immortal. Do you therefore ask of me some other boon.' Thus addressed by the creator, Brahma, the Ten-necked one, O Rāma, standing before him with joined hands, said. O lord of creatures, I would, O external one, he incapable of being slain by birds and serpents, Yaksas, Daityas, Danavas and Raksasas, and the deities; for, O you that are worshipped by the immortals, anxiety I have none from any other beings. Indeed, I deem as straw creatures such as men etc. Thus accosted by the Rākşasa the Ten-necked one-that righteous-souled one, the great-father, along with the celestials, said. O foremost of Rākşasas, what you say shall come to pass. Having O Rāma, said this to the Ten-necked one, the Great-father (again spoke), Hear! I, having been gratified, will confer on you a fresh boon. O Raksasa, O sinless one, those heads of your which have been offered as sacrifices and which have sunk, into the fire, shall again be your. And, a placid one, I shall also confer on you another boon difficult of being obtained, The form that you shall wish to wear, shall instantly be yours. As soon as the Ten-necked Rākṣasa had spoken, thus, the heads that had been offered as sacrifices into the fire, rose up again. Having said this to the Ten-necked one, the. great sire of all creatures addressed Vibhīşana, saying. O Vibhisana, gratified have I been by you, whose intelligence is established in righteousness. Therefore, my child, O righteoussouled one, O you of excellent vows, ask for the boon that you would have. Thereat the virtuous Vibhīşaņa spoke with joined hands, 'O reverend one, since the spiritual preceptor of all creatures himself (is pleased) with me, I (deem myself) as furnished with every perfection, even as the Moon is envisioned with rays. If you will bestow on me a boon with pleasure, then, O you of excellent vows, hear of the boon that I would have. May my mind remained fast fixed on righteousness, even when I shall happen to fall into high peril; and may I attain Brahma knowledge without any instructions! And inay every sense of mine sprung during the observance of particular modes of life, be in unison with righteousness, so that I may practice the form of religion (in harmony with any particular mode of life !) O exceedingly noble one, this best of boons, is even what is sought for by me, for nothing in this world is incapable of being attained by those attached to righteousness.' Then the lord of creatures, being again delighted, spoke to Vibhīşaņa. As you are virtuous, so all this shall come to pass on your behalf. And inasmuch as in spite of your having been born in the Rākṣasa race, your thoughts, ( destroyer of enemies, do not originate in sin, I confer on the immortality. Having said this, he intended to grant boons to Kumbhakarna. Thereat the celestials in a body represented to the lord of creatures with joined hands. 'On Kumbhakarņa you should confer no boons, since you know in what manner does this wickedminded one frighten people. And, O Brāhmaṇa, even Apsarās in Nandana, ten attendants of Mahendra, as well as sages and human beings, have been devoured by this one. Considering what this Rākşasa did when he had not obtained any boon whatever, if he obtain one now, he shall eat up the three worlds. Do you then, o lord having immeasurable prowess, pretending to give him a boon, give stupefaction (instead). Thereby the welfare of the people would be secured, and the honour of this one too shall be maintained. Thus addressed by the celestials, Brahmā, the Lotus-sprung one, pondered. The goddess, Sarasvatī, who was by his side was also agitated by anxiety. And remaining by him, Sarasvatī with joined hands observed, 'O god, I have come here. What work shall I accomplish?' And the lord of creatures, on having her, spoke to Sarasvatī,' O Vāņi!' be you the goddess of speech of this foremost of Rākşasas, favourable to the deities. 1. Lit. word, a designation of Saraswati. 2. i.e. preside over Kumbhakarna's speech while asking for the boon, and let him, through your power, ask for such a gift as may turn our profitable to the gods. Having said, 'So be it,' she entered (within Kumbhakarna's throat); and Prajapati said,' O Kumbhakarma, O mighty-armed one, do you ask for the boon that you would have. Hearing those words, Kumbhakarņa said,' O god of gods, my wish is that I may sleep for a good many years.' Thereupon, saying,' So be it, “Brahmä along with the celestials went away; and the goddess, Sarasvati, also again left the Rākşasa. And on Brahmă accompanied by the deities going to the celestial regions, he was renounced by Sarasvatī, and then he regained his consciousness. And then the wicked-minded Kumbhakarņa sorrowfully thought. What is this speech that has to-day come out from my lips? Meseems I had then been stupefied by the deities that had come. Having thus obtained the boons, the brothers endowed with flaming energy, going to the Śleşmātaka wood, began to dwell there peacefully.