The princes were all waiting with a poorly heart when Rama, with a dried countenance, addressed them, saying. May good betide you-do not act against my desire. Hear, what the citizens have been talking about me and Sītā. The citizens as well as the inhabitants of provinces have been showering censures upon me. I have been pierced to the very vitals by those accusations. I have been born in the illustrious family by the high-souled Ikşvākus. Sītā has been born also in the holy family of the great Janaka; gentle Lakṣmaṇa, you know how in the solitary forest of Dandaka, Sītā was stolen away by Rāvana and how have I slain him. At that time even I was stricken with anxiety regarding Sītā that how I could take her home since she had resided in the house of the Raksasas. To secure my confidence, Sītā, in your very presence, entered fire. At that time, O Saumitri, fire, carrying sacrificial oblations and the wind of the sky declared Sītā's innocence before the celestials. in the presence of all the Rşis and gods, the Sun and Moon announced the innocence of the daughter of Janaka. Indra, the king of the celestials, himself handed over the chaste Sītā to me in the island of Lanka. My mind know Sītā as chaste for ever. So, at that time, I came back to Ayodhya with Sita. But now a great sorrow consequent upon the censure of the citizens and villagers has pierced my heart. He, who is notorious on this earth and as long as that notoriety remains current, is classed among the vile. Even the celestials speak ill of bad name whereas fame is adored in all the regions. Therefore the high-souled exert their best to acquire reputations. O foremost of men, what to speak of the daughter of Janaka-I can even renounce my life and yourselves in fear of a bad name. Do you therefore perceive into what great abyss of sorrow and ill-fame I have fallen. Up to this time I have never experienced such a mighty grief. Do you, O Laksmana, next morning, ascending the car driven by Sumantra, take away Sītā to another country. There is a picturesque hermitage of the highsouled Vālmīki situate on the Tamasā on the other side of the river Gangā. Do you, O delight of Raghus, soon come back, leaving behind Sitā in that lonely place. Do you carry out my words. Do you not speak anything regarding Sīta's banishment. Therefore, O Laksmana! you may go form here, and you need not to think anymore. If do you request me to desist from this, it shall be the more unpleasant to me. For my life and arms, do you not proffer any request to me regarding this. If so, you shall only endanger my well-being and I shall ever regard you as my enemies. If you obey my behest's, do you honour my words now. Do you take away Sītă from here. Ere this Sītā had communicated her intention of beholding the hermitages of ascetics on the banks of the Gangā. Let that desire of hers be now satisfied. While saying this, the eyes of the virtuoussouled Rāma were covered with tears. Sighing hard like to an elephant, he, with a heart stricken with grief, departed to his own quarter in the company of his brothers.