Lavana being slain the celestials headed by Agni and Indra said in sweet accents to Śatrughna the represser of enemies. O child, fortunate it is that you have been crowned with success after slaying the Rākṣasa Lavaņa. Do you, therefore, O foremost of men, O you of firm vows, accept boons. O you having long arms, all those who can confer boons have arrived here; they all wish for your victory; seeing us does not go without fruits. Hearing the words of the celestials the largearmed and self-controlled Satrughna placed his hands on his head and said. Let this picturesque and charming city of Madhu, built by the celestials, by my capital; this is the only excellent boon I can beg. The celestials, with a delighted heart, said to the descendant of Raghu.-Your desire shall be fulfilled and forsooth shall your city be turned into a picturesque capital under the name of Surasena. The high-souled celestials having ascended the welkin saying this, the highly effulgent Śatrughna brought the soldiers there, that were encamped on the banks of the Gangā. When the soldiers arrived there on hearing the commands of Satrughna he engaged in making encampments in the month of Śrāvan. In this wise the fearlessness of the celestial host, taking the shape of a country, that beautiful and picturesque city was reared in the course of twelve years. All the fields there were filled with crops and Indra began to pour showers in due seasons. And being protected by the strength of Śatrughna's arms all men there became valiant and were freed from deseases. That city on the banks of Yamună appeared beautiful like the half moon and was filled with yards, shops, streets beautiful houses, men of four orders and various articles of trade. Śatrughna now engaged in beautifying the spacious, white houses that were made by Lavana before, with various ornamental works. Beholding the city interspersed with various excellent gardens, pleasure grounds and prosperously filled with celestials and men and diverse articles of trade and merchants hailing from various countries, Satrughna, the younger brother of Bharata, attained to the satisfaction of desire and excess of delight. Having thus reared the beautiful city he resolved within himself The twelfth year has come. I shall now behold the feet of Rāma. There upon having set up the city resembling the region of the celestials and filled with various men, the king Satrughna, the enhancer of Raghu's race, determined on beholding Rāma's feet.