Beholding Sītā thus wailing, the sons of the Rşis there speedily approached the great Vālmīki, well-established in asceticism. And saluting him they all communicated to him Sītā's bewailing and said. O great Rşi, we do not know the wife of what great man, beautiful like the very Lakşmī, and not seen before, is crying aloud very poorly? It is better that you should see her once. That beautiful damsel, like a goddess failing from heaven being bewildered, is waiting on the banks of the river. We saw her alone crying aloud being overwhelmed with sorrow and grief as if she had none to look after her. A damsel like her should not be subject to such a condition. Having gladdened a little the aggrieved Sītā by virtue of his own effulgence of the great ascetic Vālmīki addressed her in following sweet ascents. She did not appear to us to be a woman. Do you receive her duly. She is near the hermitage and so has come to seek your shelter. O chaste damsel, you at the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha, the beloved wife of Rāma and the daughter of Janaka; your coming here is auspicious. O illustrious Sir, she is on the look out for a protector-do you protect her.” The pious Vālmīki could perceive everything by virtue of his asceticism: and ascertaining the truth of the words of the Rși boys by the power of his understanding, he, with quick steps, approached Sita. I am apprised, by virtue of asceticism and meditation, of the object of your coming here. O great lady, I am also fully aware that you are by all means chaste. In fact I am conscious of all the incidents in the three worlds. And the disciple followed that high-minded ascetic. Thereupon proceeding a little on foot with Arghya in his hands, the wise Vālmiki reached the banks of the river and saw that Rāghava's spouse was bewailing like a helpless woman. By the eyes of asceticism, I perceive, O daughter of Janaka, that you are innocent. You have come under my shelter, O Vaidehi-to be you consoled. O child, the pious ascetics live around my hermitage. They shall daily take care of you as their daughter. Do you accept this Arghya now, and confiding in me do you remove your grief. Be not sorry for anything; consider that you have come to your own home. Hearing the wonderful words of the great ascetic, Sītā humbly touched his feet and said Your desire shall be fulfilled. Saying this, She with folded hands, followed the ascetic. Beholding the great ascetic and Sītā approach, the wives, of the Rsis, delighted neared them and said. “Do you come, O foremost of Rșis, you have arrived here after a long time. We all bow to you-do you order what we shall do." Hearing their words the great Vālmīki replied in worthy accents-"This Sītā is the wife of the intelligent Rāma, the daughter-in-law of Daśaratha and the daughter of Janaka. She has now come to our hermitage. She is chaste and innocent, still her husband has renounced her. So we should all protect her. She is worthy of your reverence specially while such is order of mine-your preceptor. So. do you all, take care of her with great affection. Having consigned the charge of Sītā to the hands of the female ascetics, the great and illustrious ascetic Vālmīki, followed by his disciples, speedily proceeded towards his holy hermitage.