As the lord of Rākşasas was ranging the earth frightening everyone, Nārada foremost of ascetics, came to that wood mounted on a cloud, Thereupon saluting him, the night-ranger Tennecked one enquired after his welfare as well as the occasion of his visit. That Devarsi the exceedingly energetic Nārada of immeasurable splendour, seated on the back of the cloud, addressed Ravana, who was stationed in Puspaka, saying, O lord of Raks asas, o placid one, O son of Viśravā, stay. I am well pleased with your prowess and fame. And even as Vişnu had pleased me by destroying the Daityas, you pleased me by harassing the Gandharvas and serpents. I will tell you something. If you would hear what I have to say then, O child, listen heedfully as I unfold it. Why, my child, do you slay these*; you are incapable of being slain by even the celestials. All these (men) are subject to death, they are verily slain. *i.e. human being. The world of man is unworthy of being afflicted by you who are incapable of being destroyed by Deities, Dānavas, Daityas, Yakşas, Gandharvas and Rākşasas. Who should slay creatures, who are ever stupid in respect of their welfare, environed by mighty dangers, and encompassed by hundreds of decrepitude and decease? What sensible person can set his heart on slaying human beings, who are everywhere beset with a perennial stream of evils. Do not you enfeeble those beings who are already enfeebled and smitten by Divinity with hunger, thirst, old age etc. and who are overwhelmed with sorrow, and grief. O mighty-armed one, o lord of Rākşasas, behold man, albeit having their sense stupified, engaged in the pursuit of various interests, and themselves not understanding their own ways;* some pass their time merrily with dancing and playing on musical instruments while others weep distressfully with tears streaming from their eyes down their cheeks. *Gati, according to the commentator, means the time of employment and suffering. I think the ordinary meaning answers, and give it accordingly. Down fallen on account of their attachment for their mothers and fathers and sons, and of their desires touching their wives and friends they set small store by labours having the hereafter as their object. What then is the use of affecting a race that is brought down ever by its own infatuation. O placid one, this world is verily conquered by you, there is no doubt. These for certain will have to repair to the abode of Yama. Therefore, O Paulastya, O captor of hostile capitals, do you put down Yama. On him being conquered, all will doubtless be conquered by you. Thus addressed Lankā's lord, flaming in native energy, addressed Narada, laughing and saluting him. 'O you that delightest in the sport of gods and Gandharvas, and that take pleasure in warfare, I am ready to go to the nethermost regions for the purpose of conquest. And conquering the three worlds, and bringing under subjection serpents and celestials I shall for ambrosia churn the nether regions. Then the reverend sage Närada spoke to the Ten-necked Ravana, Who save you can on forsooth go that journey? Verily, o irrepressible one, O destroyer of foes, the way leading to the city of the lord of the dead is difficult of access. Thereat laughing, the Ten-faced one said to the saint resembling a mass of white clouds, "This is done. Therefore,* O great Brahmana, intent upon slaying the Vaivasvata's son, I will go by this way which lead to the king-the offspring of the sun. *As you has commanded me. O master, from wrath I have vowed that I will, eager for encounter, O reverend one, conquer the four Lokapālas. Then here go I to the city of the lord of the Pitſs; and I am determined to compass the death of him that visit creatures with smart. Having delivered himself thus and saluted the sage, he, entering the southern way with his councillors, proceeded along. The exceedingly energetic Nārada best of Brāhmaṇas resembling a smokeless fire, remaining rapt for a while, began to reflect. How can (Ravana) conquer Time who, when its life wane, righteously visit with affection the time, sphere with Indra, fraught with mobile and immobile. How can this lord of Raksasas, of himself, go to him who, resembling another fire, bear to the gifts and acts (of persons), that high-souled one of whom attaining consciousness, people put forth their activity; and; afflicted with the fear of whom these three worlds fall away? How can (Rāvana) subdue him who ordain things both great and small, who met rewards and punishments for good and bad acts, and who himself has conquered the three worlds? Resorting* to what other means shall Rāvana secure (victory)? *Explains the commentator: "Time has every thing under its control. Like the all-enclosing space, time pervades all that is. This being so, resorting what transcending Time, shall Rāvana obtain victory over it." I am curious about it. To Yama's abode shall I go for witnessing the encounter between Yama and the Raksasa.