Thereupon having heard everything about Arajă from a disciple, he, surrounded by his pupils, arrived at his own hermitage and beheld her there poorly, soiled with dust and like to the morning rays of the moon possessed by a planet. He was stricken with hunger and was greatly incensed on beholding his daughter in that wretched plight, as if burning the three worlds with rage. Addressing his pupils, he said. Do you witness today the dreadful calamity, arising out of my flaming ire, of the vicious Daņda treading the path of immorality. This vicious wight has placed his hands in the burning flame so he shall, along with followers, meet with destruction. Since that vile being has perpetrated such a dreadful crime he shall forsooth suffer the consequence thereof. Within seven nights, the wicked and vicious Daņda, with his son, soldiers and retinue, shall meet with death. Showering dust Indra shall destroy, to the extent of a hundred Yojana, the territory of this vicious king. And all creatures mobile and immobile, wherever they might be, shall be destroyed with this downpour of dust. All animals as far as this Daņdas' territory extends, shall be destroyed within seven nights. Having said this, with eyes reddened with ire, USanas, Bhrgu's son, said to the inmates of his hermitage: Do you all go and wait outside this kingdom. Hearing the words of the preceptor Sukra, the inmates left the hermitage and lived at a place beyond the limit of Danda's territories. Having thus addressed the inmates of the hermitage the great saint, said to Arajās. O unfortunate girl, with a devoted mind do you wait at this hermitage. Without any anxiety O Arajās, do you wait for the time at the picturesque banks of this pond extending over a Yojana. Within seven nights whoever shall approach you, shall be destroyed with this downpour of dust. Hearing the words of the Brāhmaṇa saint and preceptor śukra, Arajās sorrowfully said to her father 'it shall be done.' There upon Sukrācārya went away and lived elsewhere. According to the words of the saint, the entire kingdom of Danda, with servants, army, and conveyances, was destroyed within seven nights. O Rāma, in the golden age, the province between the mountains Vindhya and Saivala comprising Danda's territories, imprecated by the Brāhmaṇa saint, in consequence of the iniquity of the vicious souled, was reduced into a desert. From that time it passes by the name of Dandaka forest. And it is otherwise called Janasthāna because the ascetics used to perform austerities there. O Rāghava, I have thus related to you, all you did ask of me. O hero, the time for performing evening rites has come. Behold O foremost of men, having performed ablution, the great saints, on all sides, with jars full of water, are worshipping the sun. Having accepted adoration in the shape of Vedic hymns chanted by Brāhmaṇas, wellversed in Vedas, the illustrious Aditya is about to be set. Therefore, O Rāma, do you perform the ceremony.