The highly powerful Mahendra being thus defeated by Ravana's son, all the celestials, taking the patriarch Brahmä before them, went to Lanka. Having obtained Rāvana encircled by his sons and brothers the Patriarch, stationed in the welkin, calmly said. My son, Ravana, I have been pleased with your son in the conflict. Oh! what wonderful prowess, what strength-equal or greater than your. You have, by your own prowess, conquered the three worlds — your promise has borne fruits-I have been pleased with you-both the father and son. O Rāvana, this your son is highly powerful and gifted with great strength and he shall be celebrated in the world under the appellation of 'Indrajit' or the conqueror of Indra. The Raksasa shall be powerful and irrepressible, by those help, O King, the celestials have been brought under your subjection. Do you therefore, O you having long arms, release Mahendra, she chastiser of Pāka and for setting him free what do you want from the celestials? Thereupon the highly powerful Indrajit-the subduer of enemies, said: "If do you say so, O god, I pray for immortality." Thereat the highly powerful patriarch said to Meghanāda, “There is none perfectly immortal on earth among created beings, birds, quadrupeds and other highly powerful beings.” Hearing the words uttered by the grandfather, the highly powerful Meghanāda said to the eternal lord. Hear, then, what I want in exchange for releasing Sakra. May a chariot with horses rise up from fire when I shall offer sacrifices to it, being desirous of vanquishing my enemies in the conflict. And may I be immortal as long as I shall remain on that car. This is the boon I have resolved upon praying for. May I meet with destruction, O deity, whenever I shall engage in fight without finishing my offerings to fire. All others, O god, attain to immortality by virtue of devout penances but I shall acquire that by dint of my own prowess. Where to the grand-father replied saying "so be it." Thereupon Meghanäda released Indra and the celestials returned to their own abode. In the interval, O Rāma, Indra became poorly, divested of his immortal brilliance, stricken with anxiety and pensive. Beholding him in that plight the grand-father of the deities said:-O performer of hundred sacrifices, why did you formerly perpetrate that mighty iniquity? O Chief of the immortals! O lord!, some creatures were all of the same colour, same speech, and same appearance. There was no difference visible in their appearance or marks. Thereupon, with wholeminded-ness, I began to think of these created beings. And I created a female distinct from them. Collecting all those limbs that were most excellent among the created, I made a female under the name of Ahalyä. Hal means uglinessone born from Hal is called Halya. That female was known as Ahalyā because she had nothing blameable in her, I gave her that name. Having created that female I was thinking, O king of the celestials! O foremost of the deities!, on whom I should confer her. Being proud of dignity, O Sakra, O lord, O Purandara you did regard her in your mind as your spouse. I placed her under the care of the high-souled Gautama and he rendered her back after many long years. Thereupon considering the patience and accomplished asceticism of Gautama I married her with him. That virtuous-souled, great ascetic enjoyed her company; and for my thus conferring her upon Gautama alll the celestials disappointed. But being enraged and possessed by lust you did repair to the hermitage of the ascetic and see her resplendent like the flaming fire. Maddened with lust and ire you did ravish her and you was seen in that hermitage by the great ascetic. were You were then imprecated by him, enraged and gifted with great effulgence saying, 'O lord of the celestials, you have attained to a change of circumstances-for which, O Vásava, you have fearlessly ravished my spouse. You shall, therefore, O Sakra, go under the arms of the enemies, in conflict. And this vile desire, O you having a vicious intellect, which you have first created, shall undoubtedly spread in the world of mortals. Whoever shall commit this crime, shall be half responsible for it and the other half shall descend upon you; and forsooth your position shall not be permanent. Whoever shall be the lord of the celestials, shall not have his position secure. This is the curse I give, which I have communicated to you. Having remonstrated with his wife that one of devout penances said to her-'O vicious one, let your beauty be spoiled in the vicinity of the hermitage. You are gifted with beauty and youth but your mind is fickle; so you shall not continue as the single beautiful damsel in the world. All created beings shall participate your beauty; your matchless beauty has brought about this mischief.' Thenceforward all created beings were gifted with beauty. Thereupon she propitiated the ascetic Gautama saying, “O twice-born one, I was unwittingly ravished by Indra, assuming your form. I have not committed this willingly, O ascetic-so do you be propitiated with me.” Ahalyā having said this, Gautama replied:In the race of Ikşvākus, there shall be born a highly effulgent and mighty car-warrior, known in the world as Răma; for performing the rites of a Brahmana, the mighty-armed Visnu, assuming a human form, shall repair to the forest. You shall be purified when you shall behold him, O fair damsel. He shall be able to purify you from the iniquity perpetrated. Having treated him as a guest when you shall come to me again, you shall live with me, O you having a fair countenance. Having said this that ascetic returned to his hermitage. And thenceforward the wife, of that ascetic chanting the themes of Brāhmaṇa, engaged in austere penances. You have met with all this in consequence of the imprecation of that ascetic. Therefore, O you having long arms, do you think of your past iniquity. For that curse and nothing else, O Vasava, you have been brought under the grasp of enemies. Having controlled your senses, do you soon undertake a sacrifice in honour of Vişņu. You shall be purified by that sacrifice and go to heaven; and your son, O lord of celestials, has not been destroyed in the conflict. He has been taken into the ocean by his grand father. Hearing this and having celebrated the sacrifice in honour of Vişnu he again went to the region of celestials and reigned there as their king. I have thus described to you the strength of Indrajit-what to speak of others he vanquished even Indra-the king of the celestials. Hearing the words of Agastya, Rāma, Lakşmaņa, Vānaras and Rākşasas all said wonderful it is; and Vibhīşaņa, who was by the side of Rama, said:-After a long time, the old recollections have come to my mind. Thereupon Rāma said to Agastya-All, you have said, is true. And Agastya said Rāma, Rāvaņa, the thorn of people, then grew in power, by whom, in the company of his son, Indra, the lord of the celestials, was defeated.