Having thus given the command of a huge and dreadful army to Khara and consoled his sister the Ten-necked demon was satisfied and freed from anxiety. Thereupon that highly powerful lord of Rāksasas with his followers entered an excellent garden in Larkā named Nikumbhilā. There, he saw, filled with hundreds of sacrificial posts and altars, a sacrifice being celebrated, as if burning in its lustre. He beheld his fearful son Meghanāda too, clad in an antelope skin and holding Sikhă and Kamandalu. Having seen him (there) and embraced him by his arms the lord of Lankā said: “What are you after, O my child? Tell me the truth." Thereupon that foremost of twice-born ones Usanas* of austere penances, wishing the prosperity of the sacrifice, said to Rāvana, the Raksasa chief. *Another name of Sukra. Indrajit took the vow of silence so he thought it improper to disturb him. Hear, I shall relate to you everything, O king; your son has met with the fruits of many a sacrifice, Agnistoma, Asvamedha, Bahusuvarņaka, Rājsūya, Gomedha and Vaisnava. And being engaged in this Maheśvara sacrifice, which is incapable of being celebrated by men, your son has obtained boon from Pasupati’ himself. He has also obtained illusory powers, which create darkness or ignorance, namely of ranging in the sky, of being eternal, of ascending a celestial car which curses at will and of creating darkness. O lord of Rākşasas, these illusory powers being used in a conflict, even the celestials and Asuras shall not be able to perceive his course. Besides he has obtained a quiver, the arrows whereof shall never be exhausted, a bow, which is hard of being got by and a dreadful weapon which destroys enemies in a conflict. Having obtained these boons your son, O you having ten faces, and myself, the sacrifice being finished, have been waiting to behold you. Whereto the Ten-necked demon replied, You have not done well as you have worshipped, with diverse articles my enemies, Indra and others. However, what is done is done, there is virtue in this, no doubt; come, o gentle one, we shall go to our house. Thereupon going there with his son and Vibhișana, the Ten-necked demon got down all those damsels, speechless with tears, gifted with auspicious marks, the precious females of the celestials, Dānavas and Räkşasas. Perceiving his vicious desire for those damsels, the virtuoussouled (Vibhisana) said. You do (still) follow your own whims, knowing that people are injured by these actions which destroy piety, wealth and fame. Having slain their kinsmen you past brought these beautiful damsels hither, but disregarding you, O King, Madhu has carried away Kumbhīnasī. Ravana said:-“I do not understand all this. Who is that Madhu, who has been named by you?" Worked up with ire Vibhîşana said to his brother: "Hear, the fruit of your vicious actions has arrived. There was an old Räkşasas, celebrated for his wisdom, named Mālyavān, the elder brother of Sumālin, our maternal grandfather. His granddaughter is Kumbhinaşi and is born of our maternal aunt Analā.; so she is virtually our sister. Your son being engaged in the sacrifice and myself being under waters she was stolen away, Oking, by the powerful Rākşasa Madhu. Kumbhakarma, ogreat king, was then asleep. Having slain all the powerful Rākşasas and your councillors, he had stolen her away, O king, who was in your inner apartments. Hearing this even, O great king, we have pardoned and not slain him; an unmarried girl should be given away to her husband by her brothers, but that has not been the case, this is merely the result of your vicious actions, wicked-minded as you are. And this you have met with instantly, so the people say. Hearing the words of Vibhīşaņa, Råvana, the lord of Rākşasas, became agitated like an ocean, by the recollection of his vicious deeds. And engaged, with blood-red eyes the ten-necked demon said. Get my chariot ready soon and let all the heroes of our party be prepared. Let my brother Kumbhakarņa and other leading night-rangers, armed with various weapons, ascend their conveyances. Having slain today in the encounter that Madhu, who is not afraid of Ravana, I shall, encircled by my friends, and desirous of battle, proceed to the region of the celestials. Thereupon issued out for battle leading Rākşasas four thousand Akşauhiņi strong taking various weapons. Commanding them Indrajit proceeded the army, Răvaņa went in the middle and Kumbhakarna was in the rear; the virtuoussouled Vibhīşaņa remained in Lankā, being engaged in pious observances. And the rest of the leading Rākşasas proceeded towards the city of Madhu. All the Rākşasas went covering the sky, some on asses, some on camels, some on horses, some on quick-coursing porpoises and some on huge serpents. And beholding Rävaņa proceed, hundreds of Daityas, inimical to the celestials, followed him. Having arrived at the city of Madhu and entered there the ten-necked demon did not behold Madhu but espied his sister. Thereupon being afraid of the king of Raksasas, Kumbhinasi, with folded palms, touched his feet with her crown. Having raised her up the Rākşasa-chief Ravana said “No fear, what can I do for you? Where to she replied “O King, O you having long arms, if you are pleased with me, do not slay my husband today, Oconfrere of honours. It is said there is no other fear like this for damsels of high pedigree. The greatest of fears is that of being a widow. Be you truthful, O king of Kings, do you look towards me, who am thus begging. You have yourself said, O king, "no fear.” Being thus addressed Råvana said to his sister there: "Do you tell me speedily where is your husband. I shall go with him for conquests to the region of the celestials." Out of pity and love for you I refrain from slaying Madhu. Being thus accosted, that Raksasi, being pleased, got her sleeping husband, the night-ranger, up and said. Here is my brother, the highly power Dasagrīva. Being desirous of conquering the region of the celestials he prays for your help. Do you therefore proceed to his help, O Raksasa, with all they friends. It behoves you to help him, who out of affection for me, has prayed for your help.” Hearing those words Madhu said:-"So be it." Approaching a little he beheld that foremost of Rākşasas and duly welcomed Rāvana. Being thus honoured the highly power Dasagrīva spent one night in Madhu's house and then, addressed himself for departure. Thereupon reaching the hill Kailāsa, the abode of Vaisravana, the lord of Raksasas, resembling Mahendra, encamped his army.