After a while the Rākşasa named Sumāli, coming up from the nether regions, began to range all over the earth. And resembling dark clouds, that lord of Rakşasas decked in ear-rings of burnished gold, taking his daughter like to Sri herself without her lotus, and wandering over the earth, saw the lord of riches journeying in his Puspaka, going to see his sire-that lord, the son of Pulastya. And seeing that one resembling an immortal and like to fire, journeying on, (Sumāli) struck with amazement, entered the nether regions from the earth. And that mighty-minded one reflected thus, ‘By adopting what measure may the welfare of the Rākṣasa he brought about, and how can we increase (in power)?' And that great-minded lord of Rākşasas, resembling dark clouds, decked in burnished earrings of gold, then began to reflect. And then the Raksasa addressed his daughter, named Kaikasi. O daughter, the time has come when I should give you away. Your youth is about to be passed. (Kept back) by the fear of refusal, no suiter has sought you (up to his time). But desirous of acquiring religious merit, we are striving our best in your interests. My daughter, you are finished with every perfection like to Śrī herself. The being father to a daughter is misery to every one that seekes honour. O daughter, one does not know who shall ask for one's daughter. Whenever may a daughter be conferred, a daughter stayes, placing in uncertainly the three races* to which she is related. *The races respectively of her father, mother and husband. Do you, my daughter, seek for your husband that best and foremost of ascetics sprung in the line of Prajăpati Pulastya's son, Viśravā, and of yourself accept him (for your lord). Then, O daughter, even as this lord of riches, so you will, without doubt, have sons resembling the Sun himself in energy. Hearing that speech of his, the daughter for the sake of dignity of her sire, going to where Viśravā was practising penances, stood there. In the meanwhile, O Rama, that twice-born one-Pulastya's was performing the Agnihotra, like the fourth Fire itself. And without minding that terrific time, (Kaikasi), having regard to the dignity of her sire, coming up before him, stood (there) son hanging her head down towards his feet and throwing up the earth with her great foe. Seeing that one of the shapely hips, having a face fair as the full Moon, (that exceedingly high-minded ascetic) flaming in energy accosted her thus. O gentle one, whose daughter are you? And when do you come hither? And what is your errand? And for whom (do you come)? O beauteous (damsel), truly tell me this. Thus addressed, the girl, with joined hands, said, 'O ascetic, you are competent to get at my intent by virtue of your own power. Yet, O Brahmarși, know me as having come here at the mandate of my sire. My name is Kaikasī. The rest do you read yourself. Thereupon, the ascetic, entering into contemplation, said these words, 'O gentle lady, I have learnt the purpose that is in your heart. O you having the gait of a mad elephant, there reigns a powerful desire in you for having offspring. Inasmuch as you have come to me at this fierce hour, hearken, you amiable one, as to the kind of offspring that you shall bring forth. You shall, O you of graceful hips, bring forth terrible and grim-visaged Rākşasas delighting in frightful friends, and of cruel deeds. Hearing his speech, she, bowing down, said, 'O reverend (ascetic), such sons of terrific ways seek I not from you that follow the Veda. Therefore it behoves you to favour me.' On being thus besought by the girl, Visravabest of ascetics, again addressed Kaikasi, like the full moon addressing Rohini.* *Hesperus. O fair-faced one, the son that you bring forth last, shall be like to my line, he shall, without doubt-be righteous-souled. Having been thus accosted, the girl, O Rama, after a length of time brought forth a very terrible and hideous offspring having the form of a Raksasa, having ten necks, furnished with large teeth, and resembling a heap of collyrium, with coppery lips, twenty arms, huge faces, and flaming hair. On his having been born, jacka.s with flaming mouths and other ferocious beasts began to gyrate on the left. That god showered down blood; and the clouds uttered forth harsh sounds. And the sun was deprived of his splendour; and meteors began to dart to the earth. And the earth shook; and the wind swept away violently. And that lord of streams-the ocean, which was calm before, became agitated. And his sire resembling his grand-father named him, (saying), 'As this one has been born with ten necks, he shall be called Ten-necked.' After him was born Kumbhakarņa endowed with prodigious strength, than whose proportions there are none other's on earth. Then was born she that, having a frightful visage, goes under the name of Surpanakha; the righteous Vibhīşaņa is the youngest son of Kaikasi. On that one endowed with great strength having been born, blossoms were showered down from heaven; and celestial kettle-drums were sounded in the heavenly regions. And then there arose the sounds of 'Excellent!' 'Excellent!' And in that extensive forest those exceedingly energetic ones, Kumbhakarņa and the Ten-necked one grew up, and became the sources of anxiety to the people. Kumbhakarma, maddened to the height, devouring mighty-saints devoted to religion, constantly ranged the triune world in a dissatisfied spirit. But the righteous Vibhișana, ever intent on piety, dwelt there studying the Veda, restraining his fare, and controlling his senses. It came to pass that after a length of time the god, Vaisravana-lord of riches-came to see his sire, mounted on Puspaka. Seeing him, the Raksasi-Kaikasi-flaming up in energy, coming to the Ten-necked one, represented to him. O son, behold your brother, Vaisravana, enfolded in effulgence; and, albeit of equal fraternity, behold you in this plight! Therefore, O Ten-necked one, O you of measureless prowess, do you so strive that you also, my son, may be like Vaisravana himself. Hearing that speech of his mother, the powerful Ten-necked one was wrought up with exceeding great ill-will, and he vowed then. I truly promise to you that I will be equal to my brother (in energy), or excel him in it. Therefore do you cast off this sorrow in your heart. And influenced by that passion, the tennecked one with his younger brother began to perform rigid acts, with his mind fixed on asceticism. 'I must through austerities have my wish,' thus fixed and resolved, he compassing his end, came to the sacred asylum of Gokarna. There the Rākşasa of unrivalled prowess along with his younger brother carried on austerities and thus gratified that lord-the greatfather. And being gratified (with him), he conferred on him boons bringing on victory.