Thus afflicted, the deities, sages, and ascetics, wrought up with fear, sought the protection of that god of gods Maheswara creator and destroyer of the cosmos, unborn, of an unmanifest form, the stay of all creatures, worthy of being adored, and the . supreme preceptors (of all). And coming to that enemy of Kama* and foc of Tripura the three-eyed (Deity), the gods with their voices faltering through fear, represented with joined hands. *The Hindu Cupid. Mahadeva had burnt to ashes Kama, when he had the fool-hardiness to disturb the contemplation of the former. By the way, Kalidasa has cared his faery fabric, entitled Kumāra Sambhava, on the basis of this legend. O reverend one, the creatures of the lord of creatures are being (sorely) troubled by the sons of Sukesa, given to harassing their foes,-swolen with insolence on account of the benn conferred on them by the great-father, asylums, constituting our refuges,-have been divested of their power of granting shelter, and driving off the deities from the etherial regions, they are sporting there like the immortals. 'I am Vişnu,' 'I am Rudra,' 'I am the king of the celestials,' 'I am Yama,' 'I an Varuna,' 'I am the moon,' 'I am the Sun,' flattering themselves in this fashion, Māli and Sumāli and the Rākşasa Malyavān as well as those going before them, are annoying (the gods), breathing exhilaration of martial spirits. Therefore, O god, it behove you to liberate us from fear, who have been greatly tormented by it. Do you, assuming your terrific form, slay the thorns of the celestials. Thus addressed by the immortals in a body, that lord, Kaparddi of red-blue hue, reflecting that it would be wrong for him to destroy Sukesa (with his own hands), spoke to the gods. I shall not slay them, you gods; they are incapable of being slain by me. But I shall unfold to you the way in which they will be destroyed. Do you, you Maharsis, in the heat of this affairs, seck the shelter of Visnu. That lord will slay them. Thereat, saluting Maheśvara with the sounds of Jaya, (the celestial) afflicted with the fear of the night-rangers, presented themselves before Visnu. And bowing down to the god holding the conch, discus and mace, and paying him high homage, they, greatly flurried, addressed him about the sons of Sukeśa, saying. O god, by virtue of the boon (that has been bestowed on them), resembling the three fires, Sukesa's three sons, assailing us, have deprived us of our abode. There is a city named Lankā, stationed on the top of Trikuta, (extremely) difficult of entrance. Taking up their station at that place, the nightrangers in a body pursue us. Do you, O slayer of Madhu, destroy them for our welfare. We have sought your shelter. Become our refuge, O foremost of celestials. Do you dedicate to Yama the lotuses of their faces, severed (in pieces) with your discus. Save you, we have none who can, while tormented with fright, inspire us with courage. Slay in encounter the elated Rākşasas along with their adherents; and even as the sun dried up dew, do you dispel this fear of ours. Thus accosted by the deities, that god of gods Janārdana who brings fear to foes cheering up the celestial up the celestials, said to them. 'I know the Raksasa, Sukesa, as flushed with the boon bestowed by Iśāna. And I also know his sons, of whom Mālyavān is the eldest. Those worst if Rākṣasas that have over-riden your dignity will I, wrought up with wrath, slay (in battle); therefore, you gods, be of good cheer. Thus addressed by the mighty Vişņu, the gods, highly rejoiced, went to their respective quarters, extolling Janārdana. And hearing of the activity of the celestials; the night-rangers Mālyavân addressed his heroic brothers, saying. The immortals and sages, going to Sankara, spoke these words, desirous of our destruction, The terrific sons of Sukeśa, puffed up, and swollen on account of their strength flowing from the boon, are crossing us at every step. We have been overpowered by the Rākṣasas. And, o lord of creatures, from fear of those wicked-minded ones, we cannot remain in our own homes. Therefore, to do us good, do you, O threeeyed one, destroy them; and, O best of consuming ones, do you with your roars, burn them up. Thus addressed by the deities, the slayer of Andhaka, hearing their speech, said, shaking his head and hands. You gods, Sukesa's sons are incapable of being slain by me in battle. But I shall tell you the means whereby they may be slain. Do you seek the shelter of him who hold the discus and mace in his hands, and who is clad in a yellow attire, of Janardana, Hari, even of the auspicious Nārāyaṇa. Having received this counsel of Hara, they, rendering reverence to that enemy of Kāma, came the abode of Nārāyana and communicated everything to him. Then Nārāyana spoke to the celestials with Indra at their head, I will slay those foes of the celestials. You gods, cast off all fear! to O foremost of Rākşasas, Hari promised to the frightened celestials that he would slay us. Therefore do you think as to what is fit. Hiranyakaśipu has met with death (at the hands of Hari), as also other enemies of the immortals. And Namuci and Kālanemi, and that foremost of heroes, Sanhrada and Rādheya, and Bahumāyī, and the virtuous Lokapāla, and Yamala, and Arjuna, and Hardikya, and Sumbha and Niśumbhaka, Asuras and Dānavas endowed with strength and possessed of terrific prowess all these, who having come to the field, had never been heard of as worsted, who had performed hundreds of sacrifices, who had been well skilled in illusion, who had been versed in every branch of knowledge, and who were the terrors of their foes have by hundreds and by thousands been destroyed by Narayana. Learning this, it behove you to do what would conduce to the behoof of all. It is a sore task to defeat Narayana, who wish to slay us. Thereat Sumāli and Māli, hearing the words of Malyavān, said to their eldest brother, like the Asvins addressing Vāsava. We have studied, performed sacrifices, practised charity, and obtained riches; and attaining long health and long life, we have established sterling righteousness in our path. With arms plunging into the sea of celestials, we have conquered our unrivalled enemies. Therefore, we have no fear touching death. Even Narayana and Rudra, Sakra and Yama, ever fear to stay before us (in the field). O lord of Raksasas. There is no occasion for Visnu's displeasure of us. The mind of Visnu has wavered in consequence of the evil caused by the celestials. Therefore, will we even avenge ourselves on the gods, from whom has sprung this wrong. Having taken counsel together, those powerful ones conciliated their forces. And proclaiming (their order) that preparations were to be made, all the foremost Nairtas sallied forth for battle, like to those led by Jambha and Vſtra. O Rāma, having thus taken counsel together, with all the preparations complete, those hugebodied and redoubtable Rākşasa marched forth for conflict, mounted on cars, and elephants, and horses resembling elephants, and mules, and kine, and camels, and purpoises, and serpents, makaras, and tortoises, and fishes, and fowls resembling Garua himself, lions and tigers and boars and Srmaras and Camaras.' up with pride of prowess, the Raksasa Marica, leaving Lanka, and the enemies of the celestials went to the heavenly regions for battle, 1. How purpoises could be pressed into the service passes my conception, unless Sicumdra have any other meaning. 2. Wilson gives the meaning: (1) a kind of animal,' and (2) 'a young deer, 3. Bos Gruniens. Perceiving the destruction of Lanka hand, those deities that had taken up their quarters there, everywhere were struck with fear and felt their spirits depressed. Mounting the best of the cars, the Rakşasas by hundreds and thousands with intent mind swiftly sallied forth for the celestial regions. And the deities (aforementioned) followed the tract of the Raksasas. At the command of Kala, terrible evil omens foreshadowing the destruction of the Raksasachief began to arise on the earth well as in the sky. The clouds showered down bones and hot blood. The oceans overleapt their continents and the mountains shook. And jackals of terrific forms, having voices resembling the roaring of clouds, bursting out into a horse-laugh, began to emit cries frightfully. Creatures were one after another seen to drop down; and mighty swarms of vultures, with mouths belching forth flames, began to wheel over the Raksasa, like to Kala himself. And blood-footed pigeons and Sarikas* darted off (around). And crows and two-legged cats began to cry in loud accents. *A species of harlot. But fast bound with the noose of Death, the Raksasas, proud of their strength, disregarding these omens, march on, and do not stay their course, Mälyavān and Sumāli possessed of prodigious strength, going before the Raksasas, like flaming fires. Even as the gods take refuge under Dhātā, the night-rangers take refuge under Mālyavân resembling the mountain, Mälyavān. Under the command of Māli that host of Raksasas, roaring like mighty clouds, inspired with the desire of victory, went to the celestial regions. The lord Nārāyana, hearing of the preparations of the Rākşasas from a celestial messenger, set his heart on fight. And equipped with weapons and quivers, he mounted on Vinata's offspring.* *Garuda, Narayana's vehicle. And donning on his mail furnished with the effulgence of a thousand suns, fastening his spotless quivers filled with shafts, being engirt with his waist-band and bright falchion, and equipped with his conch, discus, mace, Sariga,* sword, and other superior weapons, that lotuseyed lord, seated on Vinata's offspring like a very mountain, set out speedily for compassing the destruction of the Raksasas. Seated on Suparma's* back, the blue-brown Hari clad in yellow attire resembled a mass of clouds on the crest of the golden mountain, with lightning playing through it. *Lit. fair-feathered-a name of Garua. And hymned by Siddhas and celestials and sages and mighty (semi-divine) serpents and Gandharvas and Yakşas, the enemy of the Asura hosts presented himself, bearing in his hands the discus, sword, that weapon Śärnga and the conch. The Raksasa-hosts, struck by the wind produced by the wings of Suparņa, with their pennons swinging to and fro and their weapons scattered about, quaked like the blue summit of a mountain with its crags tossed about. Then the night-rangers, hemming in Madhava,* began to pierce him with thousands of excellent sharpened weapons dyed in flesh and blood, and resembling the fire of Doomsday. *One of the many designations of Visnu.