Having spent the night on the banks of Kesini, the mighty car-warrior Lakşmaņa, got up early in the morning and again proceeded on his journey (home) and reached in the noon the city of Ayodhyā filled with various jewels and delighted and plump citizens. But the high-souled Lakşmaņa became greatly sorry stricken with the thought as to what he should relate on approaching the feet of Rāma. While proceeding with this thought he saw the highly picturesque palace of Rāma resembling the rays of the moon. Having descended from his car at the palacegate, Laksmana, the foremost of men, with his face down wards and a distressed heart, unobstructed, entered the palace. Having entered there he saw his elder brother Rāma seated poorly on an excellent seat with his eyes full of tears. Being greatly pained at the sight, Saumitri touched his feet and with folded palms said. O worshipful sir, having obeyed your behest's I have left the daughter of Janaka at the holy hermitage of Vālmiki near the banks of the Gangā. Having left that illustrious pure lady at the skirt of the hermitage. I have again come to serve your feet Do you not grieve, O foremost of men, for such is the cause of time. The intelligent people like you do not grieve. When there is grow there is decay, where there is prosperity there is ruin, and where there is birth there is death. Therefore attachment to wife, sons, friends and riches is not proper, for surely shall be brought about separation with them. O Kakutstha, While you can control yourself and your mind, should you not be able to bear this trifling pain of separation? Leading men like yourself are never overwhelmed by all these things. O Rāghava, you shall again be blamed by the people. In fear of this calumny, O king, that you have renounced Maithili. And if do you grieve for that spouse your calumny shall undoubtedly be deep-routed in the kingdom. Therefore do you restore yourself patiently, O foremost of men. Do you give up this weakness and or not sorry. The intelligent Lakşmaņa, the son of Sumitrā, having said this, Rāma, the descendant of Käkutstha and fond of friends, with great delight said. You have spoken the truth, O Laksmana, O foremost of men. I have been greatly delighted, O hero for your carrying out my orders. O gentle Saumitrī, my grief and sorrow have been removed for those pleasant words of yours.