Hearing the words of Laksmana and smiling, the highly effulgent descendant of Raghu, Rāma, skilled in the are of speech, replied. Lakşmaņa, O foremost of men, you have truly related the story of Vſtra's destruction and the fruits of horse-sacrifice. 0gentle one, I have heard, that formerly in the province of Valhīka, the graceful king lla, the son of the patriarch Kardama, was highly pious. O foremost of men, having brought the entire earth under his subjects like to his own sons. O descendant of Raghu, being terrified, the generous deities, the rich Daityas, the highly powerful Nägas, the irrepressible Rakşasas, Gandharvas and Yakşas used to adore him perpetually. The high-souled Ila being enraged, the three worlds used to be convulsed with terror. And albeit so very powerful the highly illustrious king of Vālhika never swerved from the path of morality nor neglected his deities and rather intelligently used to administer all business. Once on a time in the picturesque season of spring the mighty-armed Ila, with his army and conveyances, entered into a charming forest, and on the pretext of hunting, slew hundreds and thousands of deer. With slaying deer only the high-souled king was not satisfied. He slew millions of diverse other animals. In this way being engaged in hunting the king Ila arrived where Kārtikeya was born. At that time, in that hilly fountain there was sporting in the company of his followers, the irrepressible god of gods, the three-eyed deity with the daughter of the Chief of mountains. Being desirous of satisfying the goddess Umă, her lord. whose emblem is bull, was sporting under the guise of a female. In that forest land, all male animals or trees were metamorphosed into the other sex at that time. A hunting, the king Ila, the son of Kardama, arrived at that place and saw all animals and trees changed into female forms. And immediately the king and his army were changed into similar forms. Finding himself in that plight the king Ila was greatly sorry, and thinking that the misfortune was owing to the influence of the god of gods Umā's lord, he was greatly terrified. There with his followers and army the king took shelter or the high-souled and red-throated deity. There upon the great god, the conferror of boons, with the goddess, smiling said: Rise up, O son of Kardama, O you of great strength, O gentle one, do you beg of me any other boon than that of obtaining your manhood. Being thus disappointed by the great deity, the king Ila, metamorphosed into a female, became greatly sorry and did not pray for any other boon. Being stricken with great sorrow, the king, with whole heart, saluted the daughter of the mountain-chief and said:-0 goddess, you are the protectress of all-you do confer boons on all; seeing you does not become fruitless. Do you therefore have compassion on me. There upon, cognisant of that king's intention, the goddess, with Hara's consent, said. Half of the boon, that you shall beg of us both, shall be granted by Mahādeva, and the other half shall be granted by me. Do you therefore beg of me the half. Hearing of that excellent and wondrous boon the king became greatly delighted and said:-If you are pleased with me, O goddess, do you confer upon me this boon, that I may be for one month, a female gifted with wonderful beauty in the three worlds and for another month I may be a male. There upon understanding king's desire, the beautiful goddess Pārvatī, mercifully said: The boon, according to your desire, shall be granted. O king, when you shall attain to the male figure, you shall not remember anything of your female form. And when you shall a assume the charming female figure you shall forget everything of your male state. O Lakşmaņa, by virtue of this boon, the king Ila for one month used to become a man and for the next used to become female, charming in the three worlds under the name of Ilă.