The lord of Räkşasas was installed along with his brothers. And then he thought of the giving away in marriage of his Rakşasi sister. Then that Raksasa bestowed his sister, the Rākşasī Śūrpanakhā, on that lord of the Dänavas and king of the Kālakeśa Vidyujjihvä. Having given her away, the Rākşasa was wandering about for the purpose of hunting, when, o Rāma, he happened to see Diti's son, named Maya. And seeing him accompanied by his daughter, that night-ranger the Ten-necked one asked him, saying, 'Who are you that (wanderest) alone in this first devoid of men as well as deer? And are you accompanied by this one having the eyes of a young deer?' Thereat Maya, O Rama, answered that nightranger, when he had asked this. 'Listen. I shall tell you all about this. You may ere this have heard of an Apsarā named Hemā. She like to the Paulomi of Satakratu was bestowed on me, by the gods. And I passed a thousand years, being devoted her. Thirteen years have passed away since she had gone on a business of the celestials, as also the fourteenth year. Then I through my extraordinary skill constructed a golden palace, adorned with diamond and lapises. There I dwelt, aggrieved and sorrowful on account of her separation. From then, taking my daughter, I have come to this wood. This, O king, is my daughter, grown in her womb. I have come hither with her, seeing of her husband. Verily being father to a daughter is misery to everyone that seekes one's honour. A daughter, forsooth, stayes, ever placing the two lines* in uncertainity. *The lines, namely, of her father and mother. The line of a mother as distinct from that of a father would be impossible under the present economy of Hindu society inasmuch as, as soon as a girl is married, she by that ceremony leaves her father's line and becomes incorporated with that of her husband. But this seems to have been otherwise in ancient times, This opens up an interesting social problem for the research of orientalists. On this wife of mine I have also beget two sons. The first is Māyāvī and the next Dundubhi. Thus have I truly related to everything to you that had asked for it. But, my child, how can I know you now? Who are you? Thus addressed, the Rākşasas humbly said, 'Ten-necked by name, I am the son of ascetic, Paulastya, who was born as the third son of Brahmā. Thus accosted, O Rama, by that lord of Raks asas, that Dänava and foremost of Dānavas, Maya; learning that he was the son of Maharsi, Paulastya, there desired in his heart to give away his daughter to him. Taking her hand with his own, Maya, the lord of Daityas, laughing said to that lord of Raksasas. This daughter of mine, O king, O king, borne by the Apsarā, Hemā, this my daughter named Mandodari do you accept as my wife. 'Well' thereupon the Ten-necked answered him, O Rāma. And lighting a fire, he took her hand. O Rāma, Maya knew the curse of the sage touching him.* Knowing this, he gave away his daughter, having regard to the race of Ravana's paternal grand-father; and he also conferred on him an exceedingly wonderful dart acquired through the most rigid austerities, by which he wounded Laksmana. *Respecting his birth. Having thus wedded, that master-Lankā's lord-going (back) to that city, married his brothers. Rāvana married the grand-daughter of Virocana (on the maternal side) named Vajrajvālā, to Kumbhakarņa. And Vibhīşaņa obtained for his wife the righteous (damsel) named Saramā-daughter to the high-souled Sailusa-sovereign of the Gandharvas. Saramā was born on the shores of the lake, Mānasa, was swollen with water on the arrival of the rains, her mother, hearing her cries, affectionately said, Saro mā varddhata 'O lake, do not swell,' and from this circumstance, her name became Saramā. Having thus wedded, those Rākşasas, taking each his wife, set about sporting there, like to Gandharvas sporting in Nandana. And then was born Mandodari's son-Meghanāda. Him you call Indarjit. As soon as he was born, Ravana's son, formerly crying, emitted a tremendous roar resembling the rumbling of clouds. O Rāghava, Lankā was petrified at his voice: and (accordingly) his sire himself kept his name, Meghanāda. O Rāma, remaining hidden like a fire by fuel, Ravana's son, rejoicing (the bosoms of) his father and mother, grew up in Rāvana's elegant inner apartments.