Hearing the words of the effulgent Rāma, Lakşmaņa, the slayer of enemies, said with folded hands. Having thus cast off their bodies how did that Brāhmaṇa worshipped of the celestial and the king regain them? Having been thus accosted by Lakşmaņa, Rāma, the descendant of Ikşvākus and the foremost of men, replied. Having renounced their persons both Nimi and the pious Vasiştha, having asceticism for their wealth, were metamorphosed into air. Thereupon being thus deprived of his body like the highly effulgent and great ascetic Vasiştha went to the Patriarch Brahmā with the object of acquiring from his another. Being merged in the air, he, conversant with religion, bowed to his father and said. O illustrious god of gods! O you lotus-sprung! by the imprecation of Nimi I have been now deprived of my body and been converted into air. O lord, the state of being bodiless is highly painful to all. The bodiless cannot perform any work; do you, therefore, by the favour, grant me another body. Whereto the self-sprung Brahma, of unmitigated prowess, replied. O great one, do you enter into the vital energy of Mitra and Varuņa; and even then, O foremost of twiceborn ones, you shall not be born of a woman and being greatly pious shall attain to the rank of a patriarch. The Patriarch Brahma having said this, Vasishtha, saluting and circumbulating him, repaired to the region of Varuņa. At that time Mitra in conjunction with Varuņa was reigning in Varuna's kingdom being worshipped by all celestials. Meanwhile encircled by her mates the leading Apsarā Urvasi by name arrived there at her pleasure. Beholding the frolicsome and beautiful Urvasi, Varuna attained to an excess of delight. Thereupon he expressed his intention of living with that queen of Apsarās, having a moon-like countenance and lotus-eyes. Thereat Urvasi, with folded hands, said-0 lord of celestials, Mitra himself has already invited me for the same. Being stricken by the bow of Kupid, Varuņa said to Urvasī I shall discharge my vital energy into this pot if you do not wish to live with me. Hearing those sweet words of the Patriarch Varuna, Urvasi was highly pleased and said. Do what you have said. Now my body is under the possession of Mitra but my mind is attached to your and you are equally attached to me. Urvaśī having said this, Varuņa discharged his vital energy into the pot. Thereupon Urvasi approached Mitra. And thereat highly enraged he said to her. I invited you first; O you of vicious actions, why have, you, renouncing me, secured another. for this vile action, you shall, by my curse live in the land of mortals for some time. The royal saint Pururava, the king of kasi, is the son of Budha. Do you go to him, O you of a vicious intellect; he shall be your husband. Thereupon being thus placed under the influence of curse Urvasi went to Pururavă. The king Paruravă was the begotten son of Budha. He reigned in the foremost of cities Pratişțaro. He begot on Urvaší a highly powerful and beautiful son by the name of Āyu. Nahuşa, powerful as Indra, was the son of When Indra, the king of the celestials, was assailed with thunderbolt by the Asura Větra, Nahuşa governed his kingdom for a hundred thousand years. In this wise Urvasi, having beautiful teeth, eyes and brow, remained on earth for many years and then returned to the region of Indra after the period of curse had been over.