Thereupon darkness having set in all the celestials and Rākşasas, maddened with their strength, began to fight rushing one another. And in that darkness-Indra, Ravana and Meghanāda— these three were not possessed by the influence of illusion. Beholding his whole army slain in a moment, Ravana, worked up with dreadful ire, sent out terrible roars. And in anger, that irrepressible one said to the charioteer, stationed on the car, “Do you take me to the other end of the enemies' host." I shall soon in the field of battle, with the stroke of various weapons despatch all the deities to the abode of Death, I shall slay Indra, Kubera, Varuna and Yama, what to speak of more, I shall soon destroy all the deities and place myself above them. Be not sorry; do you soon drive my chariot. To-day I have told you twice to take me to the end of the enemy's army. We are now waiting near the Nandana grove, do you take me to the hill when the sun rises. Hearing his words the charioteer drove the steeds, coursing at will through the enemies' host. Thereupon being apprised of his intention, Śakra, the king of the celestials, stationed on car, said to the deities, in the field of battle. O you deities-bear my words, what appear to me best. This Ten-necked demon must be vanquished by us while alive. Ascending his car, gifted with the velocity of the wind, the highly powerful one is proceeding among the army like to the deep with waves rising during Parva. It is not possible to slay him now, for he shall not meet with death in consequence of the boon. So let us make him captive-and we should all exert to that end. Bali being held captive, I am enjoying the three worlds-and I think proper to obstruct the course of this vicious-souled one. Having said this and left aside Råvaņa, Sakra went to another side, O King, and fought terrifying the Rākşasas in the conflict. Dasagriva, incapable of being thwarted, entered by the northern route and the performer of hundred sacrifices by the southern. Thereupon having entered into the army up to a hundred leagues the lord of Rākşasas overpowered the celestial host with a downpour of shafts. Thereupon beholding his own army slain Sakra, returned fearlessly and obstructed the Ten-necked demon. In the interim beholding Rāvaņa brought under his grasp by Śakra the demons and Raksasas cried aloud, “Alas we are slain." Thereupon ascending his car Ravana's son, became senseless by his wrath and beside himself with rage, entered the dreadful flank. Having resorted to the illusory powers, conferred upon him yore by Pasupati he entered into the enemies' camp and belaboured them. Having left behind all other deities he pursued Indra and the highly effulgent Mahendra too espied his enemy's son. And albeit assailed by the highly powerful deities, Ravanas son, divested of mail, entertained no fear. Having overpowered the approaching charioteer Måtalt, with many excellent arrows he covered Mahendra with a downpour of shafts. Thereat having left his car and charioteer Indra mounted his elephant Airāvata and ran about in search of Ravana's son. Being invisible in the welkin by virtue of his illusory powers and having brought Indra under the influence thereof he struck him with hundreds of arrows. When Råvaņa's son came to know that Indra was exhausted he, having bound him up by virtue of illusion, proceeded towards his army. Having seen Mahendra carried away by force from the battle field the deities thought“What is this?” That conqueror of Śakra and subduer of enemies, conversant with illusory powers, was not visible, by whom, Indra, although master of many illusions, was carried away by force. In the meantime, the celestials, all enraged, covered Rāvana with a downpour of shafts and belaboured him. And being worn out in the encounter with the Ādityas and Vasus he was not capable of fighting any more. Beholding his father thus distressed and assailed in warfare with strokes, Ravana's son, although invisible, said. Do you come, O father, our work in the battle field is finished; know, we have achieved victory; be you consoled and divested of agonies. By virtue of my illusory powers I have made Mahendra captive the lord of the three worlds and of the celestial host and have crushed down the pride of the deities. Having subdued your enemy by virtue of your prowess do you enjoy the three worlds at your pleasure. What is the use of labouring again? And useless it is to fight again. Hearing the words of Rāvana's son the deities retired from the battle field, and went away without Sakra. And hearing the sweet words of his son, the lord of the night-rangers, the enemy of the celestials, having great prowess and wide spread fame, desisted from fighting and affectionately said to his son. You have enhanced the glory of our race displaying the prowess like a highly powerful man. You have vanquished the celestials and their king of unequalled might. Do you set out hence for the city, taking Indra on your chariot and surrounded by soldiers. I shall, soon, delighted, follow you with my councillors. Thereupon having returned home with his army and chariots and taking the king of the celestials, the powerful son of Rāvana dismissed the victorious warriors.