Then, O King, the mighty-armed Ravana ranging the earth, came to Himavān and began to go round it. It came to pass that there he saw a damsel wearing a dark deer-skin and matted locks, leading the life of a saint, and flaming like a celestial. Seeing the girl observing high vows, endowed with beauty, he, with his soul overwhelmed with lust asked her, laughing. How is it, o amiable one, that you act thus contrary to your youth? This course of life surely does not befit your beauty. Your loveliness, O timid one, is peerless, capable of maddening folk with desire. It does not behove you to lead an ascetic mode of life,-this would suit an old person. Whose daughter are you, O gentle lady? And what is this (vow) that you practise? And O fair faced wrench, who is your husband? He who has you for his wife, is, O timorous one, has religious merit on earth. Tell all about this to me who ask for it. For whom do you put yourself to trouble? Thus accosted by Rāvana, that illustrious girl, having asceticism for wealth, having received him hospitably in due form, said. My sire is named Kušadhvaja a Brahmarși of immeasurable energy, son to Bệhaspati, endowed with grace, and like to Bphaspati himself in intelligence. And while that high sound one was engaged in the daily study of the Vedas, I was born as his word-impregnated daughter, named Vedavati. When the gods and the Gandharvas and the Yaksas, Raksasas, and Pannagas, coming to my sire asked for me, O foremost of Rākşasas, my father did not bestow me on any one of them. And I shall you the reason thereof; listen, O long-armed one. My father's intended son-in-law was even Vişņu sovereign of the celestials, and the lord of the triune world; and my father would not bestow me on any other. And hearing this, a certain king of the Daityas, named Sambhu proud, of his prowess was wrought up with wrath, and one night as my sire was on bed, that wicked one slew him. Thereat my forlorn mother, of exalted righteousness embracing my father's body entered into fire. Then wishing to realise my father's wish touching Närāyana, I have fixed my heart even upon him. Having made this promise, I have been carrying on rigid austerities. Thus, o foremost of Raksasas. I have related to you everything. Nārāyaṇa is my husband, and not any one else than that best of male beings; and desirous of having Nārāyaṇa I have adopted severe restraints. I know you, O king. Go you, O son of Paulastya. By virtue of my asceticism I know all that takes place in these three regions. Thereat descending from the front of his car, Ravana, affected with the shafts of Kandarpa, again addressed that girl, observant of a mighty VOW. a O you of sharply hips, in as much as such is your intent, you must be very proud. O you having the eyes of young antelope, accumulation of religious merit suits old people. You, furnished with every perfection, should not talk thus. You are the paragon in these three worlds,. Your youth wax away. I am the lord of Lărkā., O gentle lady. known as Dasagriva. Be you my wife, and enjoy pleasures according to your desire. Who is he whom you call Vişņu O mild one, neither in prowess, nor in asceticism, nor in enjoyment, nor in strength, is he my equal, whom, O damsel, you seek. Thus accosted, Vedavati said to the nightranger 'Do not say so' in respect of Visnu, lord of this triune sphere, bowed down to by all creatures. Save and except you alone, O King of Raksasa, who, that is intelligent, cried down (Narayana). Thus addressed there by Vedavatī, the nightranger seized the girl by the hair. Thereat Vedavati, wroth, cut off her hair with her hand transformed into a sword. Then, flaming up in ire and as if consuming the night-ranger, she, preparing a funeral pyre, hastened to make away with herself. You object, having been outraged by you I wish not to live. Therefore, O Raksasa, I will enter into fire in your very presence. As I have in this world been dishonoured by you you are nefarious. I shall again be born to compass your destruction. It lie not in a female to slay a male intent on sin; and if I utter a curse, it shall cost my asceticism. But if I have done anything, given away any thing, offered oblations to the fire, then I shall be the chaste daughter of some virtuous person, albeit unborn of any female vessel. Having delivered herself thus, she entered into the flaming fire; and thereat a celestial shower of blossoms rained all around from heaven. O Lord, this is she that has been born as the daughter of king Janaka, your wife, O mightyarmed one. You are the eternal Visnu. The enemy, endowed with the splendour of a hill, formerly that been slain by her, by help of your superhuman prowess. This one of eminent righteousness would again spring up on earth like a flame from a field furrowed by the plough. This one named Vedavatſ was born in the Kệta age; and in the Tretā age, for compassing the destruction of that Rākşasa, she was born in the Maithila line of the high-souled Janaka.