Learning that these night-rangers had obtained boons, Sumāli with his followers, casting off fear, rose up from the nether regions. And wrought up with exceeding great wrath, the counsellors of that Rākşasas-Mārīca and Prahasta and Virūpākṣa and Mahodara-also rose up. Accompanied by his counsellors-foremost of Rākşasas-Sumāli presenting himself before the Ten-necked one and embracing him, addressed him, saying. By good fortune it is, O child, that through you we have had the wish that was in our heart, inasmuch as you have received the best of boons from him that is the foremost of all these three worlds. O mighty-armed one, that great fear arising from Vişnu, from which leaving Larkā, we had gone to the nethermost abysses, has been removed. Full many a time, brought down by that fear, we, on being pursued (by our enemies), forsaking our homes, had gone to the nether regions along with all those (related to us). This Lankā was our city, inhabited by Rākşasas. (Now) it is inhabited by the brotherthe intelligent lord of riches. O mighty-armed one, if you can through selfcontrol or charity or by a sudden display of prowess, repossesses yourself of the same, a (great) thing shall have been achieved; and then, O child, you should, without doubt, be the lord of Lankā; and this Raksasa race, which has sunk, shall have been raised up by you. O you endowed with prodigious strength, you shall be the lord of all. Then the Ten-necked one addressed his maternal grand-father, who was present. The lord of riches is our superior; therefore you ought not to speak thus. On that dignified were Rākşasa-chief having through moderation thus passed it by, that Rākşasa, understanding his intent, did not then say anything more. It came to pass that when Rāvana had resided there for a time, Prahasta addressed him in humble speech. O Ten-necked one, O long-armed (hero), it does not behove you to speak thus. Faternal feeling there is none among heroes. Listen to these words of mine! There two sisters-Aditi and Diti, mutually attached to each other, those (damsels) endowed with surpassing beauty, became the wives of that lord of creatures-Kaśyapa. Aditi brought forth the gods, who are the lords of three worlds. And Diti gave birth to the Daityas, offspring of Kasyapa. O you cognisant of righteousness, formerly this earth, O hero, having the ocean for her garment, and furnished with mountains, belonged to the Daityas; and (gradually) they grew very powerful. And then this undeteriorating triune world was brought under the dominion of the celestials. So that you are not the only one that would act inimically (to your brother); but this course had formerly been pursued by both the celestials and the Asuras. Therefore do you act in conformity with my word. Thus exhorted, the Ten-necked one, with a delighted heart, reflecting for a moment, said, 'Very well.' And wrought up with delight, the Ten-necked one endowed with prowess the very same day went to the forest, accompanied by the night-rangers. Arriving at Trikuta, that one skilled in speechthe night-ranger, Ravana-sent Prahasta in the ca vacity of an ambassador: O Prahasta, hie you; and tell the foremost of Naiſtas-the lord of riches-in my words informed with mildness. This city of Lankā, O king, belongs to the high-souled Rākṣasas; but you have established yourself in her. This, O sinless one, is not proper for you. Therefore, O you of unrivalled prowess, if you should render the same (back), I shall be highly gratified; and righteousness also you will maintain. Thereupon, repairing to Lankā, well-protected by the giver of riches, Prahasta communicated these words to the highly generous ruler of riches. O you of excellent vows, I have been sent to you by your brother, the Ten-necked one. O long-armed one, O foremost of those versed in all branches of learning, do you listen to my words, O lord of wealth, and what the Ten-faced one says. This beautiful city, O you furnished with expansive eyes, was formerly inhabited by Räkşasas of dreadful prowess headed by Sumāli; and for that reason, O son of Viśravā, he asks you this. Do you, my child, grant this to him, who is humbly begging for it. Hearing these words from Prahasta, the god Vaiśravaņa, best of those skilled in speech, answered the former. My father had given this to me, when it had been emptied of night-rangers; and, O Raksasa, I have inhabited this place, furnished with charity, honour and other virtues. Go and tell the Ten-necked one, as this city and this kingdom are mine, so they are your, O mighty-armed one. Do you enjoy this kingdom without a foe. May my kingdom and wealth never undergo division when you are present! 'Having said this, the lord of riches sought the side of his sire, and, paying him reverence, he communicated Ravana's wish to him:' My father, this Tennecked one had sent a messenger to me, saying, Give (back) the city Lankā, which had before been inhabited by hosts of Rakşasa. Now, O you of excellent vows, do you tell me what I should do. Thus accosted, that foremost of ascetics, the Brahmarși Viśravă spoke to the lord of riches (standing) with joined hands, 'O son, listen to my words. The mighty-armed Ten-necked one had (once); spoken in my presence (to that effect). Thereat I greatly rebuked that wicked-minded one; and I said again and again in anger, You disregard (your religion and honour). Do you listen to my words fraught with religion and profit. Of a wicked heart, you, with your understanding spoilt in consequence of the granting of the boon, can not distinguish between those deserving honour and those not; and, further, through my curse, you have come by fierce nature. Therefore, O mighty-armed one, go to the mountain, Kailasa. Do you, along with your retainers, for the purpose of dwelling there, take up your quarters (there). There flowes the Mandākini best of streams, with her water covered with golden lotuses resembling suns, as also with lilies and blue lotuses and various other fragment flowers. And coming there frequently, celestials with Gandharvas and Apsarās and serpents and Kinnaras, ever sport there. O lord of riches, you ought not to enter into hostilities with that Raksasa. You know how he has obtained a great boon. Thus addressed, Vaisravana, for the sake of his father's dignity, with his wives and sons, with his counsellors and his vehicles and wealth went (to Kailasa). And Prahasta, going (back), joyfully spoke to the high-souled Ten-necked one, (seated) with his counsellors and his younger brothers. The city of Lanka is (now) empty. Renouncing her, the bestower of riches has gone out of her. (Now) entering into her, along with us, do you there maintain your own religion. Thus addressed by Prahasta, the redoubtable Ten-necked one, entered the city of Lanka with his brothers and forces and followers. And then even as the lord of the celestials ascends heaven, that foe of the immortals ascended Lanka welldivided by highways, which had been forsaken by the lord of wealth. Having been installed, that night-ranger the Ten-faced one dwelt in that city; and that city teemed with night-rangers resembling dark clouds. The lord of riches, for the sake of his father's dignity, dwelt in a palace situated on the hill bright as moon-light, graced with ornamented superb piles; even as Purandara dwells in Amaravati.