On the same night ſatrughna housed himself in a thatched cottage Sitā gave birth to twin sons. In the midnight the Muni boys came to Vālmīki and communicated to him this auspicious intelligence, saying. “O illustrious Sir, the beloved spouse of Rāma has given birth to two sons; do you so protect them that evil spirits not injure them." Hearing those words the highly effulgent Vālmīki went there and attained to great on beholding those two highly effulgent sons, resembling the newly risen sun and the celestials. Thereupon he made arrangements against the oppression of ghosts and goblins. Thereupon taking Kuśa (the upper part of the grass) and Lava (the lower part) the great ascetic Vālmīki made those arrangements. And giving Kuśa sanctified by Mantras to the hands of elderly women he said, “do you rub the person of the elder boy with these”; and giving them Lava he said “do you rub the person of the younger brother with this. And according to this I shall name the first Son Kuśa and the second Lava; and by those names they shall be celebrated on earth.” Thereupon reverentially taking from the hands of Vālmīki and Kuśa Lava, the means of protection, the elderly ladies engaged in guarding them. Hearing the Sītā without any trouble had given birth to two sons and elderly female ascetics had been engaged in protecting them and bearing the chanting of Råma's glories in the midnight, Satrughna thought within himself. "Blessed it is that Sītā has given birth to two sons.” And with this joy the live long night of Śrāvaņa passed away in no time. Having performed the morning rites after the expiration of the night and taken farewell from the ascetic Vālmīki, Lakşmaņa proceeded towards the west. And having spent seven nights he at last arrived at the hermitage of the pious Rși living on the banks of the Yamuna. Taking shelter there be engaged in pleasant conversation with Cyavana (son of Bhrgu), and other ascetics. Having remained there for the night and talked with those ascetics the highsouled, heroic Raghu prince Śatrughna was greatly delighted.