On the Rākṣasas having been slain, all the ascetics, for the purpose of congratulating Rāghava, came to Rāma as he gained (back) his kingdom. Kausika, and Yavakrīta, and Gārgya, and Gālava and Kaņva, son of Medhātithi,who dwelt in the east, (came thither); and the reverend Svastyāstreya, and Namuci, and Pramuci, and Agastya, and the worshipful Atri, and Sumukha, and Vimukha, who dwelt in the south, came in company with Agastya.* *The name of Agastya had before been just specified among the incomes; but so it is in the text. Nrisadgu, and Kavasi, and Dhaumya, and that mighty sage-Kauseya-who abode in th quarter, came there accompanied by their disciples. Vasiştha and Kasyapa and Atri and Viśvāmitra with Gautama and Jamadagni and Bharadvāja and also the seven sages*, who for aye resided in the northern quarter, (came there). *Ursa Major, or the great bear, the seven stars of which are the souls of as many saints, Marici, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasistha. On arriving at the residence of Rāghava, those high-souled ones, resembling the fire in radiance, stopped at the gate, with the intention of communicating their arrival (to Rama) through the warder. That foremost of ascetics-the righteous Agastya-versed in various branches of learning and cognisant of the Vedas along with their branches, addressed the warder, saying, “Do you say to Dasaratha's son that we-the sages-have come (here)." Then at the words of Agastya, the gate-keeper quick* and swift presented himself with celerity before the high-souled Rāghava. And that one versed in polity and emotional expressions, of worthy ways, possessed of ability, and endowed with patience swiftly seeing Rāma resembling the full moon in brightness, communicated to him the arrival of that supreme of saintsAgastya. *Turnam-according to the commentator, is mental celerity, and drutam-physical. This distinction, however, is seldom, if ever, observed by Sanskrit authors. Hearing of the arrival of the anchorets, possessed of the effulgence of the sun new-risen, he answered the warder, saying, "Do you usher them in, having regard to their comfort." Seeing the ascetics him, Rāma with joined hands worshipped their feet with arghyas, and with regard consecrated a cow to each, and saluting them with the collecting mind, he ordered seats (for the saints). And having, according to their rank, seated themselves on gorgeous and superb seats of kuća or deerskins embroidered with gold, those foremost of sages-those mighty saints, versed in the Vedas, along with their disciples and leaders, having (previously) been asked as to their welfare, addressed Rāma, saying. O son of Raghu. O mighty-armed one, complete welfare is ours. By good luck it is that we see you fortunate, with all your foes finished. Bygood luck it is that, Oking, Ravana-destroyer of creatures, has been slain byyou. Sure, O Rama, it was no great matter for you (to slay) Rāvaņa along with his sons and grandsons. Furnished with your bow, you can, without doubt, destroy the three worlds themselves. By good fortune it is, O Rama, that Ravana along with his sons and grandsons has been slain by you. By good fortune it is that today we see you victorious along with $ītā, and, O righteoussouled one, with your brother, Lakşmaņa, (ever) compassing your profit. (By good fortune it is) that, Oking, today we behold (you) in company with your mothers and your brothers. By good fortune it is that those night-rangers, Prahasta, and Vikata; and Virupāksa, and Mahodara, and the unconquerable Akampana, have all been slain (by you). By good fortune it is, O Rama, that he than whose proportions there are no other's greater on earth, even Kumbhakarņa, was brought downy (by you). By good luck it is, O Rama, that these highly powerful night-rangers. Trisiras and Atikāya and Devāntaka and Narāntaka, have been slain by you. By good luck it is that you had been encountered in a hand-to-hand combat with that foremost of Rākşasas, incapable of being slain by the celestials themselves; and achieved victory (ultimately). To defeat Ravana in battle was (for you) in small matter; but it is a piece of good fortune that Ravana's son, who had confronted you for combat, has been slain (by you) in battle. By good fortune it is that you, O mightyarmed one, had been liberated from the bonds of) that foe of the celestials whose course resembled that of Time;*-and that you also had secured victory. *i.e. surpassing perception. Hearing of the destruction of Indrajit, we congratulate you (on your success). He was in capable of being slain by all creatures, and in battle possessed mighty powers of illusion. Hearing that Indrajit slain, amazement have seized us all. Having conferred on us this holy freedom from fear, O Kākutstha, O repressor of enemies. you through good fortune, will grow in victory. Hearing the speech of the ascetics of sacred souls, Rāma, coming under the influence of a mighty wonder, said with joined hands. You worshipful ones, wherefore, passing by those exceedingly powerful ones-Kumbhakarna and the night-ranger, Ravana, do you praise Ravana's son? Wherefore, passing by Mahodara, and Prahasta, and the Rākşasa-Virüpākşa-and Matta, and Unmatta, and the irrepressible Devāntaka and Narāntaka-redoubtable heroes all-do you extol Ravana's son? And wherefore, passing by Atikāya and Trisiras and Dhumraksa, that night-ranger-all endowed with exceeding powers, do you extol Ravana's son? What was his prowess? And what his strength? And what his might? And by virtue of what cause did he surpass Rāvana? If I can well hear the same (do you tell it me). I by no means command you. If the thing can bear disclosure, I would hear it. Pray, speak out. How was Śakra vanquished by him, and how also did he obtain the boon? And how was the son powerful and not his sire Rāvaņa. How could that Raksasa, surpassing his sire, conquer Sakra in mighty encounter, and how did he obtain the boon? O foremost of anchorets, do you today unfold all this to me, who ask (for the same).