At no distance from where on the banks of the river Narmadā, that dreadful lord of Rākşasas collected the flowers, Arjuna, the King of Māhismatī, and the foremost of the victorious, was sporting with his wives in the water. And being encircled by them the king Arjuna appeared like a leading elephant surrounded by a thousands of she elephants. In order to measure the strength of his thousand arms the King of Haihayas obstructed the course of Narmadă. Being obstructed by the arms of Kārtavīryarjuna and having flooded the banks with her pure waters, Narmadā flowed in an opposite direction. The currents of Narmadā, rising high as during the rainy season flowed with fishes, and crocodiles. That stream, as if driven against Rävaņa by Kārtavīryarjuna, carried away his collection of flowers. Having given up his worship which was halffinished Rāvana looked towards Narmadā looking like an unwilling damsel and saw that she, with rising currents, was flowing towards the east from the west and the waters beyond that were in a natural state like a quiet lady and the birds were seated there without any anxiety. Thereupon being anxious to learn the cause of the rise of the river, the Ten-necked demon, with his right finger, hinted Suka and Sarana. Being commanded by Rāvana, the two brothers, the heroic Suka and Sāraņa proceeded towards the west by the aerial way. And going half a league, the two night-rangers espied a man sporting in the waters with some females. He was huge as a Sāla tree, his hairs were floating on the water, he was inebriate and his eyes were reddened in consequence thereof. Like to Sumeru holding the earth with his thousand feet he obstructed the current of the river with his thousand arms. He was surrounded by a thousands of beautiful damsels like an elephant by a thousands of she-elephants. Beholding that dreadful spectacle, the Rākṣasas-Śuka and Sāraṇa came back and approaching Rāvaņa communicated (all) to him. O lord of Rākşasas, an unknown person, huge as a Sāla tree, is sporting with females obstructing the course of Narmadā like to a dam. Being withheld by the thousand arms of that man the waters of Narmadā were continually throwing up high waves. Hearing the words of śuka and Sarana, Ravana exclaimed “This is Arjuna' and proceeded to fight with him. Ravana, the lord of Raksasas, having set out with a hostile intention against Kārtavīryarjuna, the wind mixed with dust began to blow high with tumultuous sound. The clouds began to mutter with a downpour of rain. And the lord of Räkşasas proceeded against Arjuna with Mahodara. Mahāparáva, Dhumraksa, Suka and Sarana. Within a short time the dreadful Raksasa, powerful as the elephant Arjuna, reached the banks of Narmada and espied there Arjuna encircled by females as an elephant surrounded by she-elephants. At the very sight the eyes of the lord of Raksasas, proud of his prowess, grew red and addressing the councillors of the king Arjuna he said. Do you communicate to the king of Haihayas that Rāvana, the lord of Raksasas, has come to fight with him. Hearing the words of Rāvana, the ministers of Arjuna stood up with arms and said. O good Råvaņa, you are well cognisant of the proper time for fighting. Now our king is drunk and is sporting with the females in the waters like an elephant in the circle of female-elephants. And now do you wish to fight with him. Therefore, O Ten-necked one, do you spend the night here, if you are bent upon fighting. Or even if you are anxious to enter speedily into conflict with Arjuna do you slay us all at first, and then fight with the king. Thereupon the hungry councillors of Rāvana, slew some of the ministers of the king and devoured some. There arose a dreadful uproar on the banks of Narmada, of the councillors of Răvana and Arjuna. The warriors of Arjuna assailed Rāvana and his ministers with hundreds of arrows, Prāsas, darts, Tomaras, thunder-bolts and Karsanas. The warriors of Arjuna became dreadfully furious and emitted cries like the roaring of the deep infested with crocodiles, fishes and other marine monsters. Thereupon being enraged and displaying their own prowess Suka, Sāraṇa and other ministers of Ravana began to destroy Arjuna's soldiers. Thereupon the emissaries, stricken with fear, went to the sporting king and communicated to him the proceedings of Rāvana and his iministers. Hearing those words and saying to the females-"Do not fear” he rose up from the waters like an elephante The eyes of that fire-like Arjuna were reddened with ire and he shone dreadfully like the fire of dissolution. And taking up speedily his club, that one, always using golden clubs, pursued the Rakşasas like to darkness following the sun. Holding up the huge club and hurling it with his arms, Arjuna, resorting to the velocity of Garuda, went on Thereupon stood there obstructing his course Raksasa, worked up with anger and with a mace in his hand, like to the Vindhya range standing in the way of the sun. And throwing down off his hand the iron mace, he, in anger, began to roar, like Yama. And the top of the mace freed from the hand of Prahasta, was ablaze like the tips of Asoka flowers. Not the least agitated on beholding that mace, the king Arjuna, by his club, baffled its action. Thereupon uplifting the huge club, five hundred hands long, the king of Haihayas pursued Prahasta. And within a short time being struck down by that club gifted with great velocity Prahasta fell down on earth like to the summit of a mountain clapped down by the thunder-bolt of Indra. Beholding Prahasta fallen, Marica, Suka, Säraņa, Mahodara and Dhumrākṣa fled away from the battle-field. All the councillors having thus fled away and Prahasta being slain, Rāvaņa speedily proceeded towards Arjuna, the foremost of kings. Thereupon there ensued a terrible encounter capable of making down erect between the thousand-armed Arjuna, the king of men, and the twenty-armed Ravana, the king of Raksasas. And taking up their clubs Arjuna and Råvaņa began to fight with one another emitting cries like the mutterings of clouds, like to two huge balls fighting for a cow, two agitated oceans, two moving mountains, two effulgent Adityas, two burning flames, two proud elephants, two proud lions and like the very Rudra and Kāla. As the mountains suffer many clappings of thunder-bolts so did they bear many strokes. And all the quarters were resounded with the sound proceeding from the stroke of their clubs like to the sound of thunder-bolts. Being placed against the breast of Rāvaņa Arjuna's club rendered, for a moment, the welkin look like the burning gold as does the lightning. And striking again and again against Arjuna's breast Ravana's club looked like a huge firebrand. Neither Arjuna was worn out nor was Rāvaņa. And the conflict went on between them like the encounter between Bali and Våsava in the days of yore. The King of men and the King of Rākşasas assailed and wounded one another with their clubs like to two bulls striking one another with their horns and two elephants with their tusks. Thereupon worked up with rage, Arjuna, with his full might, smote Răvaņa on his breast, with his club. But Rāvana was well protected by the boon of the celestial, so the club fell on earth sundered into two pieces like one hurled by a weak wight. Still wounded by the mace of Arjuna, Rāvana, shedding tears, ran away at a distance of four feet and sat there. Beholding Răvaņa thus over-whelmed Arjuna sprang up and caught him like Garuda holding a serpent and Vişņu binding Bali. Daśagrīva being thus bound, the Siddhas, Caranas and the celestials exclaiming "Well done! Well done!!” showered flowers upon Arjuna. And the king emitted leonine roars again and again as a tiger joyous roars like a cloud, holding a deer under his grasp. Regaining his sense and beholding Rāvana bound, Prahasta, in great anger, pursued, the King of Haihaya. And the Rākşasa force grew tempestuous like to the rising of the ocean during rains. Thereupon exclaiming repeatedly “Leave him off! Leave him off Wait! Wait!!" The Raksasa host hurled hundreds of Musalas and darts in the battle-field. Not the least moved thereby the king Arjuna, the slayer of enemies, bore those weapons of the enemies of the celestials. Thereupon baffling the weapons of the Räkşasas by means of many a dreadful and excellent one, Arjuna, the king of Haihayas, drove them away · like winds scattering the clouds. Having thus struck terror to the night-rangers, he, encircled by his own kinsmen, repaired to his own city with Ravana, carrying him bound like to Indra carrying Bali bound. Thereupon flowers and fried paddy were showered upon him by the Brāhmaṇas and citizens.