After sunset the highly power Rāvaņa encamped his army there. And the clear moon, brilliant as the mountain, having risen, that huge army, armed with diverse weapons, became asleep. And lying down on the summit of the mountain, the highly powerful Rāvaņa espied the caves beautified with the rays of the moon and the trees. The interior of the forest was beautified with the brilliant groves of Karņikār, with Kadamba and Vakula trees, groves of full blown lotuses, the waters of Mandākini, with Campaka, Asoka, Punnaga, Mandāra, mangoe, Pātala, Lodhra, Priyangu, Arjuna, Ketka, Tagara, Coconut, Pyāla, Panasa and various other trees. There sang the Kinnaras, possessed by desire, and having sweet voice, enhancing the delight of the mind. There danced mirthfully, with their damsels, the Vidyādharas, inebriate and having their eyes reddened with drink. There was audible in the house of the lord of riches, the sweet music of the assembled Apsarās like to the sound of the bell. Being shaken by the wind the nectar-smelling trees made the hill fragrant with the shower of flowers. And carrying the fragrance rendered salutary with honey and filaments of flowers, the excellent wind blew enhancing Ravana's desire. Being possessed by desire through songs, richness of flowers, coldness of air, beauty of the hills, and the rising of the moon is night, the highly powerful Rāvana espied again and again the moon with heavy sighs. At this time passed by that way the foremost of Apsarās, Rambhā, adorned with excellent ornaments and having a countenance like the full moon. Her person was sprinkled with excellent sandal paste, her hairs were decked with Mandāra flowers, her body was beautified with other flowers and her movements tended to increase desire. Her eyes were beautiful and her waist was high, adorned with Mekhala' and was as if the refuge of Rati.? 1. A kind of ornament used on the waist.) 2. Wife of Kama-the god of love in Hindu mythology. Her forehead and other parts of the countenance were painted with the marks of red sandal and adorned with ornaments of flowers growing in six seasons. Rambhā appeared like the second tree, in grace and beauty, natural and artificial. She wore green clothes resembling the clouds; her face was like the moon, eye brows like the excellent bows, thighs like the trunks of elephants and palms soft as leaves. She was seen by Rāvana as proceeding in the midst of soldiers. Having got up and been influenced by lust he took her, shameful as she was, by the hand and smiling said. Where are you going, O beautiful damsel? Whom are you going of your own accord to satisfy? Whose prosperous time has appeared, with whom you shall enjoy? Who shall be satisfied with drinking the nectar of your mouth smelling like lotus? Whose breast, O fare damsel, your rising breast beautiful like two golden pots closely placed, shall touch? Who will go to bestride today your large thigh resembling a disc of gold, encircled by a golden chain and which was like the form of a heaven. Who is there so beautiful as I-Indra, Visnu, or two Asvins that you are passing by me? Do you take rest upon this excellent rock, O you having charming waist. There is no other lord, save me, in the three worlds. And Daśānana, the lord of the lords of the three worlds, thus begs you, with folded palms. Do you therefore seek me. Being thus addressed, Rambhā, trembling, with folded palms, said:-Be you propitiated; it does not behave you to speak thus, who are my superior. Rather should you protect me if any body else try to oppress me. Virtually I am your daughterin-law. I speak to you the truth. Thereupon the Ten-necked demon said to her, standing with her face downwards, and her down standing erect at his very sight, “Had you been the wife of my son, you would have been my daughter-in-law.” Whereto Rambha replied. “Truly it is; I am, by virtue, the wife of your son, O foremost of Raksasas. Your brother Vaiśravana has a son, dearer than his life, celebrated in the three worlds under the name of Nalkūbara. In virtue he is like to a Brahmin, in prowess he equals a Kşatriya, in anger he is very fire and in patience he is like the earth. I have been thus directed by that Lokapāla's son. For him I have adorned my person with these ornaments. I am not attached to any body else but him. O king, O slayer of foes, by virtue of (this relation) is behove you to save me. And that virtuous-souled one is anxiously expecting me. You should not put obstacle in that; it behove you to let me go; do you, O foremost of Rāksasas, wend the way treaded by the pious. You are worthy of being reverend by me and I am object of your protection." Being thus addressed Daśagrīva humbly replied. "I am daughter-in-law,” as you have said, is worthy of being said by one who is the only wife. This is the everlasting law of the celestials that the Apsarās have no husband; they cannot be the wife of one husband. Having said this, the Raksasa ravished her. Being released from his grasp Rambhā became divested of her ornaments and garland and became like the river agitated by the elephants. Her hairs were dishevelled and her hands were trembling. Like to a blossoming creeper shaken by the wind, she, trembling and bashful and with folded hands, went to Nalakubara and fell down at his feet. Having seen her in that plight the high-souled Nalakubara said-"O fair one, what is this? Why have you placed yourself at my feet?” Sighing heavily and trembling she with folded palms, related to him everything from the beginning to the end. O lord, on his way to heaven, Dasagrīva has arrived here and has spent the night with his army. While I was coming to you, O slayer of foes, I was seen by him. Then holding me he said-“Where are you going?" I related to him everything truly. But being possessed by lust he did not pay heed to my, words. He was again prayed by me, O lord, saying “I am your daughter-in-law." But neglecting that he ravished me. O you of firm vows, it behove you to forgive me for this folly. O gentle one, a woman's strength can never equal that of a man. Hearing of this ravishment Vaisravana's son was greatly enraged and entered into meditation. Having ascertained the truth within a moment Vaisravana's son, with eyes reddened with ire, took water in his palms. Having taken this and rinsed his mouth duly, he imprecated a dreadful curse upon that lord of Raksasas. O fair one, since you have been ravished by him despite your unwillingness he shall never be able to get by an unwilling damsel. Whenever he shall, stricken by lust, ravish a reluctant damsel, his head shall be sundered into seven pieces. As soon as this curse, like to a burning flame, was uttered, the celestials bugles were sounded and a shower of flowers fell from heavens. Being apprised of the plight of people (brought about by him) and of the death of that Rākşasa the patriarch Brahmă and other gods were greatly delighted. Hearing of that curse capable of making the down erect, Daśagrīva abstained from entertaining lust for unwilling females. And hearing of the curse imprecated by Nalakübara all the chaste damsels, that were kept captive, attained to great delight.