Hearing this wonderful and heavenly theme Lakşmaņa was highly gratified and said to Rāma. O Kakuthstha, how did that twice-born one worshipped by the celestials and the king regain their bodies, after being bodiless. Hearing the words of Laksmana, Rama, having truth for his prowess, began to relate the story of Vasiştha. O foremost of Raghus, there sprang up two foremost Brahmin saints from the vital energy discharged by the high-souled Mitra and Varuņa into the pot. At first therefrom rose up the illustrious Rși Agastya and saying 'I am not your son' Varuņa was thrown into the pot Mitra. Before the vital energy of Varuna was thrown into the pot Mitra discharged his own on Urvasi's account which was the source of Agastya's birth. (Into the pot in which Mitra's energy was discharged Varuņa also put his own and both the energies were mixed up). There upon after some time from the energies of both Mitra and Varuņa sprang up the effulgent Vasistha-the priest of Iksvākus. O gentle one, the highly effulgent Iksavāku appointed that blameless Rși as the priest of our family as soon as he was born. I have thus described to you the story of Vasistha's birth possessing a wonderful body. Hear now what befell the king Nimi. And beholding the king Nimi bodiless the intelligent Rșis initiated him into the rites of sacrifice. And those leading twice-born ones, with assembled citizens and servants, began to protect that body with unguents, garlands and clothes. There upon at the end of the sacrifice Bhrgu said O king, I am propitiated with you; I shall restore you to senses. There upon the celestials, highly pleased, addressed the consciousness of Nimi saying O royal saint, do you accept boons; where shall we place your consciousness? There upon being addressed by the celestials the consciousness said I may live in the eyes of the celestials. They agreed to it and said ( lord of earth, for you, their eyes shall be influenced within a moment. The exhaustion, that their their eyes shall experience on account of your moving about as the air, shall be removed within this moment. Having said this the celestials repaired to their respective quarters and the high-souled Rșis having conveyed Nimi's body to the sacrificial ground and dedicated it as an edy began to churn it with great energy accompanied by incantations. They being thus engaged in churning the edy for the purpose of having a son of Nimi there sprang up a son of devout austerities. He was called Mithi for he originated from Manthana; he was called Janaka for his having sprung up from Janana and Vaideha from having been born from Videha. In this wise Janaka, the first king of Videhas, was born. His other name was Mithi and his family were celebrated as Maithilas. O gentle one, I have thus related to you the wondrous births, in consequence of the curse, of the great ascetic Vasistha and the royal saint Nimi.