Sītā having entered Rasātala, all the monkeys and Rșis repeatedly eulogised her before Rāma. Stricken with sorrow and grief and lowering down his head, Rāma, with eyes full of fears, face downwards, and a dejected mind, sat down. And being possessed by grief and anger and shedding tears he wept for some time and ther said. My mind is about to be possessed by grief, which I had never experienced before, for in the very presence of mine the graceful Jānaki, like Lakşmī herself, has disappeared from view. Formerly, in my absence, Janaki was once carried away into the city her back; what wonder it is that I shall get her back from Pātāla? O goddess Vasudhā, do you soon bring Sità in my vies, or else, worked up with ire I shall give you the fruits of your negligence. You are my mother-in-law, since the royal saint Janaka obtained Sītā from your womb while cultivating you with plough share. Do you therefore bring back my Sītā or give me a region of the celestials, I wish to live with Sītā in nether world or heaven. I am beside myself for her; do you therefore bring back Sita. If you do not render back Sītā to me O Vasudha, I shall deluge the earth with Waters, having assailed, destroyed and drowned into water your huge compass with mountains and forests. Rāma, having given vent to those accents under the influence of ire, the patriarch Brahmā, with the consent of the celestials, said. O Rāma of firm vows, O slayer of enemies, you should not grieve thus, Recollect your former state of Vişņu and the counsels. I would not have reminded you of this secret but for the present necessity. Do you now once more remember your birth from Vişnu. By nature, Sītā is pure, chaste and ever dependent upon you. And by virtue of her ascetic dependence upon you she has gone to the region of Nagas. You shall again meet her in heaven. Hear, what I communicate to you before the assembly. You shall be informed of everything by listening to this excellent poem describing your own actions. O hero, Vālmīki had described herein all miseries and joys you have experienced since your birth and what shall happen in future after SIta's entrance into Patala. O Rāma, this first epic poem, Rāmāyaṇa, has been composed describing your works. None but you is worthy of the fame of this poem. Even before you I have heard this complete poem with gods, which is wonderful, truthful and unveiled. O lion among the men, Odescended of Raghu, you may hear the remaining portion of Rāmāyaṇa epic with religious mind. O Rāghava, O highly illustrious one, do you hear with the Rsis, Uttarakandam, the last portion of this poem. O descendant of Raghu, this is not worthy of being heard by any but those who are the foremost of the royal saints. Having said this, the deity Brahmă, the lord of the three worlds, with other deities, repaired to the region of immortals. The high-souled and the highly effulgent ascetics, living in Brahma's region, who were present in the assembly, obtaining Brahma's permission, waited there, to hear Rama's future career in the Uttarakandam. Hearing the words of the great Patriarch instinct with well-being, the highly effulgent Rāma said to Vālmīki. O illustrious sir, the Rşis living in Brahmă's region have grown desirous of hearing my future history. So let it be taken up next morning. Having thus settled and taken with him Kuća and Lava and sent away the assembled people he entered his palace and spent the night mourning for Sită.