Next morning Råma, being present in the sacrificial ground and having sent for the Rşis, Vasiştha,-Vamadeva Jābāli, Kasyapa, Visvämitra, carrying on penances for a long time, Durvāsā, Pulastya of hard austerities, Śakti, Bhargava, Markandeya living long, the highly illustrious Maudgalya, Gargya, Gargya, Cyavana, Śatānanda, conversant with religions, effulgent Bharadvaja, Agni's son Vasuprava, Narada, Parvata, the great Gautama and other ascetics of firm vows, assembled with minds possessed by curiosity. The highly powerful Räkșasas and monkeys also came there out of curiosity. Besides thousands and thousands of Kșatriyas, Vaiśyas, sadras and Brāhmaṇas of firm tenancies, also hailed there from various parts to witness Sita's trial. Having arrived there they all sat down motionless like mountains. There upon, Valmiki, the foremost of ascetics, speedily came there accompanied by Sitā. With her face downwards, folded palms, eyes full of tears and meditating upon Råma in her mind, Sita, following the Rsis, came before the assembly. There arose a great uproar of eulogy from the assembly when they saw Sità following Vālmīki like to the Śruti following Brahmā. There upon members, stricken with sorrow, made a tumultuous sound. Among the visitors some praised Rāma, some praised $ītā and others eulogised both of them. There upon having entered that huge assemblage in company of Sītā, the great ascetic Valmiki addressed Rāma, saying: O son of Dasaratha, in fear of calumny, you did renounce her near my hermitage, albeit Sitā is pure and follows the ways of morality. O Rāma of firm vows, you are afraid of the censure of the people. Sitā has becoming willing to give testimony (of her purity) for removing the calumny of the public; do you mercifully give her permission in this. I tell you the truth, O Råma, that these irrepressible twin brothers are your sons, O descendant of Raghu. I am the tenth son of Pracetā, so, far from speaking untruth it does not even spring up in my mind. I therefore know the truth that these twins are your sons. I have performed austere penances for many thousand years; I now swear before you, that if this Maithili is found touched by any sin I shall not reap the fruit of my ascetic observances extending over many thousand years. I have never perpetrated before a crime either, in my mind, body, or speech. If Maithili is found divested of sin I may then partake of the fruits of piety. O descendant of Raghu, finding Sitä pure in mind and five elements of body I took her near the spring in the forest. Besides this Sitā, of pure ways, divested of sins and ever considering her husband as deity, shall give testimony this day. You have been afraid of the public calumny. O son of a king, your mind being possessed by the fear of public scandal regarding her husband as a god; I came to know this by virtue of my discriminative knowledge.