Released by Arjuna, and yet not conceiving any shame, Rāvana, the king of Räkşasas again began to transverse the earth. Rākşasas or men, of whom the proud Rävaņa heard to be powerful he used to approach and summon them for fight. After some time he arrived at the city of Kişkindhā reared by Vāli and invited him, wearing golden garland, to fight. Thereat, Tara, her father Susena and the Prince Sugrīva said to the king of Rākşasas. O lord of Rākşasas, he is not present here, who shall be able to withstand you. What monkey else is capable of standing before you? However, O Ravana, Vali shall soon return after performing the Sandhya rites at the confluence of the four oceans; therefore wait here for a moment. Behold, O Dasanana, there lie the bones of all those, like conch, who came ere this to fight with the powerful king of monkeys. O Ravana, O Raksasa, ever if you have drunk nectar, you shall at this very moment loose your life, when the encounter with Vāli shall take place. O Vaiśravaņa, do you observe the variegated universe now wait for a moment after which it will be hard for you to keep your life. Or if you do wish to meet with death do you speedily repair to the southern ocean and you shall behold there Vali like to fire placed on earth. Hearing those words, Rāvana, the aggrandiser of the triple world, remonstrated with Tāra and ascending his flowery car went to the southern ocean and espied Vali, having red countenance like the rising sun, engaged in Sandhyā rites with whole-mindedness. Thereupon having descended from his Puşpaka car he with silent approached Vāli to bring him under his grasp. Casting his looks at pleasure, Vali saw him. Albeit apprised of his evil intention, he was not the least moved. And he did not care for him as a lion is not moved on beholding a hare and Garuda on beholding a serpent. He then thought within himself-“This vicious-souled Răvaņa is approaching to catch me; holding him under my arm pit I shall journey over the three great oceans. Everyone will behold the enemy Rāvana, under my arm pit as a serpent possessed by Garuda, with his thighs, arms and clothes loosened. Having thought thus Vāli remained silent for sometime and reciting incantations he waited there like a mountain. Thereupon the king of monkeys and the lord of Rākşasas, proud of strength, essayed to catch one another. Vāli was seated with his back (towards Rāvaņa); still from his footsteps he perceived that he had come within the grasp of Råvaņa's army and he at once caught hold of him like to Garuda holding a serpent. Getting hold of Rāvana, the lord of Rākşasas, desirous of catching him, (Vāli) and placing him under his arm-pit Vāli vehemently rose high up in the welkin. And he went away carrying him, scratching him again and again with his snails like to winds scattering clouds. The Ten-necked demon being thus carried away, his councillors, to release him, pursued, exclaiming, Vali, in the welkin. They thus following him, Vali, appeared in the sky like the sun in the midst of clouds. The Rākşasas could not catch Vāli but were rather exhausted by the stroke of his arms and thighs. What to speak of animals made of flesh and blood anxious for their lives even the mountains make way when Vāli goes. Rising high up into the sky where even the birds cannot reach, Vali, the lord of monkeys and gifted with great velocity, by and by finished his Sandhyā rites above the oceans. Being worshipped by the aerials their lord, with Rāvaņa, first proceeded to the western ocean. Having finished there Sandhyā prayers and recited incantations he, with Daśānana, went to the northern ocean. And having journeyed over many thousand leagues like the wind and mind, that huge monkey, with his enemy, finished his prayers at the northern ocean and then proceeded to the eastern ocean. And having recited his prayers there also, Vali, the son of Indra, and the king of monkeys, carrying Rāvana, returned to the city of Kişikindhā. Having gone through his Sandhyā rites at the four oceans and carrying Răvaņa, that monkeychief was greatly exhausted and (therefore) descended into the gardens of Kişkindhā. Having got out Răvaņa from his arm-pit, the foremost of monkeys, laughing again and again said:-"Where are you coming?" Thereupon being surprised greatly, Daśānana, the king of Rākşasas, with eyes, shaking with exhaustion, said to the king of monkeys. O king of monkeys, resembling Mahendra, I am Rāvaņa, the king of Rākşasas; I came here to fight: but I have been defeated by you. Alas! What strength is your! what prowess! What gravity! Holding me like a beast you have journeyed over the four oceans. O hero! What heroic wight is there who is not exhausted by carrying me so vehemently? O monkey, mind, wind and Garuda-these three are gifted with the velocity. Undoubtedly you have got the same velocity. Your prowess has been sufficiently displayed. But bow I wish, O king of monkeys, to make friends with you for ever before fire. O king of monkeys, from today, wife sons, city, kingdom, enjoyment, cloth and food shall be our common, Thereupon having lighted up fire the king of monkeys and the king of Rākşasas, embracing each other, became friends. Thereupon holding each other by the arms they entered the city of Kiskindha like to two lions, entering delightedly a cave. There like Sugrīva Răvaņa spent a month. Afterwards his councillors, desirous of destroying the triple world, took him away. O lord Răma, I have thus related to you the previous history. Having thus belaboured Rāvaņa Vālī at last made friends with him before fire. O Rama, Vali and unequalled and great strength. Like to fire burning down locusts you did burn down Vali.