After the conversation between Råma and Bharata had been over, Laksmana, with reasonable words, said to the former. O Rāma, among sacrifices Aśvamedha is the best and the remover of all sins; it is my prayer therefore that your desire might be turned towards this great and highly purifying sacrifice. It is said in this Purānas, that Purandara, sullied by the sin consequent upon slaying a Brāhmaṇa, was again purified by celebrating a horse sacrifice. O you having long arms, formerly, during the war between gods and demons there flourished a highly honoured Asura under the name of Vſtra. The breadth of his body was a hundred Yojanas and the height there of was three hundred Yojanas. Considering all under his subjection he used to regard them with affection. He was pious, grateful and used to perform nothing without proper deliberation. And treading tracks he used to govern his subjects very carefully. During his administration earth produced all wished-for objects; roots and fruits were tasteful and flowers were fragrant. Without being cultivated earth used to yield crops. In this wise for many long years he governed a prosperous and wonderful kingdom. Thereupon he determined upon performing a hard penance. He considered asceticism as the best of all and regarded all other things as mere illusions. Having resolved thus and placed his son Madhureśvara on the throne Vſtra engaged in austerities creating terror to all deities. He being thus engaged in asceticism, Indra, greatly terrified, approached Vişņu and said. O you having long arms, by virtue of his asceticism Vſtra is about to conquer all the worlds. He is pious, so I cannot subdue him. O illustrious Sir, if his ascetic powers grow more we shall be constrained to live under his control for ever from the creation. Do you therefore not neglect any longer this highly Generous Asura. They self being enraged, O lord of deities, Vſtra shall not live even for a moment. O Vişnu, from the time he succeeded in propitiating you, he has obtained the sovereignty of the three worlds. Do you, therefore, be propitiated now; save you none can free this world from thorns and bring it at rest. O Vişnu, all the deities are waiting for you; do you help them by slaying Vộtra. O you having a large mind, you are always the help of these high-souled deities. It is impossible for any one else to accomplish the present work. You are the refuge of the helpless.