O Rāma, having, vanquished his brother, the lord of riches, the king of Räkşasas went to the great wood of reeds, where Mahasena was born. The Ten-necked Rāvana saw the great golden wood of reeds. Furnished with networks of solar rays, and appearing like a second Sun, and ascending the mountain, he was surveying the heart of the forest, when, O Rama, Puspaka was (suddenly) deprived of its motion. The lord of Räkşasas, could not comprehend how the car which had been so made as to course in accordance with the wish of the rider, could have its course impeded; and thereat he in company with his. councillors thought, 'Wherefore does not his Puşpaka course at my desire over this mountain? Whose act is this?' Thereat Mārīca foremost of intelligent ones said, 'That Puspaka does not course cannot, sire, be without cause; or it may be that in consequence of Puşpaka not having borne any other than the bestower of riches, it has ceased its course not having the lord of wealth for its rider.' As they were speaking thus, that attendant of Bhava, Nandi, terrific, of yellow black hue, dwarfish, frightful, with his head shaven, having short arms, and stout, coming up to them, said (this). And the lordly Nandi, undaunted, addressed the sovereign of the Raksasas, saying. Desist you O Ten-necked one; Śankara sport in the mountain; and (now) He is incapable of being approached by every one, birds, serpents and Yaksas; gods, Gandharvas and Raksasas? Hearing Nandi's speech, (Ravana), wrought up with wrath, his eyes coppery, and his earrings shaking, leapt down from Puspaka. And saying, 'who is this Sankara? and he came down to the base of the mount. He beheld there Nandi stationed at the side of the deity, supporting himself on his flaming dart, resembling a second Sankara. And seeing that one having the face of a monkey, the Raksasas, deriding him, burst out into laughter, and seemed as if a mass of clouds were sending roars. Thereat, growing enraged, the reverend Nandi Sankara's other body spoke into that Rākṣasa The Ten-necked one present there. “As O Daśānana, deriding me for my monkery-form, you have indulged in a laughter resembling the bursting of thunder, do monkeys endowed with prowess, and possessed of my form and energy shall be born for compassing the destruction of your race. And armed with teeth and claws, and fierce and furnished with the fleetness of thought, and mad for encounter, and bursting with vigour, and resembling moving mountains and being born, they shall crush your high pride and power along with your courtiers and sons. But, O night-ranger, I can even now end you quite; yet I must not slay you for you have ere this been slain by your acts. When that high-souled god had spoken thus celestial kettle-drums sounded and a blossomy shower rained from the sky. But without heeding Nandi's speech, that highly powerful one Daśānana coming to the mountain, said. 'O Gopati, I will even uproot this mountain, for whom Pușpaka was deprived of its motion as I was journeying. It must be known by what influence Bhavasvara sport here king-like. He does not know that an occasion of fear has presented itself?' Having said this, O Rama, Ravana seizing the mountain with his arms, lifted it up at once; and then the mountain trembled greatly. And in consequence of the mountain shaking the attendants of the deity (dwelling in it) also shook. And Pārvatí also trembled and embraced Mahesvara. as Then, O Rāma, Mahadeva foremost of the deities even Hara, as in sport pressed the mount with his great toe. Thereat his arms, resembling blocks of stone felt the shock and then there the councillors of that Rākşasa were struck with amaze. The Rākṣasa, from wrath and the pain felt in his arms, set up a shout that shook the entire triune world. His councillors considered it the concussion of the thunder at the universal disruption. And then the celestials with Indra at their head shook on their way; and the sea was wild and the mountains shook. And Yakşas and Vidyadharas and Siddhas asked, "What is this.' 'Do you propitiate Uma's lord the bluethroated Mahādeva; for, O Daśānana, save him your refuge see we none in this matter. Bowing yourself down, do you seek him as your shelter. Then the kind Sankara, on being gratified, will confer on you his favour. Thus accosted by his councillors, the Tenfaced one, bowing down to him having the bull for his standard, began to hymn him with various soma hymns; and the Rākşasa passed away a good thousand years in lamentations. Thereat that Lord Mahādeva, pleased, set free the hands of Daśānana stationed at the top of the mount, and O Rāma, addressed him, saying. O Daśānana, pleased am I with you on account of your hymns. And as in consequence of your arms having been hurt by the mountain, you have uttered a terrific yell, which struck horror into the worlds and put them shaking, therefore, o King, your name shall be Ravana. And deities and men, Yakşas and others living on earth shall call you Rāvana terror to creatures, Go, O Paulastya, which way you wish with confidence, and permitted by me, O Lord of Raksasas, go you. Thus accosted by Sambhu, Larkā's lord said of himself. 'If you are pleased with me, grant me a boon, who ask you for it. I have already obtained a boon, bestowing on me immunity from death at the hands of gods, Gandharvas and Dānavas; and Rākşasas and Guyhakas and Nāgas; and others also that are of more than ordinary strength. Man count I not ogod: They, I deem, are insignificant. I have also, O destroyer of Tripura, received a long lease of life from Brahmä. Now I wish to pass the remainder of my days in peace: and do you grant me a weapon. Thus addressed by him, (Ravana,) Sankara gave him an exceedingly effulgent sword, famed as Candrahāsa; and the master of spectres then also granted him peace for the rest of his life. And making (the sword) over to him, Sambhu said, “You must not disregard this. If disregarded, it will for certain come (back) to me?' Having thus received his his name from Mahesvara, Rāvana, saluting Mahadeva, ascended Puspaka. Then, O Rāma, Rāvaņa, began to go round the earth. And opposed at places, by the heroic Kșatriyas endowed with energy and irrepressible in fight, fight, who refused submission, he exterminated them along with their retainers. While other men of wisdom, knowing the Räkşasa to be invincible, said to the Rākṣasas elated with strength, "We have been conquered?”