Having speedily despatched before all articles of sacrifice, Bharata's elder brother Rāma set free a black horse, gifted with all marks and worthy of the sacrifice and placed Lakşmaņa with Rtvik in charge of it. There upon the mighty-armed Kakuthstha, in the company of his soldiers, proceeded to the Naimiņa forest and beholding the wonderful sacrificial ground attained to an excess of delight and said:-It has become highly charming. While he remained in the Naimisa forest, all the kings sent him presents and Rāma also made returns. And diverse food, drink and clothes were offered to the kings when they arrived there with profuse presents. Bharata, with Satrughna, engaged in attending upon the kings. The high-souled monkeys, with Sugriva, being self-controlled engaged in attending upon the Brahmanas. Vibhīşaņa, in the company of many Rākşasas, with a collected mind, began to serve the Rşis, having asceticism for their wealth. And the highly powerful Răma, the foremost of men, set aside valuable houses for the accommodation of the high-souled kings. Under these proper arrangements the horsesacrifice commenced. Lakşmaņa engaged in looking after the sacrificial horse. In this wise Rama, a lion among the kings, undertook the celebration of the horse-sacrifice. And in that Aśvamedha of Rama presents were given to people as long as they were not satisfied. There was no other sound audible at that time save that of 'Give! Give!!. In sooth at the horse-sacrifice of the high-souled Rāma, to their fullest satisfaction, sweets and other things were distributed to people. Indeed before words came out from the lips of the beggars, monkeys and Rakşasas satisfied them with gifts. And all the ascetics living for ever and having asceticism for wealth that were present there, could not think of any other sacrifice, accompanied by so profuse presents, they had seen before. In that sacrifice, those, who wished for gold, obtained it, those who wished for property got it and those, who longed for jewels, received them. In this wise before all, enough of gold, jewels, and clothes were given away. The ascetics said:We have never seen before a sacrifice like this, Indra's, Soma's, Yama's or Varuna's. Being present everywhere the Rākşasas and Vänaras gave away enough of riches and clothes even to them who did not want. And though this sacrifice, gifted with all marks, of Rama, a lion among kings, continued for a year still his accumulated treasure was not exhausted, but rather was increased.