Beholding Sumali slain and reduced to ashes by Vasu and being assailed by the deities the Räksasa host fled into diverse directions. And collecting all the Rākşasas stood there the highly powerful Meghanāda, enraged, the son of Ravana. Like to flaming fire approaching towards forest that great car-warrior encountered the enemies in a precious car coursing at will. As soon as he, armed with various weapons, entered the field the celestials, at his very sight. And away to all directions. None could stand before him, well-versed in war-fare. Thereupon beholding the deities terrified and pierced with shafts, Indra, the king of gods, said. Be not afraid, O you celestials; do not fly away; come back to the battle; this my son, who has never been vanquished, goes to battle. Thereupon Sakra's son, known as divine Jayanta, proceeded towards the field of action by a wondrous car. Having encircled Saci's son and encountered Rāvana's son, the deities began to assail him. The encounter between Mahendra's son Jayanta and Rāvana's son Meghanāda was like one between gods and demons. Thereupon Rāvana's son began to assail, with shafts feathered in gold, his (Jayanta's) charioteer Gomukha, Mātali's son. Sacīs son too, enraged, assailed on all sides, Rāvana's son and his charioteer. And the powerful Rāvani, stricken with ire and with eyes expanded, covered Sakra's son with arrows. Thereupon Rāvana's son struck the celestial host with thousands of huge mountain summits, Śataghnīs, maces, Prāsas, Prāsas, clubs, daggers, Paraśus and various other sharp pointed weapons. Rāvana's son thus striking Indra's army the quarters were enshrouded with darkness by his illusory power. Being overpowered with arrows on all sides the celestial army, leaving aside Jayanta, became restless. The deities or the Rākşasas, they could not recognise one another. And being distressed they ran about on all sides. Being enveloped with darkness and having their senses bewildered the celestials killed their own kith and the Rākṣasas their own men, and others fled away. In the interim a heroic and powerful Daityachief, Pulomā, be name, taking ſacī's son disappeared. Taking his own grand-son he entered into the ocean, Puloma was his grand-father for by him Śaci was begotten. Thinking that Jayanta was slain all the deities greatly sorry and distressed fled away on all sides. Thereupon Rāvana's son, enraged and encircled by his own powerful followers, pursued the celestials emitting loud cries. Not beholding his son and observing the flight of the deities the king of the celestials said to Mātali, “Bring the car." By Mātali was brought, the celestial, highly dreadful, huge and quick-coursing chariot, that was ready. (And he having) ascended the car, the huge clouds, with lightening, being driven by winds, began to emit forth loud mutterings before the chariot. The Gandharvas began to play on various instruments and the Apsarās began to dance. Taking up various weapons, Indra, the king of divinities, set out for the field of action, in the company of Rudras, Vasus, Adityas, the two Asvins and Maruts. He, having set out for battle, the winds began to blow high, the sun was divested of its brilliance and the huge fire-brands began to send out flames. In the interval the heroic and the highly powerful Daśagrīva ascended the celestial car, constructed by the Architect of the deities, encircled by the huge-bodied serpents capable of making down erect and by whose breath the battle-field was ablaze. Surrounded by demons and night-rangers and with the celestial car he encountered Mahendra in the battle-field. Having desisted his son he himself stood there. And having coming out from the field of action Ravana's son too stood silent. Thereupon there arose an encounter between the Räkşasas and the deities and there began a downpour of weapons in the conflict like clouds. The vicious-souled Kumbhakarņa armed with various weapons came you, but he did not know,* O king, with whom the conflict was going on. *For he was asleep till then so he was not acquainted with the particulars war-fare. He used to sleep for six months at a time. And by him enraged, the celestials were assailed with his teeth, feet, arms, hands, Saktis, Tomaras and clubs or any weapon whatsoever. Thereupon the night-ranger engaged with the highly powerful Rudra and was wounded, in the conflict, with incessant strokes of weapons. Thereupon the Rākşasas army began to fight with Maruts and they were overwhelmed in the encounter with the stroke of various weapons. Some fell down on earth of their carriers in the battle. And they all stood there in a halfsensible mood, some holding the car, some elephants, some asses, some boars, some Piśācamouthed animals and some embracing the Pannagas. And other night-rangers, having their bodies sundered by the deities gave up their being. The Rakşasas being slain and lying down on earth the action appeared wondrous like a painting. There issued out in the battle-field a river from weapons, having blood for its silent waters and infested with crows and vultures. Having beheld his own army slain by the deities the highly powerful Daśänana, enraged beholding the army slain by gods, entered the ocean of celestial army and slaying the deities in the conflict confronted Sakra. Thereupon Śakra took up his huge bow by the twang where-of the ten quarters were filled. Having unstrung his huge bow Indra struck Răvaņa, on his head, with arrows resembling the flame of fire and the rays of the sun. And the Rākşasa-chief Daśānana, having long arms, also assailed Indra with hundreds of shafts discharged off his bow. They having been thus engaged with each other with the downpour of dreadful shafts, all the quarters were filled with darkness and in consequence thereof nothing was visible.