After the great Rșis Vālmīki had said this, Rāma, on beholding the daughter of Janaka resembling a celestial, in the midst of the assembly, with folded hands, said. O great one, you are conversant with piety. By your words shorn of sin, I have been convinced that Janaki is of pure ways. Still, O Brāhmaṇa, what you have commanded shall be carried out; let Sītā produce testimony of the purity of her character. Because Vaidehi formerly underwent a trial in the city of Lankā before the celestials I brought her home. O Brāhmaṇa, vilification of the people is very powerful. Although I know that Jānaki has not been touched by any sin still I have renounced her. Do you therefore forgive me. I know that these twin brothers Kusa and Lava are my sons. Yet if Janaki gives evidence of her own purity before the assembly I shall be greatly satisfied. Being apprised of Rama's intention as to Sītā's trial the celestials all came there on the occasion. The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Visvadeva, Maruts, Sadhyas, Siddhas, Nagas, and Rsis placing Brahmā before them, all came there. And beholding the celestials and Rșis assembled there Rama again said to Vālmīki:-O foremost of Munis, the words, of the highsouled Rsis, are divested of sin; therefore on your words only I shall consider Sītā as having pure ways. Still all have come here being anxious to witness Sītā's trial. I shall therefore be greatly delighted if Janaki gives in before them any testimony of her pure character. As soon as those words were uttered, sweet, fragrant, cold air, the witness of virtue and vice, blowing mildly, excited the joy of the assembly. People, hailing from various countries, with all attention began to witness this wondrous and unthought of event. In the golden age only the celestial wind used to blow, and it now blew even in the Tretā Yuga and forsooth it was a matter of exceeding surprise. There upon beholding all people assembled there, Janaka's daughter, wearing a red cloth, with her face and looks downwards and folded palms said. I have never thought of any other person in my mind but Rāma; by the strength of this virtue let the goddess Vasundharā give me room. I have always with my mind, body and words prayed for Rāma's well-being and by virtue hereof may the goddess Vasundhară give me room in her womb. I have never thought for other than Răma. If it is true, may the goddess Vasundhară give me room in her womb. As soon as Sītā swore in this wise a wonderful incident took place. From inside the earth a celestial and excellent throne rose up. It was carried on head by the Nāgas of unmitigated prowess, having celestial persons and adorned with celestial jewels and ornaments. Having stretched out her arms and taken Maithilī, the goddess earth welcomed her and placed her on the throne. And while seated on the throne she was entering the earth, she was covered with the continued showers of celestial flowers. Eulogising her at that time, the celestials said: Oh! highly praiseworthy is your conduct, O Sītā. Being present in the welkin and beholding Sītā enter into the Earth, the celestials again and again eulogised her in various words. The Rşis, kings and other leading men present in the sacrificial arena repeatedly expressed their surprise. Beholding Sita's censure thus removed all animals, animate or inanimate, either on earth or in the sky, were greatly delighted. Some cried aloud in joy, some remained silent, and some motionless espied Rāma or Sītā. In this wise beholding Sītā's entrance into the Earth the ascetics were greatly delighted. They all attaining to the same state of mind, the whole universe, for a moment, was possessed with the state of equality.