According to the command of Räma of unwearied actions, the warders went to the princes and communicated to them (the arrival). Beholding Bharata and Lakşmaņa present, Rāma embraced them and said. I have, as promised, performed the work of the excellent twice-born one. I wish now to perform a Rājasūya sacrifice, the source of religious glory, the destroyer of all sins, inexhaustible and un-ending. Therefore, with you like my own self, I wish to engage in the most excellent and eternal Rājasūya sacrifice. O slayer of foes, by celebrating Rājasūya, Mitra attained to the dignity of Varuņa. And having celebrated the Soma sacrifice, conversant with piety, established eternal fame in the three worlds. Do you therefore consult with me even today as to what is proper. Do you consider carefully and tell me what is auspicious and productive of well-being in the long run. Hearing the words of Raghava, Bharata, wellskilled in the are of speech, with folded hands, said O pious Sir, in you are established piety, earth and fame. O you of unmitigated prowess, as the deities honour the patriarch so other kings hold you in reverence. O king, all creatures mobile and immobile consider you as their father. O you of great strength, you are the refuge of all animals and of the universe. Therefore of what use is such a sacrifice to you? In such a sacrifice all the royal families meet with ruin. O king! all those men, who are proud of manliness, being incensed with great ire on the occasion of this sacrifice, shall bring ruin upon all. O foremost of men, the whole earth has been brought under your subjection so it is not proper to devastate it. Hearing those sweet accents of Bharata, Rāma, having truth for his prowess, attained to incomparable delight, and addressed the enhancer of Kaikeyi's delight with kind words, saying: O you freed from sins, I have been greatly delighted with you. O foremost of men, for the preservation of earth, you have given vent to words, without any hesitation, pregnant with manliness and piety. O you conversant with piety, according to your wise counsels, I refrain from celebrating this Rājasūya sacrifice. The wise should never undertake all those works which give affliction to people. O elder brother of Lakşmaņa, it is proper to take wise counsels even from a boy. O you of great strength, I therefore, hear your speech