As Rama and Laksmana were (daily) engaged. in conversing thus, the vernal night; neither hot nor cold, came on. And it came to pass that one bright morning, after having performed his first diurnal rites, Käkutstha, understanding the ways of the citizens, became anxious to present himself at a spot when he could observe the citizens. At this time Sumantra, entering, addressed him, saying, “O king, stopped at the gate, some ascetic stay there, Maharsis, led by Bhargava and Cyavana. And, O mighty monarch, eager for a sight of you, those dwellers on the banks of the Yamunā, well pleased, have despatched me (hither), O tiger among men.” Hearing his words, the righteous Rāma answered: “Let the exalted Brāhmaṇas leaded by Bhārgava, enter." Thereat, honouring the royal mandate, the warder with joined hands brought those ascetics difficult of being approached. And numbering over an hundred, flaming up in their native effulgence, those high-souled anchorites entered the royal residence. And they presented Rāma with various fruits in profusion and vessels filled with sanctified waters of all holy spots. Thereupon, accepting the waters of the holy places as well as the various kinds of fruit, that mighty-armed one spoke to the mighty ascetics. "Do you agreeably to desert take these seats." Hearing Rāma's speech, all the Maharşis sat down on those graceful and elegant golden seats. And seeing the saints seated there, that captor of hostile capitals Rāghava, restraining himself, with joined hands, observed. What is the reason of your visit? What shall I heedfully perform for you? I am worthy of being commanded by the Maharşis; and I must without demur compass every pleasure of theirs. And this entire monarchy, and the life that is resident in my heart, all these are for the regenerate ones. This I tell you in the name of truth. Hearing his words, the sages of fierce austerities inhabiting the banks of the Yamunā, broke out into a peal of plandits. And those high-souled ones, exceedingly rejoiced, said: On earth, O crown of men, this can only be expected from you and nobody else. Many kings wielding great power have passed away who, having regard to the (possible) gravity of the undertaking, could not bring themselves to promise anything before hand. But, without knowing the task, you have bound yourself by a promise for the glory of the Brahmanas. And you, without doubt, will succeed in effecting the work; and it behove you to deliver the sages from a mighty fright.