Being thus requested by the high-souled Laks maņa, Sumantra began to reveal the mystery of Durbasa's account. In the days of yore the great ascetic Durbāsā, the son of Atri, resided for a year in the holy hermitage of Vasiştha. At that time your sire, the highly effulgent and illustrious Dasaratha, with a view to see his high-souled priest Vasistha, repaired there. He saw the great ascetic Durbásā, burning like the sun in his effulgence, seated on the right hand side of Vasiștha. Thereupon he humbly saluted those two leading ascetics. And they too, welcoming him, received him duly with seat, water to wash feet, Arghya, fruits and roots, Then he lived there in the company of the ascetics. Thereupon during the noon, all those ascetics, seated there, began to dwell upon various pleasant topics. During an interval Dasaratha, with folded hands and uplifted arms, said to the high-souled son of Atri-Durbāsā, having asceticism for his wealth. O illustrious Sir, how long shall my family remain in existence? What is the extent of the lease of life granted to Rāma and my other sons? How long shall the descendants of Rāma live? And what shall be the end of my race? Do you relate all this to me. Hearing the words of the king Dasaratha the highly effulgent Durbāsā replied. Hear, the early history, O king. During the encounter between the celestials and Asuras, the demons, ,, being remonstrated with by the celestials sought shelter of the wife of Bhrguyour priest. Bhrgu's wife having promised them help they lived there fearlessly. Having beheld the demons thus helped by Bhrgu's wife, Hari, the king of celestials, enraged, chopped off her head with his sharp discuss. And angry on beholding his wife slain, Bhrgu, imprecated a curse on Vişņu, the slayer of enemies' race, saying. Being beside yourself with anger you have slain my wife, not worthy of being killed; therefore, O Janārddana, you shall be born in the region of mortals. And there you shall remain separated from your spouse for many long years. Having imprecated this curse, Bhțgu was greatly pained and being propitiated by his adoration, Visnu, fond of disciples, said. “Having slain Rāvaņa and others, I shall be, for the behoof of . mankind, subject to this imprecation." O bestower of kings, the highly effulgent Vişnu, thus imprecated by Bhrgu in the days of yore, has been born as your son in this birth and has been celebrated under the appellation of Rama. O conferer of honours, for sooth shall Rāma partake of the fruits of Bhrgu's curse. He shall reign in Ayodhyā for a long time. All his followers shall be happy and prosperous. Having reigned for eleven thousand years Rāma shall repair to the region of Brahmă. None shall be able to vanquish him. He shall celebrate many a horse-sacrifice with profuse gifts and shall establish many royal families. He shall beget on Sită two sorts. Having thus related to Dasaratha the past and future of his family the highly effulgent great ascetic Durbāsā became silent. He being silent-the great king Dasaratha, having bowed to the two high-souled ascetics, again returned to his city Ayodhyā. I had heard there all there words of the great ascetic Durbāså. Up to this time they are lying in my heart. Rsis' words shall never prove fruitless. According to the words of Rși Rāma shall install two sons of Sītā in Ayodhyā, not anywhere else. Under these circumstances, O Laksmana, you should not grieve for Sītā or Rāma; in their interest do you become patient. Hearing those wondrous words of the charioteer Sumantra, Lakşmaņa became greatly happy and eulogised him again and again? They thus conversing with one another on their way back, the sun set. They accordingly spent that night on the banks of Kesini.