Thus did the long-armed Rāma spend his days looking into all administrative works relating to the city and provinces. Some days having clasped, he, with folded hands, said to Janaka, the king of Mithila, "You are our only refuge-we have reared by you and by the help of your dreadful prowess we have been able to destroy Rāvaņa. O king, the relation between the families of Iksvāku and Mithila, by all side, is unequalled and delightful. Taking the jewel, do you proceed to your own city and Bharata as a help shall follow you. Saying “so be it" the king Janaka bespoke Rāma “O king, I have delighted with seeing you and your courteous manners. The jewels which are collected for me, I do confer upon my two daughters. The royal saint Janaka having gone away, Rāma, with folded hands and humbly said to his maternal uncle Kaikeya. O king, this kingdom, myself, Bharat and Lakşmaņa are all at your disposal. The old king might have been grieved for your long absence. It therefore behove you, O king, to go there-today. With immense wealth and various jewels let Lakşmaņa follow there. Agreeing with his request Yudhājit said, “O Rāghava, let jewels and wealth be inexhaustible with you. Thereupon, Rama, at first saluted and went round him and then Yudhăjit, the son of Kekaya, went away to his kingdom in the company of Laksmana like to Indra (leaving for home)) in the company of Vişņu on the destruction of the Asura Vrtra. Having bade adieu to his maternal uncle Rāma embraced his friend Pratardana, the undaunted king of Käśī and said. You have displayed your brotherly feelings and delight by making arrangements for my installation in the company of Bharata. O king, do you now leave for your city Varanasi, highly picturesque, well-guarded, girt by strong walls on all sides and having welldecorated gateways. Saying this, Rama, the descendant of Kākutstha rose up from his seat and embraced him cordially. Having taken farewell from Rāma enhancing Kausalya's delight, the king of Kasi, with his followers, fearlessly and speedily proceeded to his own city Vārāṇasī. Having bade adieu to the king of Kasi, Rama, with a smiling countenance and sweet accents, said to the three hundred assembled kings. Being well protected by your own prowess, you have all displayed your great love for me. By your piety, truthfulness, sagacity and strength, the vicious-souled Rāvana has been slain. Forsooth, I am merely the instrument in the destruction of Rāvana-he has been slain by your strength. Hearing that Sitā, the daughter of Janaka, had been stolen away from the forest the highminded Bharata did bring you all-but fortunately you were not constrained to go through miseries. High-minded as you are, you were all prepared for this work. Long since you have here. I think it better that you should proceed to your respective habitations. Whereto the kings, greatly delighted, replied: "O Rāma, it is by your good fortune that you have come off victorious and been installed on the throne; it is by your good luck that you have got back Sītā and the enemy Daśānana has been vanquished. That we behold you, O Rama, victorious and freed from all enemies, is our great benefit and delight. The encomiums, you have showered upon us, are natural with you. You are Rama, who always pleases people. You are worthy of being praised but we do not know how to praise you. With your permission we shall now leave for our respective provinces but you shall always reside in our hearts. O you having long arms, O great king, may you have that love for us perpetually that we may find place in your heart. Whereto Rama replied saying "so be it." Thereupon the kings, highly delighted and desirous of going, bade farewell to Rāma, with folded palms and being honoured by him, left for their respective kingdoms.