Having sent away the golden Pușpaka, the highly powerful Rāma entered the Aśoka forest beautified by sandal, Aguru, Mango, dark sandal and Debadāru trees, and covered with Campaka, Aguru, Naga, Kesara, Madhuka, Nipa, Arjuna, Nāga, Saptaparņa, Muktaka, Mandāra, Kadali and various creepers, abounding in Priyanga, Kadamba, Vakula, Jambu, pomegranate, and trees, containing various flowers, picturesque, having many fruits, fragrant, decorated with new leaves and adorned with various other trees. There were many a tree, having profuse foliage and flowers and covered with maddened black bees as if constructed by architects. The forest-land was variegated and beautified by cuckoos, the ornaments of mango trees, black-bees and various birds of various colours, Among the trees beautifying the forest some were gold-hued, some were radiant as the flame of fire and some were like red collyrium. There were various flowers, spreading fragrance and making garlands. And there were various ponds filled with pure water. The stairs of those ponds were made of corals and the ground was of crystal. And they were all filled with lotuses and lilies. There were beautified with Cakravākas and the banks were graced with variegated trees and flowers. And the forest was encompassed by stone walls and in the-irtside were dwelling many a Sárdula bird resembling Vaiduryas. All the trees in the forest were filled with flowers. And the rocks there, covered with flowers falling down from trees, appeared like welkin beautified with stars. And Rama's Asoka forest was like to Indra's Nandana and Kubera's Caitraratha made by Brahmā. Having entered the rich Asoka forestabounding in many seats and houses and creepers Rāma sat on an excellent seat, covered with a beautiful coverlet and well constructed. Like to Purandara with Sacī he took Sītā by the hand, made her sit and drink the wine distilled in the province of forest. And in rio time the servants brought for him well-cooked meat and various fruits. Being inebriate the beautiful Apsarās, wellskilled in the art of singing and dancing, began to dance before Rāma in the company of Kinnaris. The intelligent and beautiful females being intoxicated after taking wine, and well-skilled in the art of singing and dancing, began to dance before Råma. The virtuous-souled Rāma, the foremost of those who know how to please, satisfied those beautiful damsels adorned with various ornaments. And Sītā sitting by him, he appeared like the effulgent Vaşistha in the company of Arundhatī. Being greatly delighted the celestial-like Rama pleased everyday Sītā resembling a celestial damsel. Sītā and Rāghava thus spent their days happily. And thus was spent the delightful winter giving all enjoyments. Enjoying various things the high-souled Rāma and Sītā spent ten thousand years. Once on a morning time, having performed all the religious ceremonies, in the fore part of the day, Rāma, to spend the evening, entered the inner apartment. Sītā, too, having performed all religious ceremonies of morning, first in all, attended to the service of her mother-in-law. Thereupon wearing a beautifully coloured cloth and being adorned with various ornaments Sītā appeared before Rāma like to ſací approaching the king of celestials in heaven. And beholding the auspicious signs of pregnancy in his souse Rāma attained to excessive delight. Thereupon he said to the beautiful Sītā resembling a celestial damsel:-"0 Vaidehi, signs of pregnancy are manifest in you. What desires of your can we satisfy?" Smiling a little the daughter of Janaka said:"O Rāghava, I wish to behold the holy hermitages. I wish to salute the greatly effulgent Rșis living on fruits and roots and residing on the banks of the Gangā. I greatly desire, O Rāma, that I may spend even one night in the hermitage of the Rșis living on fruits and roots.” Whereto replied Rāma of unwearied actions, saying 'so be it.' Believe me, O Vaidehi, that you shall undoubtedly go there to-morrow. Having thus addressed Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, Rama, the descendant of Kakutstha, then issued out of the inner apartment and entered the middle one filled with his friends.