There upon going to bed, ſatrughna began to meditate upon that excellent theme relating to Rāma and treating of diverse subjects and did not enter into sleep. In sooth the high-minded Śatrughna spent the night in no time listening to that charming song set unmusical notes. The night being over, he first went through the morning sites and then with folded hands addressed the foremost of ascetics, Valmiki, saying. O illustrious Sir, I am anxious to see Rāma, the enhancer of the delight of the Raghu race, And my desire is that you may with other illustrious Rsis, grant me permission on this. Satrughna, the slayer of enemies, having said this, the great ascetic Vālmīki embraced and bacle him farewell. He was greatly anxious to behold Rāma and saluting the foremost of Munis he speedily preceded to Ayodhyā. There upon having entered the highly picturesque city Ayodhyā, city Ayodhyā, the graceful descendant of Ikşvākus, ſatrughna, reached where the long-armed and the highly effulgent Råma was waiting. He espied there Rāma in the midst of the councillors like Indra among the immortals burning in his own effulgence. And having bowed with folded hands to Răma, having truth for his prowess, Śatrughna, said. O great king, I have carried out all your behests; I have slain the vicious Lavaņa and filled his city with subjects. O descendant of Raghu, twelve years have passed away without you, I do not wish to live any longer separated from you. Do you therefore, O Kākutstha of unmitigated prowess, have compassion on me. Without you, I cannot live for ever in a foreign province like a motherless child. He having said this, Rāma embraced him and said: Be not sorry O hero. This is not a becoming action for Kşatriyas. The kings, O Raghava, are never tired of living in a foreign land. According to the morality of the Kșatriyas, their greatest duty consists in governing the subjects. O heroic and foremost of men, do you, at intervals, come to Ayodhyå to see me and return to your own city. Forsooth you are dearer than my life. But it is an incumbent duty to govern the kingdom. Do you therefore, O Kakutstha, live with me for seven nights, and afterwards return to your city with your servants, army and conveyances. Hearing those moral and charming words of Rama, Satrughna poorly replied, saying: Your command shall be carried out. Thereupon Satrughna, well-skilled in the use of bows, remained with Rāma for seven nights and then addressed himself for departure. Thereupon having invited Bharata and Laksmana, the high-souled Rama, having truth for his prowess, speedily went for his city in a huge chariot. The high-souled Lakşmaņa and slayer of enemies Bharata followed him on foot for some distance.