Thereupor Pulastya heard from the celestials ot the capture of Råvana like to the holding of the.wind. Having seen moved by the love for his son, the highly effulgent, great ascetic, proceeded to see the king of Māhismati. Proceeding by the aerial way, that twice-born one, gifted with the velocity of wind and the flight of wind, reached the city of Māhismati. Like to Brahma entering Indra's Amaravati, he entered the city resembling the capital of Indr and filled with delighted and plump citizens. Beholding that dreadful Rșis approach like to Āditya walking on foot, the warders communicated the intelligence to the king Arjuna. Understanding from their words that Pulastya was coming, the king of Haihayas, placing his folded palms on his crown, proceeded to welcome him. Like, to Brhaspati preceding Purandara, the royal priests went before him carrying, Madhuparka and water to wash feet. And beholding the ascetic resembling the rising sun arrived, the King Arjuna bowed to him reverentially like Indra saluting Mahadeva. Thereupon offering him Madhuparka, cow and water to wash feet, the king of Haihayas, in accents obstructed with delight, addressed the ascetic saying Reverend Sir, your visit, it is hard to obtain. On beholding you my city Mahişmati has been turned into Amaravati. Today have I obtained all auspiciousness, O lord; today has my religious observance been fruitful; today has my birth proved blessed and today has my devout penance been crowned with success, for I bow to your feet, which have been worshipped by the celestials. This my kingdom, these my sons, this my wife and myself are all at your disposal do you order me, O Brahmaņa, what I may do for you. Thereupon having enquired of the king about his piety, offerings and the well-being of his sons, Pulastya said to Arjuna, the king of Haihayas. O foremost of kings, O you having eyes like lotus-petals! O you having a countenance like the full moon! When you have vanquished Ravaņa, your prowess is matchless in the triple world. You have bound up my invincible son in the conflict at whose fear the wind and the ocean stand still. Having drunk up the glories of my son you have announced your own; so I do say, O my son, do you release Dasanana. Hearing this command of Pulastya, the king Arjuna did not utter a single world and set, most delightedly the king of Räkşasas, free. Having released that foe of the celestials, worshipped him with celestials ornaments and garlands and established friendship removing all enmities with Ravana before fire, and bowed to Pulastya, the son of Brahmā, he repaired to his own house. And being released by the influence of Pulastya, the highly powerful Daśānana, the king of Raksasas, accepted his hospitality and being embraced by him, returned home ashamed. And having set Daśagriva at liberty Pulastya, the son of Brahma and the foremost of Munis repaired to the celestial region. O Rāma, in this wise, the highly powerful Ravana was defeated by Arjuna and released by Pulastya. Observe therefore, O descendant of Raghu, there is a mightier man than the mighty; therefore, one, desirous of his own well-being, should not disregard another. Having acquired friendship with thousandarmed Arjuna, Daśānana, the king of Rākşasas, the world began again to journey over distressing the kings.