Having at first conducted Sītā to the spacious and well decorated boat plied by fishermen Laksmana himself got up. Thereupon he ordered Sumantra to wait there with the chariot, and being beside himself with sorrow ordered the sailors to move on. Thereupon having reached the other side of Bhāgirathi, Lakşmaņa, with subdued voice and folded palms, said to Sītā. O daughter of the king of Videha, this has pierced my heart like a dart, that my brother, by making me the instrumental of this action has made me the object of censure in the world. The death and the pain consequent upon it are better than the action I am engaged in. "Be you propitiated, O beautiful damsel, do not hold me responsible for this.” Saying this, the humble Lakşmaņa began to weep and pray for death. Beholding him thus overwhelmed, Sītā said "What is the matter, Lakşmaņa? I do not understand anything. Do you speak out everything plainly to me. I find you beside yourself (with grief); is it all well with the kingdom? In the name of the king, do you give out to me, the cause of your sorrow." Sītā having addressed him thus, Lakşmaņa with a poorly heart and suppressed tone, said thus. O worshipful queen! I have kept within my heart all those words, which the king said, before he entered his palace, rendered sorry and impatient on hearing in the assembly the report of censure regarding you, O daughter of king Janaka. All those words are indeed above description and so I desist. I only say so much, that afraid of the calumny of the citizens he has renounced you although your purity was sufficiently proved before me. But for that, do not consider yourself in any way guilty. Rāma has commanded me to leave you near the hermitage on the pretext of satisfying your desire as you are big with a child. Do not uselessly give vent to sorrow any more. There is the holy and beautiful hermitage of the saints on the banks of Jähnavī. There lives Vālmīki, the foremost of saints, a great friend of our sire Dasaratha. O daughter of Janaka, approaching that high-souled saint, do you spend your days happily keeping Rāma always in your mind. Do you satisfy the deities, O chaste damsel. This shall crown you with auspiciousness.