Having heard of the story of the king Ila from Rāma, Lakşmaņa and Bharata were greatly surprised. And And with folded hands they, requesting the noble king Rāma, for further particulars, said. How could the king Ila subject himself to those afflictions in the shape of a female? And how did he use to behave himself in his male form? Hearing those words begotten of curiosity, Rāma engaged in relating the whole story as he had heard before, saying. In the first month, assuming his female form having lotus-eyes and charming the three world, he used to sport in the forest abounding in groves, in the company of his companions metamorphosed into the same form. Having sent away all his conveyances Ilā used to sport in the mountain vale. Thus roaming, Ila one day espied Budha, a bundle of rays, resembling the full moon in a picturesque pond filled with birds at some distance from the mountain. Having compassion for all creatures Budha, at that time, was performing, hard, glorious and wished-for austerities within waters. O son of Raghu, on beholding him Ilā was greatly surprised, and with her female companions began to agitate waters. As soon as Budha saw her he was assailed by the arrows of Cupid. Not being able to control himself he grew impatient within waters and thought. This damsel is far more beautiful even than the celestial girls. I have never seen before a like among the celestials, Nagas, Asuras and Apsaras. If she has not been married before then she is my worthy spouse. With this resolution Budha got up from the waters, and repairing to his hermitage, sent for the fair ones. they all saluted him. Thereupon the virtuous-souled Budha accosted them saying: Whose daughter is this graceful girl among you and for what she has come here? Do not delay-tell me soon. Hearing those sweet words of Budha, the all females also said in sweet accents. This fair damsel is our supreme lady. She has no husband. Journeying she has come here in the forest with us. Hearing those plain words, Budha thought of the learning by which one can perceive everything. And being informed of all inatters regarding the king Ila, thereby that foremost of sages said to the females. Do you all live in this mountain being Kimpurusas; do you make your respective habitations here. I shall give you always fruits and roots. O you females, you shall have all Kimpuruşas as your husbands. According to the words of Budha they lived in that mountains as Kimpuruşas. In this wise many Kimpurusa-Budhas were procreated.