Hearing the ruthless words of Laksmana, the daughter of Janaka, greatly sorry, fell down on earth. And remaining senseless for some time, Sītā, with her eyes full of tears said to Lakşmaņa. Forsooth, O Laksmana, the great Dispenser has created this body to suffer miseries, and all my affections are manifest in form today. Methinks, I committed a mighty iniquity in my pristine existence or brought about me albeit I am pure and chaste. O son of Sumitrā, the affliction of residing in the forest appeared to me as pleasure ere this for I knew that I would be able to serve Rāma's feet. But how shall I, O gentle one, live in the hermitage being divorced from all my kith and kin? and being afflicted to whom shall I express my sorrow? What reply shall I offer to the ascetics when they shall ask me "Child, why has the highsouled Rāghava renounced you? What sin have you committed?" O Saumitri, I shall just renounce my life in the waters of Jāhnavi? But I desist from this for it shall bring about the termination O my husband's race. O Saumitri, do you carry out the orders you have received. By renouncing this wretched wight do you satisfy the King's orders. But hear, what I say. Without making any distinction, do you, in my name, with folded hands, bow to my mothers-in-law and then ask the well-being of the kingdom. Thereupon saluting the pious King do you address him, in my name, saying:-You know, O Råghava, that Sitā is pure, ever devoted to you and engaged in your well-being. She knows it full well, that afraid of a bad name you have renounced her. It is her duty to put a stop to your ill-name and censure; for you are her excellent refuge. Do you tell further-more that king established in righteousness to treat the citizens as his brothers, to acquire piety by protecting his subjects duly for this is the greatest mortality and by this may be acquired excellent fame, Tell him that I am not sorry for my person-my greatest sorrow is that the citizens have vilified me. Husband is a woman's god-her friend and spiritual guide. It is proper therefore to wok out husband's well-being even at the sacrifice of life. Do you, O Lakşmaņa, communicate it in short to Rāma, in my name. Do you go now and behold the signs of pregnancy are manifest in me. Sita having said this, Laksmana, with a bewildered heart, saluted her touching the ground which his head. He could not speak more. Thereupon bewailing aloud and circumbulating her, he, meditating a little, said. "What are you speaking to me, O worshipful dame? O you having no sin, upto this time I have seen any portion of your beautiful person but feet. This is a solitary forest and besides the worshipful Räma, is not present here-under these circumstances how can I cast looks upon you? Having addressed Sītā in this wise Lakşmaņa again sent for a boat and ascending it ordered the boatman to go. Thereupon having reached the other side and being beside himself with sorrow and grief he speedily ascended the car. And casting his looks behind behind while proceeding he espied that Sītā, on the other side of the Gangă, was rowing wildly like one having none to look after her. Looking again and again when Sītā saw that Lakşmaņa and the chariot have gone beyond the range of her vision, she became overwhelmed with anxiety and grief. Being sunk in grief and pressed down with the weight of sorrow on not beholding Rāma, the foremost of the illustrious, the chaste Şītā began to cry aloud in the forest resounded with the notes of peacocks.