Having heard of the origin of Kimpuruṣas, both Bharata and Lakşmaņa said to Råma: This is a wonderful story. Thereupon the highly illustrious Råma, the foremost of the pious, again began with the story of Ila, the son of the patriarch. Beholding the Kinnarīs repairing to a distance, Buddha the foremost of ascetics, smiling said, to the beautiful Ila: O you of a graceful presence, I am the most favourite son of the moon; O fair one, do you, with delight, cast looks upon me. Hearing the words of the highly effulgent and beautiful Budha in the picturesque forest land divested of men and animals, Ila said. O gentle one, I am not subject to any body; I surrender myself to you out of my own accord. O son of Soma, you may command me whatever you wish. Hearing those wondrous words, the son of moon, possessed by lust, began to live with her. And living in the company of Ilā, having a graceful countenance, Budha, possessed by desire, spent the entire month of Madhu like a moment. There upon after the expiry of a month, the graceful king Ila, son of Soma, engaged from sleep and beholding Budha, the son of Soma, engaged in austerities with uplifted hands in the midst of waters, said. 'O illustrious Sir, with my followers I entered this dense forest-I do not see them now anywhere. Where have they gone? Hearing the words of the royal saint, who had lost all recollection, Budha, with sweet words consoled him and said. All your followers have been destroyed by a downpour of huge rocks; yourself, being afraid of the storm, was also asleep in the hermitage. You have no fear now. Therefore, O hero, being consoled and renouncing all anxiety do you live here happily living upon fruits and roots. Being comforted by those words, the highminded king Ila, stricken with distress in consequence of the destruction of his servants, poorly replied. O Brāhmaṇa, I shall renounce my own kingdom. Separated from my servants, I shall not be able to live even for a moment. Do you give me permission in this. O Brāhmaṇa, my eldest son, the highly illustrious Sasabindu, the foremost of the pious, shall be the owner of my kingdom. O Brāhmaṇa, renouncing my servants and wives of the country I shall not be able to wait here. Therefore, O highly effulgent one, do you not give me such an unpleasant command of remaining here. Hearing those wonderful words of the king Ila, Budha consoling him, said:-Do you wait here. Be not aggrieved, O highly powerful son of Kardama. If you do live here for a year, I shall render your well-being. Hearing the words of Budha, of unwearied actions, the king Ila desired to live there. There upon becoming a man for the next month he began to perform ascetic penances. There upon in the ninth month, Ilă, having a beautiful waist, gave birth to a highly effulgent son, under the name of Pururavă, born of the lions of Budha, and equally graceful like him. and she handed over the highly powerful son to his father Budha. There upon after a year Ilā having regained the male form, Budha by means of various words afforded delight to him.