Rāma having taken his seat there, the experienced councillors encircling him began to dwell upon many amusing stories. Vijaya, Madhumatta, Kasyapa, Mangala, Kula, Surajin, Kaliya, Bhadra Dantavaktra, Sumāgadha-all delightedly began to introduce many amusing talks before the high-souled Rāma. Thereupon Räma incidentally addressed them saying, “O Bhadra, how do the inhabitants of the city and provinces talk about Sītā, Bharata, Laksmana, Satrughna and the mother Kaikeyi? The kings, when they deviate from the paths of justice, become objects of censure in the houses of men and even in the forests as well.” Rāma having said this, Bhadra with folded hands replied: "O king, the citizens speak many good things about you; besides they dilate upon many things in their own houses regarding your conquest acquired by the destruction of the Ten-necked demon." Hearing the words of Bhadra, Rama said:“Without hiding anything, do you relate every thing from the beginning vent to by the citizens. Hearing the good and bad opinions of the citizens I shall desist from bad actions and engage in good ones. Whatever citizens say the vicious actions of mine in the city, relate to me confidently and fearlessly. Hearing the sweet accents of Rama, Bhadra, with a quiescent mind and folded palms, said. Hear, o king, I shall relate to you all those unpleasant things frequently dwelt upon by people in court-yards, markets, public roads, forests and gardens. Indeed Rāma has accomplished a wonderfully hard work; our ancestors, the celestials, the Dānavas none heard of constructing a bridge over the ocean? Rāma has slain the irrepressible Rāvana with his army and brought over the monkeys, bears and Rākşasas to his own side. Having discomfitted Rāvana, in the encounter Rāma has released Şītā, but not being the least enraged on account of her being touched by Rāvaņa he has brought to her his own city. Rävaņa did forcibly place Sītā on her lap; how can then Rāma enjoy delight in her company? Having taken her to the city of Lankā, Rāvaņa did keep her in the Asoka forest and Sītā was brought under the control of Rākşasas. Still Rāma has not been worked up with hatred by Sītā. From now we shall also broke the bad conduct of our wives-for the subjects always tread the footsteps of their King. O King, the citizens thus talk of many types in every corner of cities and provinces. Hearings those words of Bhadra, Raghava was greatly sorry and asked his friends “Do the subjects thus talk about me?” Thereupon lowering their heads and saluting him they all said to Rāghava, of a depressed mind-“For sooth, the subjects thus talk about.” Thereupon Kakutstha, the slayer of enemies, bearing all those words, dismissed his friends.