Hearing the words uttered by Agastya, Răma wondered as to how formerly Rākşasas were generated in Lanka. Then shaking his head, he, struck with wonder, momentarily eyeing Agastya, addressed Agastya resembling fire, saying. O worshipful one, hearing your words that formerly Lankā had been in the possession of the flesh-eaters, I have been seized with great amazement. We had heard that the Rākṣasas had sprung in the race of Pulastya. But now you have said that they owe their origin to a different source. But were they more powerful than Rāvana, Kumbhakarma and Prahasta and Vikața and the sons of Rāvana? Who was their progenitor? And what was the name of that terrific strength? And through what transgression were they driven out by Vişnu? All this, O sinless one, do you tell me in detail, and do you dispel my curiosity even as the sun dispels darkness. Hearing Rāghava's words, fair and fraught with polished phrase and period, Agastya, struck with surprise, said to Rāghava. The lord of creatures sprang from water, first created water. And the lotus-born one generated creatures for protecting that element. Thereupon those creatures humbly presented themselves before the creator, saying, What shall we do? We are sore tried by hunger and thirst. The lord of creatures, laughing, addressed them, saying, “You men, do you carefully guard this (water).” Thereat some said 'Raksama,' (i.e. we shall protect.) and others 'Yaksāma.' (We shall worship.) Thus accosted by those afflicted with hunger and thirst, the creator said. Those among you who have said 'Raksama,' shall be Raksasas; and those among you, who have said 'Yaksama' shall be Yaksas. And there sprang the brothers-repressors of foes-Heti and Praheti lords of Raksasas, resembling Madhu Kaitabha himself. Praheti, who was righteous, went to the wood of asceticism. And Heti exerted himself to the utmost to get himself wived. And that magnanimous one of immeasurable soul married the exceedingly terrific sister of Kala, named Bhayā (Fear.) And on her Heti-foremost of Rākşasas and best of those having sons-beget a son, known as Vidyutkeśa. Heti's son, the exceedingly energetic Vidyutkeśa, possessed of the splendour of the sun, grew up even like a lotus in water. And when that night-ranger arrived at proper youth, his sire turned his attention towards his marriage. And that best of Rākṣasas-heti-in the interests of his son asked for the hand of Sandhya's daughter; like to Sandhyā* herself in the potency. * The evening Twilight-spouse of the Sun. Sandhya, reflecting that she needs must have to be given away by her, bestowed her on Vidyutkesa, O Raghava. Having obtained Sandhya's daughter, the night-ranger Vidyutkeśa, sports with her even as Maghavan does with the daughter of Puloma. It came to pass that after a length of time, O Răma, Sälakatankata was filled with child by Vidyutkeśa, as the clouds are furnished with water by the Ocean, Then repairing to Mandara, the Rākşasi brought forth her child, having the splendour of rain-charged clouds; even as Gangā had delivered herself of the child begotten by fire.* And having delivered herself of her offspring, she again became bent on disporting with Vidyutkeśa. *Mahesvara. Then forsaking her son, she began to sport with her husband; and the child having sounds resembling the rumbling of clouds, was renounced (by his mother). And forsaken by them both, the infant furnished with the brightness of the autumnal sun, entering his clenched fist into his mouth, began to cry slowly. It so fell that, journeying with Parvati, Siva, riding his bull through the serial regions, heard the sounds of weeping, on Along with Uma, he saw the Raksasas's son, as he was crying. And sent by Pārvatī, whose heart was moved by by compassion, Bhava destroyer of Tripura-made that Raksasa's offspring attain the age of his mother, and conferred him immortality. And for compassing Parvati's pleasure, Mahadeva, indestructible and undeteriorating granted (the Raksasa) the power of ranging the air. O son of the king, Umă also bestowed a boon: “Henceforth the Rāksasis shall conceive in a day, bring forth (child) in a day, and the child shall in a day be furnished with the age of its mother.' Then the great and magnanimous Sukeśa, puffed up with the receipt of boons, having obtained auspiciousness at the hands of the lord, Hara, began to range everywhere, even as Purandara did on having obtained heaven.