Seeing the foremost of the Yakşas by thousands undergoing trepidation, the lord of riches spoke to a mighty Yakşa Māņichara. O foremost of Yakşas, slay the wicked Ravana, set on sin; and do you (thus) become the refuge of those heroic Yakşas, who are carrying on the conflict. Thus addressed, the mighty-armed and invincible Mānibhadra, surrounded by four thousand Yakşas began the fight. And attacking the Rākşasas with maces and clubs and bearded darts, and with darts tomoras and bludgeons, the Yaksas rushed at (their adversaries). And fast safely whirling about like hawks, they fought fiercely. And (some) said, 'Well, give me battle,' and (others), 'I don't want,' and (other) again), 'Let me have (fight)'. And then the celestials and the Gandharvas and the sages studying the Vedas, beholding the great encounter, were filled with mighty amazement. And a thousand of the Yakşas were slain by Praśasta in the conflict; and another thousand of capable warriors were slain by Mahodara. O king, in the twinkling of an eye Märīca, waxing wroth and eager for encounter brought down two thousand (of enemy's soldiers). Where is the candid-coursing fight of the Yakşas and where the fight of the Rākşas by help of the power of illusion; and therefore in that battle the advantage was on the side of the Raksasas. And Dhūmrākşa, confronting Māņibhadra in the mighty conflict hit him as the chest with a bludgeon; but he did not move thereat. Then Mänibhadra dealt the Raksasa a blow with his mace; and thereat Dhūmrākṣa smite at the head fell down senseless (on the ground). And seeing Dhūmrākṣa wounded and down, bathed in blood, the Ten-necked Răvaņa rushed at Māņibhadra in the encounter. Then that foremost of Yakşas hit Daśānana with three darts as he was rushing in wrath. And on being thus hit, (Rāvana) struck at Manibhadra's head: and at that stroke his crown was depressed at one side. From that day forth that Yaksa remained with his head hollow on one side. And on the highsouled Māņibhadra having been baffled, a great uproar, O king rose in that mountain. Then at a distance, the lord of riches, mace in hand, accompanied by Sukra and Praushthapada and Padma and Sanka saw (Ravana) in the field. Seeing his brother in the encounter with his glory obscured through the curse (he had ere this come by), the intelligent (Lord of Yaksas) spoke in words worthy of the line of his grand-father. As, O wicked-minded one, you desistest not, albeit forbidden by me, you shall, afterwards attaining the fruit of this, and repairing to hell, know (the fate that follow there). That perverse one, that through ignorance having drunk poison, neglects to adopt proper measures, know the consequence of his act ultimately. The gods have set their face against you on account of a certain misdeed of your; and having for this, been reduced to this condition, you do not understand things. He that dishonour his father and mother* and spiritual preceptor, reap the fruit of his act on coming under the sway of the sovereign of the dead. *Unless he serve his parents, his heart does not incline to piety. Having regard that this body is uncertain, that foolish person, that does not acquire asceticism, dying go the way that he deserve. The mind of a perverse man does not willingly incline towards good; and as he acts, he gets the fruits (he reaps as he sows). In this world people, making their own good fortune and beauty, strength, sons, wealth and valour, gain these by virtue of their pious acts. Being given to such iniquitous acts, you will go to hell; and your designs being such, I will not hold parley with you. Honest people should act carefully in connection with the wicked.' Thus reprimanded by him, his (Rāvana's) councillors, headed by Marica, on being struck, took to their heels. Then Daśagrīva on being Struck in the head with the mace by the lord of Yakşas, did not move from his place. And then, O Rama, the Yaksa and Raksasa, smiting each other in mighty encounter, did not get bewildered of experience fatigue. And then the bestower of riches discharged a fiery weapon at him; and thereat the lord of Rāks asa resisted it with a Varuņa weapon. And then the Rākşasa king entered upon shapes for compassing the destruction of his adversary). The Ten-necked Ravana (successively) assumed the shapes of a tiger, a boar, a cloud, a hill, the ocean, a tree, a Yaksa and a Daitya. Thus he wore full many forms and he was not visible in his native shape. And then, O Rāma, seizing a mighty weapon the Ten-necked one, whirling the same, brought that redoubtable mace down on the head of the bestower of riches. Thus smitten by him, the lord of wealth, baffled, toppled down to the earth covered with blood like an aśoka whose roots have been hewn away. Thereat Padma and other Nidhi deities, surrounding the granter the granter of wealth, raised him up and brought him to the Nandana wood. Conquering the bestower of wealth, the lord of Raksasas, with a delighted heart, possessed himself of his Puspaka, the car, as a sign of victory; furnished with golden pillars, gateways set with lapises, covered with networks of pearls, having three yielding the fruits of all seasons, endowed with the celerity of thought, ranging everywhere at will, wearing forms at pleasure, capable of coursing in the sky, with golden and jewelled stairs, and daises of polished gold, the vehicle of the gods undeteriorating, bringing delight to the mind and sight; wonderous exceedingly: painted with images designed to fill the mind with reverence, constructed by Brahmä, containing all objects of desire, charming and nonpariel not cold and not yet hot, granting gratification in every season, and graceful to the view. And ascending that (car) coursing at will, won by his prowess, that utterly wicked one, out of swelling insolence, deemed himself master of the three worlds. And having vanquished the deity Vaiśravaņa, he descended from Kailasa. Having by his energy obtained the victory, the powerful night-ranger wearing a bright diadem and necklace, and seated on that superb car, appeared radiant in his court like Fire himself.