Hearing his mighty-shouts, that lord Vaivasvata knew that his adversary had gained the day and that his own host had been destroyed. Knowing that his forces had been slain, he, with his eyes crimsoned with passion hastily spoke to his charioteer, ‘Bring you my car.' Thereat the charioteer brought the noble and mighty car and stood (there) and then that exceeding energetic one mounted the car. In front (of his car) stood death, equipped with prāsas and maces in his hands, who makes nothing of this entire triune world; incapable of deterioration. And beside (him) was the rod of Kāla in its native from the divine instrument of Yama like to a flaming fire on account of its own energy. Then on beholding Kāla, infuriated, tending to strike terror into all creatures, was agitated the triune universe, and trembling over took the denizens of heaven. The charioteer urged on the steeds possessed of graceful splendour; and arrived where the lord of Rākşasas was posted. In a moment those horses like to thought (in celerity,) and resembling the steeds themselves of Hari, took Yama where the warfare had already begun. Seeing the frightful car in that aspect with Death present in it, the ministers of the Rākşasa monarch at once took to their heels. In vonsequence of their being comparatively inferior in point of strength they were deprived of their senses, and afficted with fear; and saying, 'Here we are not equal to fighting' they went their way. But seeing that car capable of striking terror into folks, the Ten-necked did not experience any agitation, nor did fear enter his heart. And approaching Ravana, Yama, enraged, discharged spears and tomaras, and began to pierce Rāvana's marrow. But Rāvana, without at all feeling any smart, began to shower arrows on Vaivasvata's vehicle, resembling a downpour caused by clouds. Again at his spacious breast, that Raksasa who had undergone slender injury, could not resist, (Yama's arms) with hundreds of mighty darts hurled. And in this way that destroyer of foes Yama fought for seven nights with various arms; until at length his enemy was driven back and deprived of his senses. Then, O hero, there took place nighty onset between Yama and the Rākşasas both eager for victory and both never tiring of fight. And celestials and Gandharvas and Siddhas, and the supreme saints, placing Prajāpati at their head, presented themselves at the fight. The encounter that then took place between that foremost of Rākşasas and the lord of the Dead was like the universal upheaval. And stretching his bow resembling in splendour the thunderbolt of Indra, he discharged arrows covering up the sky. And he smote Death with four, the (Yama's), charioteer with seven, and swiftly struck Yama in the marrow with hundreds and thousands of shafts. : Then from forth Yama's mouth there issued darted flames with his teeth mixed with smoke, the fire of his fury. Witnessing this wonder in the presence of the deities and Dānavas, both Death and Time were fixed with wrath and were filled with delight. Then Death, growing still more wroth, addressed Vaivasvata saying; “Let me go. I shall slay this sinful Rākşasa.” Even this is my native might this Räksasa will be no more. Hiranyakasipu, the graceful Namuci, and Sambara, Nişandi and Dhūmaketu and Virocana's offspring Bali, and the Daitya Śambhu that mighty monarchs, Vſtra and Bāņa; and Rājarșis versed in all branches of learnings and Gandharvas, and mighty serpents, and sages, and Pannagas and Yaksas, and swarms of Apsarās and the Earth herself containing vastly oceans and mountains and rivers and trees, at the unrolling of a Yuga all these, O mighty monarch have I brought to dissolution. All these and many more endowed with strength and incapable of being overcome, were at the very sight of me compassed with peril, and what is this ranger of the night? Let me go. O you cognisant of righteousness, I shall slay this one. There is none that, albeit strong, can survive after having been seen by me. Verily this is not mine strength, this might pertain to me by nature. O Time, if seen by me, he won't live for a moment. Hearing these words of his, the puissant king of righteousness spoke there to death, 'Do you stay. I myself shall slay him.' Then with his eyes reddened that lord, Vaivasvata, wielded with his hand the infallible dart of time; while by him lay the redoubtable noose of time and the mace in its native shape resembling fire and the thunderbolt. He, who by his very sight draw away the lives of creatures, what should be said of its touching and being hurled at people? And touched by that powerful one, that mighty weapon, engist with flames, attained access of energy, and seemed to consume the Raksasa. In the field of battle, everyone afficted with fear, ran away from it. And beholding Yama with his rod uplifted, the celestials were agitated. On Yama being desirous of slaying Rāvana, by his rod, the great-father manifesting himself spoke to Yama. O Vaivasvata, O mighty-armed one, O you of immeasurable prowess, this certainly must not be. You should not with your rod slay the nightranger. For, O foremost of celestials, I have conferred a boon on him; and you should not render false the words that I have uttered. Verily he, that, whether a god or a human being, shall falsify my words, shall render the triune universe false. There is no doubt about this. If this terrific weapon, capable of affrighting the three spheres, be discharged alike at friends and foes, it will destroy creatures. This rod of Kāla, of immeasurable might and incapable of being resisted by creatures, was created by me as having the power of compassing th : death of all beings. Therefore, O mild one, you forsooth should not bring it down on Rāvana's head. If this alights on any one, he does not live for a moment. Whether on this weapon alighting, the tennecked does not die, or if he does do either way falsehood is the consequence. Therefore do you keep your uplifted weapon off Larkā's lord. If you have any care for these worlds do you establish my truth. Thus addressed, Yama then answered, I restrain this rod. You are our lord. But as I can not slay this one, who has obtained a boon, what then shall I do now in the field? Therefore shall I disappear from the sight of this Rākşasa.' Having said this, even there did he vanish with his car and horses. Having vanquished him and distinguished his name, Rāvaņa again ascended his Puşpaka and went out of the abode of Yama. With a delighted heart Vaivasvata along with the deities headed by Brahmā as well as that mighty ascetic-Narada, went to the celestial regions.