Beholding the great ascetic Vālmīki thus conducting Sītā into his own hermitage Lakş mana's heart was bewildered with grief. Thereupon he said to the expert charioteer Sumantra. Do you perceive Rāma's grief consequent upon the separation from Sītā. His spouse-the daughter of Janaka, is perfectly pure; what can be more painful than that Rāma is living alone having renounced her? It is clear to me, O Sumantra, that this separation of Rāma, has been brought about by the influence of destiny-for it is hard to get over accident. Even that Rāma, who, when enraged, is capable of slaying the celestials, Gandharvas, Asuras and Rākşasas, has been engaged in the worship of destiny. Formerly did Rāma go through miserics, residing in the forest of Dandaka, at the command of his sire for fourteen years. But this banishment of Sītā appears to me as exceedingly painful and most ruthless. O charioteer, the opinion of the citizens is by no means just; consequently what shall we gain by performing such a bad action for fame as the exile of Sita? Hearing those words of Lakşmaņa of various types, the wise Sumantra reverentially replied. Be not aggrieved for Sītā, O Saumitri Formerly in the presence of your sire the Brāhmaṇas related this account of Sītā's exile. Rāma shall be deprived of all happiness and be separated from his dear wife; what more, the virtuous-souled Rāma, having long arms, shall, under the influence of time, renounce you, Sītā, Śatrughna and Bharata. O Lakṣmaṇa, when Durvāsa was addressed by the king Dasaratha as to your future he replied in the above way. I have told you the same. Do you not communicate this to Śatrughna Bharata or any body. O foremost of men, Durbasa said this to Daſaratha before me, Vaşistha and other great men. Hearing the words of Rsi, Dasaratha, the foremost of men, said to me, "O charioteer, do not reveal this secret to any body. O gentle one, it is not proper by any means to falsify the words of the king Dasaratha. I shall always, very carefully, carry out his orders. It is not proper to reveal this mystery before you. Still I do so for your curiosity has been greatly excited. Tough this mystery was communicated formerly by the king Dasaratha and though it is not proper to reveal it to any body, still I express it before you that you may not, on hearing it, be worked up with sorrow; for destiny is hard to be got over. And it is by the influence of that destiny that you have met with such a sorrow and grief. However, do you not reveal this secret to Satrughna and Bharata. Hearing these grave and important words of Sumantra, Laksmana ordered him to relate.