Having sent away his friends and determined what to do, Rāma, the delight of the Råghus, commanded the warder, who was seated hard by, saying. Do you bring in no time, Lakşmaņa, a son of Sumitrā, gifted with auspicious marks, alongwith great Bharata and the irrepressible Šatrughna. Hearing the words of Rāma and placing his folded palms on his head the warder reached house of Lakşmaņa and unobstructed entered therein. And having saluted him, with folded palms he said to the high-souled Laksmana and:-"The King wishes to behold you-do you soon go there. Thereupon being apprised of Rāghava's command and saying 'so be it.' Saumitri ascended his car and went speedily towards Rāma's abode. Having beheld Lakşmana's departure the warder humbly went to Bharata and having blessed him with folded hands said: “The King wishes to see you." Hearing of the command of Rāma from the warder, the highly powerful Bharata at once got up from his seat and proceeded on foot. Seeing Bharata's departure the warder speedily went to the mansion of Satrughna and with folded hands said. "Do you come, O foremost Raghus, the King wish to behold you.” Lakşmaņa and Bharata are also there. Hearing the words of the warder Satrughna lowered his head and rising up speedily proceeded to Rama. Thereupon returning, the warder, with folded। hands, communicated to Rama, the arrivals of his brothers. So long Rāma was engaged poorly in anxious meditation with his crown bent downwards. Informed of the princes' arrival he commanded the warder, “Do you soon bring the princes here. My life depends upon them. They are my dearest life. Having obtained Rāma's command, the princes, clothed in white raiment, entered there, with folded palms and quiescent mind. Having entered there they saw that Rāma's countenance was shorn of beauty like to the moon possessed by Rāhu, the setting sun and the withered lotus and his eyes were full of tears. Then having approached him quickly, and saluted his feet they all anxiously sat there. Rāma also wiped off his tears. Thereupon having embraced them with his arms he raised up the princes and pressed them to take their seats. Then he said. "You are mine all; you constitute my life; O princes, I am governing the kingdom gained by you; you are all learned, pious and intelligent. Do you follow the duties I point out." Rāma, the descendant of Kakutstha having said this, they, with anxiety and attention, awaited the orders of the king.