Pulastya's son-that prime of ascetics-Visravāin a short time was engaged in asceticism like his father. And he was truthful, and of excellent character and controlled senses; was engaged in the study of the Vedas; and was of the sanctified spirit; and he was not addicted to any of the pleasures of life, and was always studious of religion. Learning of his ways, that mighty ascetic, Bharadvāja, gave to Visravā for his wife, his daughter, Devavarņinſ. And having religiously wed Bhāradvāja's daughter, that foremost of ascetics, Visravā, conceiving the highest delight, began to reflect on the welfare of his offspring with an intelligence concentrated on them. And on her that one cognisant of righteousness begot child, exceedingly wonderful, endowed with energy, and adorned with all Brahma* qualities. On his having been born, his grand-father was rejoiced, and, marking the profitable intelligence (of the boy, he thought that) he would be the lord of riches. And well-pleased, (Pulastya) in company with the Devarsis (thought), Inasmuch as this is Viśravá's offspring, and as he resembles Viśravā himself, so he should be known by the name of Vaisravana. own a *Such as self-control, asceticism, purity, etc. Then the exceedingly energetic Vaiśravana, repairing to the wood of asceticism, increased in power) like to a fire fed by sacrificial oblations. And as he was staying in the hermitage, that high-souled one thought, 'I shall practice prime righteousness: verily virtue is the supreme way.' For a thousand years, he, having his senses controlled, practised rigid austerities in that mighty forest, observing (all the while) the most rigorous restrictions. And on a thousand years having been numbered, he by turns observed the rules relative to each term; (at first) living on water, (then) on air, and (last) going absolutely without any food. Thus passed away a thousand years like one. Then the highly energetic Brahmā along with the Indra and the celestials, coming to that asylum, addressed (Vaisravana), saying, '0 child, I am well-pleased with you for this act of your, O you of excellent vows. Do you, good betide you, ask for the 'boon (that you would have), for, O magnanimous one, you are worthy of a boon.' Then Vaisravaņa said to the Pitāmaha, who was present, 'O reverend one, I crave for the power of maintaining and protecting people.' Thereat, Brahmä along with the deities gladly said to Vaiśravana in a gratified spirit, Very well! I am about to create the fourth of the Protectors of the creatures-Yama, Indra and Varuna, the position which is sought for by you. Do you, O you cognisant of righteousness, attain the same; do you receive the position of the lord of riches. You shall be the fourth among the Sakra, the lord of waters, etc. Do you take for your vehicle this car, named Puşpaka, resembling the Sun himself, and thus raise yourself to an equality with the celestials. Good betide you! We shall (now) go whither we had come, having, my child, done my duty and bestowed on you the couple of boons. Having said this, Brahmă along with the celestials went to his own quarters. On the deities with Brahmã at their head, having departed foe the heavenly regions, the selfpossessed lord of wealth of subdued senses with joined hands spoke to his sire, saying, 'o reverend one, I have received the wished-for boon from the great-father, but the exalted lord of creatures has not fixed any abode for me. Therefore, O lord, do you seek out some dwelling for me, where no creature whatever can come by misfortune. Thus accosted by his son, that best of ascetics, Viśravä, spoke, O righteous one,' Listen! O excellent one. On the shore of the Southern sea there is a mount named Trikūta. On its brow is a beautiful and broad city built by Viśvakarmā, named Lankā, resembling the city itself of Indra the great, designed for the abode of Rākşasas, like to the Amaravati of Indra. There in Lanka, do you, forsooth, reside. That romantic city is surrounded with a golden wall and a moat, and is furnished with engines and weapons, and has gateways of gold and lapises. Formerly she was renounced by the Raksasas afflicted with the fear of Vişnu; and was empty of swarms of Rākşasa, who had gone to the nethermost regions. Now Lanka is vacant, and there is no one that lords it over her. Do you, my child, for abode, at your ease repair thither. Your stay there shall meet with no rub, and no manner of disturbance shall occur there. Hearing the righteous speech of his sire, that virtuous-souled one along with thousands of delighted and joyous Rākşasas, began to reside in Lanka stationed on the ion of the mount. In a short time (Lankā), through his sway, abounded (in wealth). And that foremost of Nairtas, the righteous-son of Visrava, wellpleased, abode in Lankā having the Ocean for her entrenchment. At times the righteous-souled lord of riches, mounted on Pușpaka, in humble guise visited his father and mother. And hymned by hosts of deities and Gandharvas, having his mansion graced with the dancing of Apsarās, and floating on rays like the sun himself, that ruler of riches went to his sire.