O Răma, in Tretāage, there was a huge forest extending over hundred Yojanas divested of animals and men. In that forest of without men I used to perform my austere penances. Once on a time I began to roam all over the forest being willing to see well every nook and corner of it. And I saw that it was impossible to ascertain how very pleasant that forest was. In every place there were trees with profuse sweet fruits. and roots. In the middle I espied a pond extending over a Yojana. There was no moss in that deep, calm, clear and sweet water; there were lotuses and lilies and swans, Kārandavas, Cakravākas and many other water fowls were playing in the waters. O lord of creatures, at no distance from that pond I saw an old, holy hermitage but there was no creature or animal around it. O best among the men, it was summer and I spent that night in that hermitage. Next morning leaving my bed I arrived at the banks of the pond and saw a plump dead body in the waters. None of its limbs was pale and its beauty was not spoiled. Beholding it and standing on the banks I began to mediate upon it. And thought I What is this?' In a moment I espied a beautiful car, swiftcoursing like the mind and drawn by ganders. And I saw in that chariot a celestial person. He was being attended by Apsarās adorned with celestial ornaments and having lotus-eyes. Some of them were singing, some dancing and some playing on Mşdanga, Vīņā and other musical instruments and some were fanning his lotus-like countenance with valuable, golden chowries, dazzling like the rays of the moon. O Rāma, the foremost of Raghu's race, like to the moon renouncing the summit of the Sumeru mount that celestial wight got down from his seat in the car and engaged in devouring the dead body. And having taken enough flesh he got down into waters and duly performed ablution. O Rāma, there after that heavenly being again addressed himself for ascending the car. O foremost of men, beholding that heavenly being about to get up I accosted him, saying, Who are you? I see, you have a celestial firm, then why have you taken such an abominable food? O you adored of the immortals, persons like you should not take such meals. O gentle one, I have been stricken with great curiosity and wish to hear all. Thine living upon dead body does not appear agreeable to me. O king, plainly and out of curiosity I put to him these questions. And hearing them, the celestial being related everything to me.