Thus accosted (by the sages), Rāma answered them with joined hands: "What does he live on? What are his ways? And where does Lavana live?" Hearing Räghava's words, the sages informed him of the way in which Lavana increased in power. His food is every creature specially ascetics; his manner of life is regulated by ferocity and his constant home is Madhuvana. Slaying constantly thousands on thousands of lions and tigers and deer, and birds and human beings, he provides his daily food (with their flesh.) And like the Destroyer on the occasion of the universal dissolution, that one possessed of gigantic strength feeds on other creatures as well. Hearing this, Rāghava spoke to the mighty ascetics: "I will slay that Raksasa. Let your depart." Having thus bound himself with that promise to the ascetics of fierce energy, Raghu's son along with his brothers spoke. What hero shall slay Lavana? Do you decide this. On whom shall devolve this duty? Whether the mighty armed Bharata or the intelligent Śatrughna shall (do this work?). Thus addressed by Raghava Bharata remarked: "I will slay this. Let this task be entrusted to me." Hearing Bharata's speech instinct with fortitude and valour, the younger brother of Lakş maņa stood up, leaving his golden seat. And Śatrughna, saluting the king represented: “The mighty-armed second son of Raghu has already achieved a grand work: he formerly governed Ayodhyā empty of the noble one,* bearing in his heart the grief connected with his return. *Rama. Undergoing many a hardship, o king, that illustrious one passed his days, lying down on a bed of sorrow, and living on fruits and roots, and wearing rags. Having suffered such misery, Raghu's son should not be suffered to undergo trouble, while, O king I his servant is by. On Satrughna saying this, Raghava again said: Let this be so. Do you do my bidding. I shall install you on the graceful city of Madhu; or if you wish without and entrust Bharata with this task, O long-armed Heroic, and accomplished, you are combatant to found a city on the Yamună as well as flourishing provinces. He that, having people's dominion, does not flourish it with a king. Go to hell. one. So if you accept my words, then slaying Madhu's son, the sinful Lavana, rule the kingdom righteously. O hero, you must say anything after what I have spoken. Without doubt, a youthful younger brother must obey the injunctions of his elder brother. Do you, o Kākutstha, accept the installation which I confer on the, precluded by the prescribed religious formulae uttered by Vipras headed by Vasiştha."