They being thus engaged in conversation regarding his achieving victory without any danger Satrughna in no time passed the night. The clear morning having arrived, that time the heroic Lavana issued out of his city to collect food. In the meantime having crossed the river Yamunā, the heroic Satrughna, with bow in his hands, stood at the gate of Madhu's city. There upon returning in the noon with many thousand animals, the night-ranger Lavana, of dreadful actions, espied Satrughna standing at the gate with a weapon in his hand. Thereupon he said: What shall you do with this weapon? O vile wight, enraged I have devoured many thousand persons holding weapons like you. I now perceive you have also been possessed by Kala. O vile man, I am fully fed. How shall you, of your own accord, enter into my mouth? Lavaņa having said this again and again laughing the great hero Satrughna shed tears in anger. The high-minded Śatrughna being beside himself with rage, from all his person issued burning lustre. Greatly enraged he said to the night-ranger O you of a vicious intellect, I wish to enter into a dual encounter with you. I am the son of the great king Dasaratha, brother of the intelligent Rāma and my name is Satrughna. I slay all my enemies and have come here to destroy you. I wish now to fight with you-do you enter into a dual conflict. You are the enemy of all animals. You shall not be able to survive at my hands. He having said this, the Rākṣasa, laughing aloud, replied to that foremost of men:-Your understanding is bewildered. By the influence of destiny you have come under my control. The Räksasa Rāvana was the brother of my aunts. O you of vicious understanding, O vile wight, it is for his wife that Rāma did slay him. It is out of hatred that I have tolerated the destruction of Rāvana's family and have pardoned you all. You are all vile men; I have slain and defeated all of your family that have passed away and shall destroy all that are living and shall come into existence. O you of vicious intellect, if you wish I shall fight with you. Do you wait here so long I do not bring my weapon. Do you remain here as long as I with that shall not kill you. Where to Satrughna immediately replied Where shall you go while I am alive? The practical men should never let off the enemies who come out of their own accord. He, who invite an enemy into battle under the influence of perverted understanding, is slain like a coward. Do you behold this world of creatures to your hearts' content for I shall by various sharp weapons despatch you to Yama's abode who is the enemy of the three worlds and Rāghava.