As clouds assail a mountain with showers, then the Raksasas, representing clouds, setting up shouts, began to assail Nārāyaṇa representing a mountain. Visnu of a bright brown-blue hue, being surrounded by the flower of the night-rangers with dark visages, resembled the Añjana mountain, on which the clouds pour down. As locusts (flood) a field, knots (throng) about a flame, gad-flies (cluster) around a pot of honey, or makaras (range) in the sea, so the shafts shot by the bows of the Rākṣasa, having (the energy of) the thunder-bolt and endowed with (the velocity of) the wind or thought, pierce Hari as if at the universal dissolution. Those mounted on cars (assailed him) with their cars, and those mounted on the backs of elephants (assailed him) with their elephants, and those riding horses (assailed him) with their horses, and the foot-soldiers attacked him, stationed in the sky; and the foremost of Rākşasas resembling mountains, by means of darts, rstis and tomaras, suspended the respiration of Hari even as the prāņāyāma* does that of a twice-born one. *The practice of regulation respiration and finally suspending the same. This is practised by the Yogis of India, who attribute wonderful virtues to it. On being sore tried by the night-rangers, like the great Ocean by the fishes (residing in it), that invincible one, taking his ſārņga, showered shafts among the Rākşasas. With sharpened arrows resembling the thunder, and endowed with the velocity of the wind, shot from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, Visnu cut off (Raksasas) by hundreds and by thousands. And dashing away (the Rākṣasa ranks) with his arrowy shower, even as the wind aroused dashes away a downpour, that best of male beings blew his mighty conch Pāñcajanya. Winded by Hari with his utmost might, that water-sprung king of conchs, endowed with terrific blares, roared, as if afflicting the three worlds. The sounds of that king of conchs struck terror into the Rākşasas, even as in a mighty forest a lion (strikes terror into the hearts of) elephants in rut. Thereat the horses could not keep their ground, and the elephants were reſt of their temporal flow, and shorn of their virtue at the roars of the conch, heroes began to topple down from their cars. And dight with dainty feathered parts having heads, the shafts discharged from the śārnga, resembling thunder-bolts, riving those Rākşása, entered the earth. In that conflict, pierced by the arrows discharged from Nārāyana's arm, the Rākşasa began to drop to the ground like mountains struck with the thunder-bolt. The wounds on the persons of the foes inflicted by the discus of Vişnu discharge blood in streams, like mountains discharging streams of red chalk. The sound of that king of conchs, as well as those of the Sārnga, combined with the roars emitted by Vişņu himself, swallowed up the roars of the Rākşasas. Hari by means of his shafts cut off their necks, and arrows, and standards, and bows, and cars, and ensigns and quivers. Like fierce rays streaming about from sun, like torrents dashing from the ocean, like elephants coming adown a mountain, or like showers descending from clouds, the shafts shot by Nārāyaṇa pursue (the foes) by hundreds and by thousands. Even as an elephant pursuits a tiger, a tiger a wolf, a wolf a dog, a dog a cat, a cat a snake, or a snake a rat, so the mighty Vişnu pursuit the Rākșasa host; and others, (struck down by him), measure their lengths on the ground. Then, having despatched thousands of Rākşasas, the destroyer of Madhu blew his water-sprung (conch), even as the sovereign of the celestials filleth clouds (with rain). Agitated by the arrows of Nārāyaṇa, with their senses bewildered by the blares of the conch, the broken Raksasa forces made for Lankā. On the Rākşasa army having been broken in consequence of the beating it got at the hands of Nārāyaṇa, Sumāli with showers of shafts resisted Hari in the encounter. As a mist envelops the Sun, he enveloped him (with his arrows). Thereat, the Rākşasas again summoned up their fortitude. And fired with range, that Rākşasa, inflated with insolence on account of his strength, setting up a tremendous roar, darted at his antagonist in the conflict, thereby seeming to receive the Råkş asas. As an elephant flourishes its trunk, that Rāks asa, lifting up his arm adorned with ornaments, began to roar from rapture, like a mass of clouds, lighted up with lightening. And (Visņu) cut off the head flaming with ear rings of the charioteer of the shouting Sumáli; and thereat the horses of that Raksasa aimlessly strayed hither and thither. And with his bewildered steeds Sumali wanders like a person deprived of patience, whose senses are under hallucination. And on Sumali's car being drawn at random by his steeds, Mali, taking his bow and equipped therewith, darted at Vişnu's car and assailed that mighty-armed one as he was descending on the field of fight. Like birds entering the Krauñca mountain, the arrows discharged from Mali's bow, graced with gold, hit Hari and entered (into his body). Thereat, as a person holding his senses under subjection is not thrown out of his mental balance, Vişnu, assailed in that encounter with thousands of arrows shot by Māli, was not disturbed ever so little. Then that creator of all beings, the reverend Gadādhara,* twanging his bow-string, showered volleys of shafts on Máli. *Lit. the holder of the mace, a name of Visnu. And getting at Mali's body, the arrows furnished with the luminousness of lightening drink his blood, like to serpents drinking nectar. And baffling Māli, the holder of the conch, discus, and mace, brought down Māli's crown, standard, bow and steeds. Then that foremost of night-rangers, on being deprived of his car, sprang forward, mace in hand, even as lion bounds up from the brow of a hillock. He with his mace smote at the forehead of that lord of birds, even as the Destroyer had smitten Isana,* or as Indra smites a mountain with his thunder-bolt. *There took place an encounter betwcen Radra and Yama in the Sveta forest, for the protection of Märkandeya and a certain king. In this battle, Yama had smitten Rudra. This is narrated in the Puranas. On being severely struck by Mali with his mace, Garuda, writhing in torments, moved the god away from the field of battle. On the god having been removed from the field by Mäli as well as Garuda, there arose a mighty din of Raksasa roaring (in chorus). Hearing the cheers of the Raksasa, Indra's younger brother, the reverend Hari, sitting on that lord of birds, albeit moved off from the scene of conflict, waxing enraged, from a desire of slaying (Mali) hurled his disc at him. Thereat the disc, possessed of the splendour of the solar disc, and resembling the wheel itself of Kāla, flooding all the heavens with radiance, brought down Māli's head to the ground. That head of lord of Rākşasas, terrific to behold, on being cut off (by Visnu), vomiting blood, fell down before (the Rākşasas), as formerly Rahu's head had fallen. Then the deities experiencing excess of joy set up leonine cheers with might and main, crying,' Excellent, O god.' Seeing Mali slain, Sumali and Mālyavån, burning in grief, fled precipitately towards Lankä along with their forces. Garuda, being cheered, turned round, and growing enraged, as before drove the Rākşasas with the wind of his wings. And (some) with their lotus-faces cut by the discus, (some) with their chests crushed with the mace, (some) with their necks torn off by the plough, (some) with their heads riven by the club, and some hewn by the sword, and others pierced by arrows, the Rākṣasas began to drop fast from the sky into the waters of the ocean. And as the thunder-bolt with lightening (riveth) a mighty mass of clouds, Narayana by means of the thunder-bolts of his arrows discharged from his bow, rived the night-rangers with their hair dishevelled and streaming (in the wind). The forces having their umbrellas rent, their arms falling off, their goodly garments scattered, their entrails coming out and their eyes rolling, became incapable of distinguishing their own party from that of the foe. Even like (the roars and the vehemence) displayed by elephants on being attacked by lions, the roars, and the vehemence of the nightrangers and their elephants, sore assailed by the Primaeval Lion,* were equal. *Vişnu as a man-lion had formerly taken the conceit out of Hiranyakasipu the Asura king-and slain him, to rid his devotee Prahlada of his mortal foc in the from of a father. And driven by Hari's networks of arrows, and discharging (all the while) their own showers of shafts, those night-rangers resembling the clouds of doom, are driven like the veritable clouds of the universal dissolution drifted by the wind. Their heads cut by discus, their parts of bodies crushed with the mace, and hewn in twain with swords, thus they foremost of Rākşasas fell like to hills (toppling headlong). The Earth was seen to be (covered) with night-rangers resembling dark clouds, adorned with jewelled necklaces and ear rings, falling down, as if covered with dark mountains dropping down.