Accompanied by his six counsellor Mohodara and Prahasta, Marica, Suka and Sarana, and the heroic Dhümrākṣa eager for encounter the graceful Rāvana, elated with his strength sallied out, as if consuming all creatures with his wrath. Leaving behind cities and steams and hills and woods and groves, he in a moment came to the mountain Kailāśa. And hearing that wicked-minded lord of Räks asas, breathing high spirits, had arrived at the mount in company with his counsellors, the Yakşas could not stay before that Rākşasa, and knowing this one is the king's brother,' went to where the lord of riches was. Going to him they in full related all about the doings of his brother. And on being permitted by the bestower of treasures, they went out for battle. And then, like to the agitation of the ocean, there took place a mighty ferment of the forces of the Naiſta king, as if making the mountain tremble. And then there took place an encounter between the Yakşas and the Räksasa were smitten fiercely. And finding his forces in that plight, Daśagrīva set up full many a cheerful shout and in wrath began to speak. Each of the terrific and mightiest councillors of the Rākşasa-chief, coped with a thousand Yaksas. And then struck with maces and clubs and swords and darts and tomaras, the Ten-necked one dived into (that deep) of a host. And rendered inert and sore assailed, Daśānana was deprived of his movements with volleys of weapons resembling torrents of rain. And albeit drenched with blood streaming dowli in hundreds of torrents, he like a mountain flooded with a downpour, being wounded with the weapons of the Yakşa, does not betray any smart. And that high-souled one, raising up his mace resembling the rod itself of Time, entered into that army, despatching Yakşas to the abode of Yama. And as a flaming fire burn up an extensive sward of grass stocked with dry fire-wood, he began to consume that Yakşa army. And as the wind scatter clouds, the small remnant of Yaksa army was scattered by the redoubtable councillors (of Ravana) Mahodara, Suka, etc. And some were wounded, and (some) broken down, and (some) measured their lengths on the ground in the encounter, and other Yakşas deprived of their arms in the field, being fatigued, sank down, embracing each other, even as banks drop down, on being worn away by water. And no room was left (in the sky) in consequence of its being thronged by hosts of sages; and warriors, wounded and rushing for conflict, and (finally) ascending heaven.* *The idea of the author is: "The welkin was thronged with sages as well as warriors, who swelled the ranks of the sages stationed in the sky, by ascending heaven after having fallen in fight.” And finding the foremost Yakşas endowed with great strength give way, the mighty-armed lord of riches despatched (other) Yaksas. In the meantime, o Rāma, a Yakşa named Sañyodhakanțaka, accompanied by an extensive force and a large number of vehicles, on being despatched, rushed (on the foe). And wounded in the conflict (by Sañyodhakanţaka) with his discus, as if by Vişnu himself, Márica toppled down to the ground from the mountain, like to a planet whose merit has waned. And in a moment regaining his consciousness and resting (for a while), that night-ranger fought with the Yaksa; and thereat, on being defeated, he* fled. *The Yaksa, that is.) Then (Rāvana) entered within the gate-way (of the place), garnished with gold, and decked with lapises and silver, And thereat, o king, the warder named Sūryabhānu prevented the nightranger Daśagrīva as he was entering. And albeit prevented, the nigh-ranger entered in. And when O Rama, that Raksasa was prevented, he did not stay. And then struck by that Yaksa with the gate-way uprooted, he, discharging blood in streams, looked like a hill with minerals running on it. And hit with that gate-way resembling a mountain-summit in splendour, that hero did not sustain any injury, on account of the boon he had received from the Self-sprung. And on being struck by the same gate-way, the Yakșa ceased to be seen, his body having then been consumed to ashes. And witnessing the prowess of the Rākșasa, all began to flee; and then they afflicted with affright, fatigued, and with pale faces entered into rivers and caves, leaving their arms behind.