Hearing the sweet words of the celestial saint Nārada, Rāma was greatly delighted and addressing Lakşmaņa said. O gently one, do you console that foremost of twice-born ones and place the dead body of the boy in a jar full of oil. Let this body be protected by sweet-scented oil so that it might not be soiled by any means. See that it is not disfigured, its joints are not loosened and the hairs do not fall off. The highly illustrious Rāma, the descendant of Ikşvākus, thus commanded Lakşmaņa, gifted with auspicious marks, and thought of his car and desired it to come soon. Understanding his intention the golden car appeared before him in no time and saluting him said: O you of long arms, your chariot has come. Hearing the sweet words of Puşpaka the king Rāma saluted the great ascetics, ascended the car with his burning bow, quiver and dagger and left Bharata and Lakşmaņa in charge of the city. And searching that Śūdra devotee here and there Rāghava proceeded towards the west. And not beholding him there he went to the North bounded by the Himālayas. And even there he did not espy the Sūdra ascetic and even the smallest iniquity was not seen there. There upon returning from that quarter the king journeyed the whole of east. And having sat on the Puspaka car he saw that the eastern quarter was transparent like a looking glass and there was not the best touch of sin. From the east Răghava proceeded towards the south and espied a big tank by the side of the Saivala mountain. On the banks of that pond one ascetic was performing the most austere penances with his legs upwards and head downwards. There upon approaching him, Rama Said O you of good vows, blessed are you; I do ask you, now, O you highly effulgent and grown old in asceticism, in what Varņa you are born. I put this question out of curiosity. I am the son of king Dasaratha and my name is Răma. For what are you going through such hard austerities? Is it heaven or anything else that you pray for? O ascetic, I wish to hear, of the purpose for which you are performing such hard penances. a Brāhmaṇa, or irrepressible Kșatriya or the third caste Vaisyas or a Śūdra? Do you speak the truth and you shall be crowned with auspiciousness Art you an Hearing the words of Rāma, the ascetic, whose face was downwards, gave out his degraded birth and communicated to him for what he was performing ascetic observances.