Having bade adieu to bears, monkeys and Rākşasas the long-armed Rāma began to live happily in the company of his brothers. Thereupon afternoon, Lord Rāghava along with his brothers heard from the air the following sweet accents. O gentle Rāma, do you with a delighted countenance behold me. O lord, know me as Puşpaka coming from the abode of Kuberu. O foremost of men, at your command I did go there to carry him. But he said to me. “Having slain the irrepressible Rāvaņa in battle the highsouled Rama, the foremost of men, has conquered you. I have greatly been delighted on the destruction of the vicious-souled Rāvana, with his relatives, sons and friends. O gentle one, the great Rāma has conquered you in Lanka. I permit you, therefore to convey him. You are the fit conveyance for traversing all regions. But my earnest desire is that you should take Rāma, the descendant of Raghu. Do, you therefore go there at pleasure without any sorrow. Hearing this command of the high-souled Kubera I have come to you. Do you fearlessly accept me.. I am above the conquest of all the worlds. At the command of Kubera I shall valiantly transverse all regions carrying out your behests. Hearing the words of Pușpaka, the highly powerful Rāma said to the returning car stationed in the welkin: "O foremost of cars, Puspaka, if such be the case, do you come here; while the lord of wealth has commanded thus, I will not be blameable for had character." Having said this and worshipped it with dried paddy, fragrant flowers and incense, Rāma, having long arms, addressed Puspaka. "Do you go and come here whenever I shall remember you. While proceeding by the welkin, O gentle one, be not sorry for our separation. And be not röbstructed in your course while traversing all the quarters. Having been adored by Rāma and saying ‘so be it' Pușpaka L.oceeded towards its wished for direction. And the holy Puşpaka car having thus vanquished, Bharata with folded palms, said to Rama, the delight of Raghu. O hero, during your divine administration, we have seen many inhuman creatures and objects speak like men. During all these months since your installation subjects have not suffered from any disease. Even the most aged animals have not met with death. The female, without any risk, have been giving birth to children and all people are plump and delighted. The delight of the citizens has been greatly increased, Oking. Indra has been pouring nectar-like showers in due time. The wind is always delightful and wholesome. O king of men, the inhabitants of the city and provinces are all saying "we may have for ever such a king. Hearing those sweet accents given vent to by Bharata, Rāma, the foremost of kings was greatly delighted