There upon the night being over, having bathed and performed the Homa; both Lava and Kusa, in consonance with Rsi's command, began the song. That song was composed by the first preceptor (Vālmīki) never heard of before, consisting of sounds originating from six places, containing all metres, many proofs and set in accompaniment with the music of a stringed instrument. Hearing such a song from the boys Rāma was stricken with curiosity. There upon taking leave from business for some time and inviting the great ascetic Vālmīki, kings, learned men, persons well-versed in Nyāya, Purāņas and science of words, all old men, twice-born ones those conversant with the signs of music, Brāhmaṇas desirous of hearing the Rāmāyaṇa, persons deep read in palmistry, Gandharvas, citizens, all those who have mastered the use of words, letters and Samāsas, those who have studied well metres, those well informed in the science of music, those wellversed in astronomy, those who are well up in the knowledge of rites and ceremonies, those expert in the despatch of business, logicians whose fame has spread far and wide, those wellversed in reasoning and arguments, poets, historians, Vedic Brahmanas, painters, and songsters Rāma requested Lava and Kusa lovingly to sing the song before the assembly. The audience being seated there and engaged in conversation with one another those two Muni boys began with the song enhancing the delight of all. Wondrous and charming was their song and the audience were not by any means satiated with the hearing thereof. Greatly delighted the highly effulgent ascetics and kings again and again looked towards them as if drinking them up with their eyes. And they all attentively said to one anotherBoth of them take after Rāma, like to a bubble resembling the one it rises from. There would not have been perceived the least difference between them and Rama had they not been clothed in dark and used clotted hair. The citizens and villagers speaking thus with one another Kuśa and Lava chanted twenty sections beginning from the first, pointed out by Narada. Having heard up to twentieth section, Răma, fond of his brother, said to Lakşmaņa in the afternoon, O Kakutstha, do you soon confer upon these two high-souled ones eighteen thousand gold coins and all other-things they wish for. There upon when Lakşmaņa addressed himself in no time to give them gold coins separately Kuśa and Lava, not accepting them and surprisingly said. We are dwellers of a forest, living upon roots and fruits-what shall we do with them (coins)? Therefore living in the forest what shall we do with the gold? Hearing those words of them, Råma and the audience were greatly worked up with curiosity and surprise. There upon being anxious to learn of the origin of the poem, the highly effulgent Rāma asked the two Muni boys, saying. What is the proof of the story of this poem? How great is his fame who has composed it? What leading ascetic is the author of this great poem? Ráma having thus asked them those two Muni boys said: The illustrious Vālmīki is the author of this poem. He has described in this poem your endless story. He has of late come to your sacrifice. The great ascetic Vālmīki has composed this poem consisting of a hundred stories and twenty four thousand slokas. O king, that high-minded ascetic is our preceptor. He has described your actions in six books beginning with the first consisting of five hundred sections. All good actions performed by you since your birth have been recorded in this. O mighty car-warrior, o king, if you do wish to hear the whole of it, do you, at your leisure, hear it delightedly in the company of your younger brother. Saying 'so it shall be' Rama bade them adieu and they too, delighted, repaired to where Vālmīki, the foremost of Munis was. There upon having heard that charming song in the company of ascetics and kings the highminded Rāma repaired to the place of business. He heard the Rāmāyaṇa sung by Kusa and Lava, gifted with musical characteristics, consisting of sections, vowels, and consonant and enchanted in accompaniment with the music of a stringed instrument.