Having thus despatched his army and waited at Ayodhya for a month Śatrughna, the slayer of enemies, proceeded alone. Having spent two nights on his way he arrived at the holy and picturesque hermitage of the great ascetic Vālmīki. And having bowed to that high-souled Muni Vālmīki, he with folded palms, said thus. "O illustrious Sir, I wish to wait here this day; I have come here for some business of our master Rāma. To-morrow morning I shall proceed to the dreadful West.” Hearing the words of the high-souled Śatrughna, Vālmīki, the foremost of ascetics, replied saying: “O you of great renown, do you wait here without any hesitation. O gentle one, this hermitage belongs to the descendants of the Raghu face. Do you fearlessly take your seat and water to wash your feet.” Thereupon taking water to wash his feet and feeding upon fruits and roots Satrughna attained to great delight. After eating the fruits and roots he asked the great ascetic Vālmīki saying: “O great ascetic, to whom belong the articles of sacrifice in the east near this hermitage?” Whereto Vālmīki replied “Satrughna, hear I shall tell you, whose sacrificial ground was this in the days of yore. There was a king by the name of Saudāsa, one of your ancestors. His son Vīryasaha was a highly powerful and pious king. The heroic Saudāsa was fond of hunting from his boyhood. Once on a time while a hunting, he espied two Rākṣasas in the forest. He had heard about them many times before: they were in the shape of tigers and of a dreadful figure and were not satisfied with devouring many thousand deer. King Saudāsa saw those two Rākşasas and found the forest divested of all creatures. And enraged in consequence thereof he slew one of them. Having slain him and here at ease, Saudasa, the foremost of men, began to eye that Rākşasas. His mate, greatly aggrieved, said to him. “O vicious one, you have, without any fault, siain my companion, I shall therefore mete out becoming punishment to you." Having said this the Rākşasa vanished therefrom. Thereupon in time the prince Mitrasaha became king. Saudása engaged in celebrating a mighty horse-sacrifice in the vicinity of this hermitage. Vasiștha officiated as a priest at that sacrifice. It continued for many Ayuta years. For immense riches the sacrifice appeared like one performed by the celestials. Thereupon when the sacrifice was about to be finished the aforesaid Rākşasa, remembering his former enmity, assumed the shape of Vasiştha and said to the king Saudāsa. O king, today the sacrifice shall end; do therefore, without any delay, feed me with meat. Hearing the words of the Rākşasa in the guise of a Brāhmaṇa, the king ordered his expert cooks, saying. "Do you soon prepare such dishes of meat as may satisfy my preceptor Vasiştha." Having been ordered by the king the cooks reverentially went away and the Rākşasas assuming their shape brought before the king dishes. The king and queen Madayantſ offered those dishes to the ascetic Vasistha, who, after being treated to them, perceived that there was human flesh, terribly enraged and said. "O king, let this be your food which you have offered me; this shall not prove otherwise." Being enraged on hearing it the king Saudāsa took water in his palms and was about to imprecate Vasiștha, when his queen, preventing him said. “O king, the illustrious great ascetic Vasiştha is our preceptor and priest and so you should not imprecate him." Hearing those words of his queen, the king Saudāsa, threw off that powerful water on his own feet which at once became dark. From that time the illustrious king Saudása became also known by the name of Kalmāşapāda. Thereupon the king with his spouse again and again bowed to Vasistha's feet and informed him of what the Rākşasa had done under the guise of a Brāhmana. Hearing the words of the king and being apprised that this wife vile act had been done by the Rākşasa, Vasiștha said, “O king, even what I have said angrily shall not prove futile. However I confer upon you this boon that after twelve years you shall be freed from this curse, and by my favour you shall cherish no recollection of your condition extending ever those twelve years." Having thus suffered the consequences of the curse, Saudasa, the slayer of enemies, again obtained his kingdom an governed his subjects. O descendant of Raghu, the sacrificial ground of which you have asked me, belongs to the king Saudasa. Having thus heard the dreadful; story of the king Saudāsa and saluted the ascetic Vālmīki, Śatrughna entered a thatched cottage.