Having related this story to Rāma the great saint Agastya again said in this context. O Kākutstha, having subdued his passions, the king Danda, reigned undisturbed in this wise for many long years. Thereupon during spring, in the month of Caitra the king arrived at the picturesque hermitage of the preceptor Sukra. At that time, Sukra's daughter, matchless in beauty and grace, was walking in the forest. The king saw that jewel of a girl, and being stricken with lust and growing restless he approached her and said. O you having a beautiful waist, O fair lady, whose daughter are you? O you having a moonlike countenance, I have been assailed by the arrows of Cupid and hence I do accost you thus. Hearing the words of the vicious-souled Danda, maddened with lust, Sukra's daughter humbly said. "O king of kings I am the daughter of the humbly Sukra of unwearied actions and my name is Araja. I am living in this hermitage, O king, do not touch me forcibly for I am a maid and hence under the guardianship forcibly for my father. Besides my father is my preceptor, and you are also his disciple. Being enraged he shall imprecate you with a curse. O foremost of men, if you do cherish any desire for me, do you honestly and piously pray for it to my sire. Or else you shall suffer dreadful consequences in the long run. When worked up with ire, my father can reduce even the three worlds to ashes. O you of a blameless person, if you do pray, my father may make me over to your hands. Arajas having said this, the king Danda, maddened with lust, placing folded palms on his head, said. Be you propitiated with me, O you having a graceful person; do not tarry even for a moment. My heart bursts out for you, O you having a moon-like countenance. For acquiring you I can even take upon myself my own destruction or dreadful iniquity. Do you seek me, O fair ladyI am beside myself for you. Having said this the king forcibly ravished her. Having perpetrated such a mighty iniquity he speedily returned to his own city Madhumanta. Arajă cried aloud in forest at no distance from the hermitage and waited for here sire who had been away on visiting the celestials. a blameless person, if you do pray, my father may make me over to your hands. Arajas having said this, the king Danda, maddened with lust, placing folded palms on his head, said. Be you propitiated with me, O you having a graceful person; do not tarry even for a moment. My heart bursts out for you, O you having a moon-like countenance. For acquiring you I can even take upon myself my own destruction or dreadful iniquity. Do you seek me, O fair ladyI am beside myself for you. Having said this the king forcibly ravished her. Having perpetrated such a mighty iniquity he speedily returned to his own city Madhumanta. Arajă cried aloud in forest at no distance from the hermitage and waited for here sire who had been away on visiting the celestials.