Seeing Brahmā the Vāyu troubled with the death of his son, stood in front of the sustainer of the world. Thrice the Vāyu prostrated before the Brahma with swinging ear-rings, illustrious diadem, garland and ornament of the gold, The knower of the Vedas lifted up the Vāyu with his outstretched and adorned hands and embraced the child. With the touch of lotusborn Brahma, the child (Hanumān) came back to life just like the crop irrigated with water. Seeing the child alive, the Vayu. started blowing happily through all the lokas in the form of vital air. Having released from the confinement of Vāyu, all the creatures became happy like lotus flowers when rid of cold winds. Then Brahmå keeping the well being of Väyu in his mind spoke to the Gods. Brahmā is endowed with three attributive epithets, viz. Triyugma; (three paired) Tridhāma (three formed). Tridaśarcita (worshipped by three and ten Gods). O powerful Indra, Agni, Varuna, Mahesvara and Kubera although you know it well, I will relate it for your well being. This child will carry out your intentions, so offer him boons to please the God Vāyu. Thereupon the thousand eyed, charming Indra setting aside the garland of lotus flowers spoke thus. Since his chin got wounded by the thunderbolt released by me, so this tiger among Mongoloids will be known as Hanuniãn. I will offer him a unique boon. He will not be killed hereafter with the help of my Vajra (or a weapon made of thunderbolt). The god Mārtanda, the dispeller of darkness, on that occasion told that I will bestow upon him the hundredth part of my brilliance, When he will be capable of learning Śástras, I will transmit in him the knowledge of all the Sastras, so that he may become a good orater. Now shall be able to vie with him in the knowledge of Śăstras. Varuņa bestowed upon him the boon that he well not die for hundred ayuta years even from the my noose (Pasa) or waters either. Yama granted invulnerability to his Danda and diseases. The Kuber told he will ever remain happy and satisfied even at the time adversary. This mace of mine will not cause his death. So was said by Kubera endowed with one brown eye. Sankara also bestowed upon him a great boon that this cannot be killed even by my weapons. Viśvakarmā having gazed this child glorious like the rising son, offered him a boon. That he will not be killed by all of my divine weapons and will live a long life. And Brahmă bestowed his blessings upon him saying that he will live long and will be invulnerable to all the weapons invented by Brahma. Afterwards seeing him equipped with the blessings of Gods. Caturmukha Brahmā, the teacher of the whole world told Väyu happily. Your son Hanuman, O Marut, will terrorise the foes and safeguard the friends. He will be in conquerable. He will be able to assume the form at his will, he will be able to go wherever he would like to do so. Nobody will be able to hinder his speed. He will be a famous person. In the war he will kill do such bewildering deeds as will destroy Råvana and please Rāma. Having thus said all the Gods followed by Pitāmaha Brahmă went to the directions they came from with the permission of Vāyu. The Vāyu also brought his son at his house. He went out having told Añjanā about it all. Having obtained boons Hanumān became highly and powerful and accelerated in himself. He became full like ocean, O' Rāma. Having become powerful, the best of Mongoloids, started committing offences against Maharsis in their hermitages. He broke the sacrificial ladles and vessels and also the heaps of banks belonging to the ascetics. That powerful Hanuman did all this type of jobs. He was made invulnerable to all kinds of weapons by Siva. Having known this all the Rşis tolerated him, the son of Kesari and Añjana. Even though prohibited by his father, Hanuman crossed the limits which enraged the Rșis of the lines of Bhțgu and Angirā and bestowed curse upon him. O best of the Raghus. That you will be unconscious of the prowess endowed with which you torment us. You will be conscious of your power only after being reminded of it. Thereupon, having devoid of prowess and glory, he used to wander in the hermitages silently and decently. There was a king of all Mongoloids named as Rkşarajā; the father of Vāli and Sugrīva. He was as glorious as the Sun. The Śiva having ruled the country of Mongoloids for a long time, offered to Rkşarajā with the passage of time. After the death of Rkṣarāja, the ministers and the counsellors installed Väli at the place of his father and Sugrīva at the place of Vāli (the crown prince). From the childhood onward he developed an unbrokeable friendship with Sugrīva like air with the fire. O Rāma! Hanuman could not be conscious of his power due to the curse at the time of altercations between Sugrīva and Vāli. In fact, O Rama! wondering Sugriva also did not know about the might of Hanumān. Due to the curse of Rşis, Hanumān devoid of might remained forestalled in the sight like a loin restrained by an elephant. Who is there in the world superior to Hanumān in respect of prowess, enthusiasm, intelligence, glory, well behavedness, sweetness, diplomacy or otherwise profundity, shrewdness, virility and patience. Having curiosity to learn grammar, the best of Mongols of immeasurable power went towards the hill of rising Sun facing Sunward with the view to ask queries and to master the great work. The chief of Mongols mastered the great gloss alongwith aphorism, comment and monographs on the subject. There is none like him in the knowledge of Śästra and prosody. He actually rivals the teacher of gods, i.e. Bșhaspati in all the branches of learning and austerities. Who can stand before Hanuman who resembled like ocean likely to engulf the worlds and like fire likely to burn the worlds at the time of decreation of universo. He and other chiefs of Mongols like Sugriva, Mainda, Dvivida, including Nīla, Tāra, Tāreya (son of Tara i.e. Angada), Nala as also Rambha were created by God for the sake of you O' Rāma! Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya, Sudanstra, Mainda, Prabha, Jyotimukha, Nala etc. and Rksas alongwith Mongols were created for you. All what was asked by you has been said. The facts of Hanumān performed in childhood has also been related by me. Having heard the sage of sages Agastya Rāma, Lakşmaņa as also Mongoloids along with Negroids were taken abode. Agastya told Rāma, all this has been heard by you. We have also seen you and conversed with you. Now we shall make a more. Hearing these words of highly effulgent Agastya, Rāghava told thus to Maharşi with folded hands and bowed head. Today Devatās, Pitaras, Grandfathers have gratified as also me alongwith my family to meet you. . Whatever I would like to submit before you, may kindly be carried out. Having entrusted the citizens with their duties I have come and will perform the operations under the guidance of your goodself. Let you mighty be the party of my operations so that I may feel obliged. Having approached you who have shed his sins due to austerity, I shall be highly thankful to my ancestors and feel happy. You should always come here. Hearing this the Rșis like Agastya, who performed great penances said so be it and began to make a more. Having said so all the Rșis departed to their respective places. Rāma too pondered over that astonishingly. Thereupon the Sun being set, he dismissed all the kings and Mongoloids. The best among men performed duly the twilight ceremony (Sandhyā). He entered the gynaeceum when the night nad set in.