I Have thus given to you an account of the curse imprecated on Nțga. Listen, if do you wish to hear of any other theme. Råma having said this Lakşmaņa replied: “I am not satiated with the account of those wonderful stories, oking." Hearing the reply of Laksmana, Rama, the descendant of Ikşvāku, began again with themes instinct with morality. There lived a highly pious and powerful king by the name of Nimi. He was twelfth of Ikş vāku's sons. That powerful king made a picturesque city like that of the celestials near the hermitage of Gautama. The name of that beautiful city was Vaijayanta and the highly illustrious royal saint used to live there. Having thus reared a highly picturesque city he thought of worshipping the deity by celebrating a sacrifice for the satisfaction of his sire. Having thus resolved and invited his sire Ikşvāku the son of Manu, he first welcomed the celestial saint. Nimi, the descendant of Ikşvāku, then welcomed the saints Atri, Angiras and Bhrgu having asceticism for their wealth. Thereupon Vasiştha said to Nimi, the foremost of royal_saints-"I have already been engaged by Indra. Do you therefore wait as long as his sacrifice is not finished there." After the departure of Vasiştha the great Gautama engaged in the satisfaction of Vasist ha's duties. And the high-souled Vasistha too engaged in Indra's sacrifice. On the other hand having united all the Brāhmaṇas the great king began to celebrate the sacrifice extending over five thousand years near his city by the side of the Himālaya. There upon having finished the sacrifice of Indra there come to the King, the blameless and the illustrious Rși Vasiştha. Finding Gautama engaged in his room he was exceedingly enraged. Thereupon he waited there for some time to see the King. On that day the royal saint Nimi was deeply asleep. And not beholding the King the high-souled Vasiştha was greatly angry and said. Since you have, O king, engaged another neglecting me, your body shall remain senseless. Thereupon hearing the curse of Vasiştha, the king got up. There beside himself with ire he said. I was unconscious in sleep-— still soiled with anger you have hurled the fiery curse against me like the second rod of Yama. Therefore, O ascetic, your person shall remain senseless for a long time. That king and the ascetic having thus imprecated one another under the influence of anger, they immediately were deprived of their bodies.