In this wise, the monkeys, bears and Rākşasas spent their days in Ayodhyä. Thereupon the highly effulgent Rāma, the descendant of Raghu said to Sugrīva. "O gentle one, proceeding to the city of Kiş kindhă, hard to be got at by the celestials and Asuras, do you reign there undisturbed with your councillors. O you having long arms, always look towards Angada, with loving eyes. Do you, O Sugrīva, protect lovingly the highly powerful Hanumán, Nala, your father-in-law Sușeņa, the mighty Tara, intepressible Kumati, the powerful Nila, the heroic Satabali, Mainda, Dvivida, Gaya, Gavaksa, Gavaya, Sarabha, the irrepressible and powerful king of bears Jambavan, Gandhamadana, valiant valiant Rşabha, Supätala, Kesari, Sarabha and Sumbha and mighty Śankhacūda, these and other heroic monkeys who dedicated their lives to my service. Do you never act to there displeasure. Having said this and embraced Sugrīva again and again Rāma addressed Vibhișana with sweet accents. I know, you are cognisant of piety; the citizens, your councillors and your brother Kubera also love you; do you therefore go and govern Lankā piously, O king; never cherish any vile intention; the honest kings always enjoy the earth. And my only request to you, O king, is that you may with love remember me and Sugriva. Do you now proceed, divested of sorrow. Hearing the words of Rama, the bears, monkeys and Rākşasas repeatedly exclaimed glory to Rāma and said. 'O Rāma, having long arms, your understanding resemble that of the Self-Sprung, your prowess is equally wonderful and your beauty is also par excellence.” The monkeys and Rakşasas having said this, Hanuman bowing, said to Rama "May my loving reverence be always in you, O king; may my devotion to you remain unshaken, O hero; and may my mind be not attached to any other thing. May my life remain in my body as long as the stories of Rama shall be in currency on earth. Let not this prove otherwise. O foremost of men, O descendant of Raghu, may the Apsarās make me always hear of your themes. O hero, as the winds scatter the cloud so I shall remove my anxiety by listening to your nectar-like themes. After Hanumān had said this, Rāma rose up from his throne and having embraced Hanumān affectionately said. O foremost of monkeys, what you have said, shall undoubtedly be carried out into action. As long as my stories shall be current on earth your fame shall exist and life shall in your body. And as long as the world shall exist my themes shall be related. I cannot, even at the sacrifice of my life, release myself from the debts of one good service out of the many, you have done for me, O monkey; and I shall for ever remain indebted to you for your last benefaction. Of let them wear out in me, for men, at the time of danger, become worthy of having their benefits returned. Having said this, Rāma took off from his neck a chain 'set with sapphires brilliant as the rays of the moon and placed it round the neck of Hanuman. Like to the mountain Sumeru beautified by the rising of the moon on its summit, Hanumān, the foremost of monkeys, appeared graceful with the chain placed on his breast. And hearing the words of Rāghava, the highly powerful monkeys, one by one, saluted Rāma, touching his feet and went away. Both Sugrīva and the virtuous-souled Vibhīşaņa embraced Rāma and three of them were beside themselves with tears. And other monkeys and Rākşasas were all moved with tears and sorrow to take leave of Rāma, Having received favours thus from the highsouled Rāghava, the monkeys went away to their own houses like-to bodied creatures leaving of their bodies. Thereupon the Rākşasas, bears, monkeys, having bowed to Rāma, the glory of the Raghu family and with their eyes full of tears consequent upon his separation, went away to the countries from which they had hailed.