Hearing the words of the high-souled Śatrughna Lavaņa was greatly enraged and again and again asked him to wait. Clashing his hands and grinding his teeth he invited that foremost of Raghus to fight. And Satrughna, the slayer of celestial's enemies, said to the dreadful Lavaņa, giving vent to those words. Śatrughna was not born when you did defeat other kings; do you therefore proceed to Death's abode being assailed by shafts. O you of a vicious soul, as did the celestials behold Rāvana slain so shall the Rșis and learned Brāhmaṇas behold you, destroyed by me. O Rākşasa, forsooth shall good crown cities and villages when you shall fall down brunt by my arrow. As the rays of the sun enter into lotus so shall arrows, hard as lightning, discharged by my hands, shall enter into your heart. Being beside himself with ire on hearing those words of Śatrughna, Lavaņa threw a huge tree against his breast. And ſatrughna too sundered it into a hundred pieces. Beholding his own action baffled the Rākşasa again took up many trees and hurled them at Śatrughna, who, with three or four hundred bent arrow, cut them all, one by one, into pieces. Thereupon when the powerful Satrughna assailed him with arrows the Rākşasa was not the least pained. Rather laughing aloud the valiant Räksasa uprooted a tree and struck him with that on the head. With that stroke he was wounded and slain. And that hero falling there arose a terrible uproar among the Rșis, celestials, Gandharvas and Apsarās. There upon considering Śatrughna slain the night-ranger did not enter his house albeit he got the opportunity; and moreover beholding him fallen and destroyed he did not take up his dart. He then began to carry his collected food. Regaining his sense within a moment, Śatrughna, with a weapon in his hand, stood at the city gate and the Rșis began to praise him. There upon, he having taken up an excellent arrow of unfailing aim the ten quarters were filled with its native brilliance. Its face was like lightning and its velocity the same and it looked like Meru and Mandāra; its joints were all bent. None could defeat it in battle. It was pasted with red sandal resembling blood and its feathers were beautiful. Beholding that dart like to the fire of dissolution, and dreadful to lords of Dānavas, mountains and Asuras, the creatures were greatly terrified. What more, being disturbed, the celestials, Asuras, Gandharvas, saints and Apsarās and all other creatures of the world approached the Great Patriarch, the conferrer of boons and said. The fear of the celestials and the destruction of the creatures has arrived. Hearing those words the Patriarch Brahmă replied Although it is a source of great fear still it is not dreadful to the celestials. There upon with sweet accents he said:-Hear, O you celestials, ſatrughna has taken up this arrow for the destruction of Pavana. By the energy thereof we have all been overwhelmed. This effulgent, ever existing arrow was made by the Primeval, Deity, Vis nu-the lord of creatures. My children, the burning arrow, of which you are afraid, was made by the high-minded Vişņu for slaying the demons Madhu and Kaitabha. Vişņu alone is cognisant of its energy. This Śatrughna is the first portion of Vişnu's person; do you all go hence and behold the destruction of the foremost Raksasa, Lavana, by the highsouled, heroic Satrughna, the younger brother of Rama. Hearing the words of the Patriarch Brahmă, the celestials arrived at the battle-field of Šatrughna and Lavana and saw that the arrow, held by Satrughna's hands, was burning like the fire of dissolution. Beholding the welkin covered by the celestials, Satrughna, the descendant of Raghu, emitting leonine roars, again and again looked towards Lavaņa. And being again excited by the high-souled Śatrughna and enraged Lavaņa arrived for encounter. There upon expanding his bow up to ears, Satrughna, the the most accomplished archer, discharged his arrow against the spacious breast of Lavaņa. And piercing his heart that arrow entered speedily into Rasātala and having entered Rasātala that arrow, honoured by the celestials, again came to the descendant of Raghu. And being pierced by that shaft the nightranger Lavaņa fell down on earth like a mountain clapped by a thunder-bolt. The Rākşasa being slain that celestial, huge arrow came into the possession of Rudra before the gods. Having removed the fear of the three worlds with one shaft, that heroic Raghu, Satrughnayounger brother of Lakşmaņa, holding excellent bow and arrow, appeared like the Sun of thousand rays removing darkness. There upon chanting the glories of Satrughna, the celestials, Rşis, Pannagas, Apsarās, said “O son of Dasaratha, it is really fortunate, that you, renouncing fear, have acquired victory, and that the Rākṣasa Lavaņa has been vanquished like a serpent."