The night being over, Lakṣmaṇa, with a poor heart and dried countenance, addressed Sumantra, saying. O charioteer, do you soon yoke quick coursing steeds to an excellent chariot, and for Sītā place an excellent seat on the car. At the command of the King, I shall take Sītā to the hermitage of the ascetics ever engaged in pious actions. Do you soon bring the chariot here. Obeying the mandate, and bringing a beautiful and holy car drawn by first-rate steeds and having excellent seats, he said to Saumitri, the enhancer of friends' honour “O lord, here is the chariot ready-do you now satisfy your desire. Hearing the words of Sumantra, Laksmana, the foremost of men, approached Sītā in the inner apartment and said. O queen, you did request the king to show he has now commanded me to take you there. Do you therefore follow me, at the command of the king. I shall, at his behest, take you to the forest where dwell many an ascetic. Hearing the words of the high-souled Lakşmaņa, Janaki attained to excessive delight and became anxious to go. Taking various jewels and costly clothes she said to Lakşmaņa, on the eve of her departure “I shall confer these ornaments, these costly clothes and riches on the female ascetics." Saying 'we shall do the same' he made Sītā ascend the car and remembering Rāma's command proceeded, being carried by quickcoursing steeds. Thereupon Sītā said to Lakşmaņa, the enhancer of prosperity:-:0 descendant of Raghu, I behold many inauspicious omens. My right eye and body are trembling. My mind is growing depressed. It is stricken with anxiety and I have accordingly grown restless. I behold the earth as void of all happiness. O you fond of brothers— has your brother met with any calamity? Are all my mothers-in-law and subjects well? Saying this Sītā, with folded hands, began to pray to gods. Hearing this Lakşmaņa bowed to her touching the ground with his crown, and though greatly sorry, said as if delighted "All well." Thereupon having arrived at the hermitage situate on the banks of Gomati Lakşmaņa spent the night there. Thereupon at dawn he rose up and asked the charioteer to get the chariot ready, saying, “Like to the powerful Mahādeva we shall hold the waters of the Bhāgirathi on our head.” Thereupon Sumantra yoked the horses, gifted with the fleet course of the mind, to the chariot and with folded hands said to Sītā “Do you ascend the car." According to the request of the intelligent charioteer, Sītā, with Lakşmaņa, ascended that excellent conveyance. In no time the daughter of Janaka, having expansive eyes, arrived at the banks of the Gangā removing all sins. Reaching the currents of Bhāgirathi before noon Laksmana, on beholding her, cried aloud. Thereupon beholding Lakşmaņa thus distressed, Sītā, conversant with piety, waxing are anxious said. “Why you weeping, Lakşmaņa? I have reached the banks of Jāhnavī, for which I have so long desired. So this is the time for rejoicing and do not give me pain at this time. O foremost of men, you do spend your days and nights in the company of Rama. You have left him for two days only, are you sorry for this? O Lakşmaņa! Rāma is also dearer than my life, but I am not so sorry— do you not be therefore overwhelmed with grief. Do you take me to the other side of the Gangā so that I may behold the ascetics and other confer upon them clothes and ornaments. Having paid them due salutation to the ascetics, and spending a night we shall return to the capital. I am also anxious to see Rāma, having eyes like lotus petals, breast like that of a lion and foremost of men. Hearing the words of Sītā and wiping his beautiful eyes, Laksmana, the slayer of enemies, sent for boatmen. As soon as they were called, with folded hands they said. “The boat is ready." Having them brought about to cross the holy Ganga Laksmana, with a quiescent mind, took her to the other side.