Having bade adieu to Satrughna, Rama, the descendant of Raghu, was greatly delighted by governing his subjects piously in the company of Bharata and Laksmana. Some days having passed in this wise-a villager, an old Brālimaņa, arrived at the palace gate with a dead boy. That Brāhmaṇa, stricken with affection, again and again bewailed in various piteous accents exclaiming What heinous crime had I committed in my pristine birth that I have been constrained to witness the death of my son. My son, you have not as yet completed fourteen years. To my misery you have met with untimely death. Forsooth, for your grief, O my son, myself and your mother shall soon be snatched away by death. I do not remember to have ever uttered a falsehood, or injured an animal or perpetrated any other crime. Therefore for some other sinful action, this boy, without performing the son's duties towards his parents, has gone to the abode of death. Save under the regime of Rama, I have never seen or heard of the dreadful death of such a boy who has not attained the age. Forsooth, Rāma has perpetrated a mighty iniquity for which boys, during his administration, have been meeting with untimely death. In other governments boys have no fear of such an untimely death. Therefore, O king confer life upon this dead child. Or else with my spouse I shall renounce my life at this gate like one having no lord. O Rāma, soiled by the sin consequent upon the destruction of a Brāhmaṇa, do you live long happily with brother. O you of great prowess, up to this time we have lived happily in your kingdom. And now, O Räma, under your subjection we are being troubled with the sorrow or our son's death. We have been brought under the influence of Kāla; so in your kingdom there is not the least happiness for us. Having attained Rāma as its lord, the kingdom, of the high-souled Ikşvākus, has attained to the condition of one having no master, where during Rāma's regime the death of a boy has been brought about. For being impiously governed by a king, for his sin, the subjects meet with calamities. And a king following evil tracks and not governing the subjects righteously people meet with untimely death. Therefore, when a king does mot suppress the crimes committed by people either in cities, or provinces the fear, of untimely death, comes in. Evident it is therefore that undoubtedly the sin of the king has appeared in cities and provinces. And for that reason this boy has met with death. Being overwhelmed with sorrow that old Brāhmaṇa again and again remonstrated with the king in these 'piteous words and afterwards covered the dead body (of his son.)