Having thus addressed Satrughna, Rāma again and again praised him and said. O foremost of men, let four thousand horses, two thousand chariots, one hundred excellent elephants, shops with various articles and songsters follow you. O foremost of men, O Śatrughna, do you proceed with Niyuta gold and silver coins and necessary riches and conveyances. Do you so act, O hero, that soldiers might be well-fed and delighted and be not annoyed with you. Do you please them with sweet words, for the servants, when they face enemies, have not with them friends or wives—and so they are pleased, O Rāghava when they receive sufficient food and presents. O Śatrughna, having sent before a huge and well contended army do you proceed afterwards to Madhuvana. You should proceed so fearlessly that Madhu's son Lavaņa might not know that you were going for encounter. O foremost of men, he shall not be slain by any other expedient than that I have acquainted yourself with. If he can perceive before, whoever that enemy might be, Lavana shall forsooth destroy him. When rains shall set in after the expiration of the present summer you should slay him for that is the proper time for destroying that viciousminded one. Let the soldiers only now proceed with ascetics before them; the summer has not as yet fully expired and this is the time, when they shall, without any trouble, be able to cross the Gangā. Afterwards having encamped your army on the other side of the Gangā you should alone proceed speedily with your bow. Hearing those words of Rāma and summoning all his highly powerful and leading warriors Satrughna said "Do you all proceed and halt at those places which are well known to you. Do not oppress any body." Having thus ordered the powerful warriors the highly powerful Śatrughna bowed to Kausalyā, Sumitrā and Kaikeyi. Thereupon having circumambulated with folded hands Rāma, Lakşmaņa and Bharata he reverentially saluted the feet of the priests. And then with Rāma's permission and having gone round him the highly powerful Śatrughna issued out. Having thus despatched before a huge army consisting of selected elephants and horses, Śatrughna, the enhancer of the glory of Raghu's race, took farewell from Rāma. And all showed him proper respect.