Thereupon having bowed to Agastya the foremost of ascetics, the highly effulgent Rāma again surprisingly said. "O Brāhmaṇa, O foremost of twice-born ones, when that cruel Rāvana journeyed over the earth, was it void of people? Was there no king, or prince on earth to administer punishment to him? Were all the kings then shorn of their strength and prowess? And many kings I (hear) were vanquished an driven out by him with various excellent weapons. Hearing the words of Rāghava, the ascetic Agastya, having six sorts of wealth, laughing said, like to Brahmā, speaking to Rudra O Rāma, O lord of earth, traversing the earth, Rāvana arrived at the city of Māhismatī, resembling the city of the celestials, where lived perpetually the deity of fire. There reigned a king named Arjuna, effulgent like fire which was kept perpetually in a well covered with Sara. One day the highly powerful Arjuna, the king of Haihayas, repaired to the river Narmadā, with his wives to sport. At the very same day, Ravana, the lord of Rākṣasas, arrived there and asked his councillors saying. Where is the king Arjuna? Do you speedily tell me; I am Rāvana, I have come to fight with your king. Do you, at first, communicate to him the news of my arrival. Being thus addressed by Ravana, the learned ministers informed the lord of Raksasas, of the absence of the king. Hearing of the absence of the king from the citizens Viśravasa's son came out of the city and reached the Vindhya mountain resembling the Himalayas. He espied the mountain extending over the welkin like to clouds and rising up as if riving the earth and obstructing the sky. The mountain had a thousand summits and the lions were residing in the caves and hundreds of fountain were falling from it; the mountain was as if laughing aloud and the celestials, Gandharvas, Apsarās and Kinsaras were sporting there with their females, and it appeared in consequence thereof) like the region of celestials; and rivers, with waters transparent like crystal, were flowing. And it therefore appeared like a thousand serpents having trembling tongues. And casting his looks upon Vindhya mountain, resembling the Himalayas and having huge caves, Ravana, the king of Raksasas, reached the river Narmadā, of holy waters and going rapidly to the western ocean. Her waters were being agitated by buffaloes, deer, tigers, lions, bears and elephants distressed by heat. Having covered her, Cakravakas, Karandavas, swans, water-cocks and Sārasas, maddened, were emitting notes. The charming Narmadā appeared like a beautiful damsel-having blossoming trees for her waist, the row of swans for Mekhala, filaments of flowers for paste, watery foams for white silken cloth, the pleasure of descending into water for the pleasure of touch and fullblown lotuses for white eyes. Having descended from his car and bathed in the waters of Narmadā, the foremost of streams, resembling a fair one, Ravana, the lord of Raksasas, with his councillors, sat on her coast resided by many an ascetic. Delighted at her beauty and having spoken highly of Narmadā like to Gangă he addressed his ministers Suka and Sāraṇa with gestures, saying:-“Behold, having rendered the earth pale, with his many rays, the sun, emitting parching heat, is in the sky. But seeing me here seated, his rays have become cool like those of the moon. At my fear, even the wind is blowing carefully, being cold and fragrant by the touch of the waters of the Narmadā and removing our toil. This charming Narmadā, abounding in crocodiles, fishes and birds, though a natural stream, is standing still like a terrified damsel. Being wounded in conflicts with many a king your persons have been pasted with blood. Therefore like to Särvabhauma and other infuriated elephants going down into the water of the Ganges, do you descend into the water of Narmadā conferring auspiciousness and health. Bathing in this stream you shall be cleansed from sins. I shall, also on the coast of this river, like the rays of the autumnal moon, reverentially worship with flowers Mahādeva, holding Pināka in his hands. Hearing the words of Ravana, Prahasta, Suka, Sarana, Mahodara, Dhumraksa and other councillors descended into the waters of Narmada. She was agitated by those elephant like leading Rākşasas like to the Gargā by Vămana, Anjana, Padma and other elephants. Thereupon having got up from the waters the highly powerful Rākşasas culled flowers for Ravana's offerings. In a moment the Rākṣasas collected heaps of flowers on the picturesque banks of Narmadā, resembling the white clouds. Flowers being thus collected, Rāvana, the king of Rākşasas descended into the Narmadā for bathing like a huge elephant into the Gangā. And having bathed he got up, reciting excellent incantations. Thereupon having left off his wet cloth he put on a white one. And to find out place for worshipping, he, with folded hands, proceeded towards the banks. And the Răkşasas too, like to so many moving mountains, followed him. Wherever Rāvana went the golden Siva Linga was brought. Thereupon Rāvaņa placed that upon a heap of sands and began to worship it with various nectar-smelling flowers and sandal. Having finished the worship of Siva, the foremost of deities, having ww moon on his crown, the conferrer of boons and the remover of miseries, the night-ranger danced with uplifted hands and sang before it.