When Vedavati had entered into the fire, Rāvana, ascending Puşpaka, began to range the earth. And coming to Uśirabīja, Rāvaņa saw a king (named) Marutta, sacrificing along with the deities. And a righteous Brahmarşi named Samvarta, the very brother of Bphaspati, officiated at the sacrifice accompanied by the deities. Seeing that Rākşasa invincible by reason of the boon he had received, the deities, apprehensive of being worsted by him, assumed the forms of beasts. Indra became a peacock and the king of righteousness, a crow and the bestower of riches a lizard, and Varuna a swan; and, O slayer of foes, others also became other beasts. And then Rāvana entered into that sacrifice like an unclean dog. Then coming up to the king, Răvaņa lord of Raksāsas said: 'Give me battle, or say, I am defeated. Whereat king Marutta asked, him 'Who are you'? And Ravana laughing in contempt said. "O king, I am delighted, that lacking curiosity, you do not dishonour Rävaņa, younger brother to the bestower of riches. What other man is there in these three regions that know not the might of me, who, conquering my brother, has got possession of this car. Thereat Marutta spoke to Ravana, saying, "Blessed for sooth are you, by whom your elder brother has been vanquished in fight. And a person so praise-worthy there is not in the three worlds. An act, that is divorced from righteousness and that is reprehended by people, can never be praiseworthy. Having committed a foul act, plumest you upon your having vanquished your brother? And practising what piety had you a-fortune received the boon? I had never before heard the like of what you say. But O perverse one, stay now. Living you shall not back. To-day with my sharpened shafts shall I despatch you to the abode of Yama. Then taking up his bow and arrows, that king of men went out for encounter; but Samavartta stood in the way. And that great sage said to Marutta words informed with affection 'If you hear my speech, you should not fight. If this Maheśvara-sacrifice should remain incomplete, it will burn up your dynasty. Where is the fight of one initiated in a sacrifice? And where is the passion of one initiated in a sacrifice? And victory is ever uncertain; and the Rākşasa is difficult to vanquish. And thereupon, the lord of Earth Marutta desisted in consonance with the instructions of his spiritual preceptor; and composed addressed himself to completing the sacrifice, giving up his bow with the arrow set. And thereat considering him as defeated, Suka proclaimed this all round, and from delight cried aloud, 'Victory to Rāvana! Then devouring the Maharsis that were present at the place of sacrifice, Rāvana, satiated with their blood, again went to the earth. On Ravana having departed, the deities, inhabiting the etherial regions Indra etc. assuming their proper forms, addressed those creatures. And from joy Indra spoke to the purpleplumed peacock, 'Pleased am I with you righteous one. No fear shall spring to you from serpents; and your plumage shall be furnished with an hundred eyes. And when I shall shower, you shall be filled with glee as a token of my satisfaction with you.' Thus did Indra chief of celestials, confer a boon on the peacock. Formerly, O King, the peacock's wings had one unvaried blue. Having received the boon, the peacock departed. O Rāma, then the king of righteousness said to the crow, seated in front of the sacrificial apartment 'O bird, I am well pleased with you. Listen to my words as I utter them. As I have been pleased with you, you shall without doubt, enjoy immunity from the various ailments to which the birds are subject. O bird, from my curse fear of death shall not approach you; and you shall exist so long as people do not slay you. Those men residing in my dominion, being smitten with hunger, shall be refreshed along with your relations, when you have eaten and been refreshed. Then Varuņa addressed that lord of birds the swan ranging the waters of the Gangā, 'Listen to my words fraught with joy, your hue shall be charming, mild, and like to the lunar disc; and it shall be beautiful, resembling the sheen of spotless foam. And approaching my person you shall ever be beautiful to behold; and you shall, as a sign of my gratification, attain unparalleled complacence. Formerly, O Rama, swans had not a hue of one unvaried whiteness. Their wings ended in, blue, and their breasts wore the spotless hue of tender grass. Then Vaiśravana addressed the chameleon as it was stationed at the mountain. Your hue shall be gold-gleaming. Pleased am I with you. Your undeteriorating head shall be ever gold-hued. And this golden hue of your shall proceed from my gratification? Having thus conferred boons on them at that festal place, the celestials, along with the king, (on the sacrifice) having ended, went to their abode.