Having agitated the earth with thousands of elephants and horses the kings proceeded to various quarters. And being prepared to help Rāma many Akşauhiņī soldiers with many steeds waited at Ayodhya at the command of Bhärata. Those kings, proud and powerful, spoke to one another-We did not face Ravana~ the enemy of Răma; Bharata did uselessly invite us after the destruction of Rāvana. Had they brought us earlier, we would, forsooth, have slain him, We would have, on the other side of the Ocean, well protected by the prowess of Rāma and Lakşmaņa, and freed from all disturbances, fought at pleasure. Being thus delighted, all those assembled princes proceeded to their respective kingdoms, dwelling on these and various other topics. And having arrived at their celebrated cities, unscathed, abounding in delighted people, wealth, crops and jewels they sent various presents of gems to Rāma for his satisfaction. Besides this they made over to him innumerable horses, conveyances infuriated elephants, sandal, excellent ornaments, jewels, pearls, corals, beautiful female servants and various cars. And taking all those jewels, the highly powerful Bharata, Lakşmaņa and ſatrughna returned to their own city. Having arrived at the picturesque city Ayodhyà those foremost of men, made presents of various jewels to Räma. Having delightedly accepted those gifts Rāma in return made presents of them to the successful king Sugrīva, Vibhîşana and other Rākşasas and monkeys by whose help he had achieved victory. And those highly powerful monkeys and night-rangers wore on their heads and arms those jewels conferred on them by Rāma. Having placed on his laps the long-armed Angada and Hanuman, the mighty car-warriorthe lotus-eyed Rāma said to Sugrīva “Angada is your good son and Hanuman is your wise councillor. O Sugriva, these are always engaged in my well-being and in giving me good counsels. For you, therefore, O king of monkeys, I should honour them in various ways.” Having said this, the illustrious Răma took off from his arms valuable ornaments and adorned Angada and Hanuman therewith. Thereupon having welcomed and casting loving looks upon the highly powerful and leading monkeys such as Nila, Kesarin, Kumuda, Gandhamadana, Susena, Panasa, Mainda, Dvivida, Jambavan, Abaksa, Dhumra, Balimukha, Prajaghna, Saunada, Darimukha, Dadhimukha, Indrajānu and others, he addressed them all in sweet accents, saying: "You are all my friends like to my limbs and brothers. O you inhabitants of forests, you have saved me from the ocean of danger. Blessed is the king Sugrīva and blessed are the friends like yourselves. Saying this Rāma, the foremost of men, conferred upon them dully many precious clothes and ornaments and embraced them all. The monkeys lived there all happily feasting on fragrant honey, well-cooked meat and various fruits and roots. In this way they spent more than a month—but it appeared to them as a moment on account of their devotion to Rāma. He, too also spent his time happily with monkeys assuming shapes at will, the highly powerful Rakşasas and the mighty bears. In this way, the delighted monkeys and Rāks asas spent the second winter month. Enjoying delight they thus spent their days happily in the city of Ayodhyā working to the welfare of Rama.