That sacrifice, the like of which was never seen before, having been undertaken the illustrious ascetic Valmiki, with his disciples, came there. And beholding this wonderful sacrifice resembling that of the celestials, his followers, the Rşis, made charming cottages in a solitary corner and at no distance. Inside the highly charming cottage of Vālmīki they placed his picturesque car full of various fruits and roots. There upon Vālmīki said to his disciples, Lava and Kuća Do you carefully and delightedly sing the whole of Rāmāyaṇa in the highly holy hermitages, of the Rşis, in the homes where perpetual fire is kept up by the Brāhmaṇas, in streets and palaces, at the gate of Rāma's house, in the sacrificial arena and before all Rtvik. And eating all those sweet fruits that are on the summit of the mountain near our hermitage, do you engage in chanting the sweet Rāmāyaṇa. If your begin singing after taking all those sweet fruits you shall not experience exhaustion in singing nor you shall forget measure. If Rāma, the lord of earth, invites you to sing the Rāmāyaṇa, you may fearlessly sing it there in due notes and measures before the assembled ascetics. During the day do you sing, in your sweet voice, twenty sections out of many I have laid in the Rāmāyaṇa consisting of many ślokas. Do not cherish the least longing for riches. Of what avail is wealth to ascetics living perpetually on fruits and roots? If Rāma asks you about your father you may say, We are both disciples of the high souled Valmiki. O Kuśa and Lava, in your proper mood do you sing the sweet song with charming Murchanā accompanied by the sweet notes of Vīņā. Before you begin with the song, without disregarding the king, do you bow to him reverentially. Morally the king is the father of all. Do you therefore both, delightedly and with a collected mind, early in the morning, sing the theme in a sweet voice and accompanied by the music of the stringed instrument. Having in this wise given counsels, the highly generous and great ascetic Vālmīki, son of Pracetā, became silent. Being thus commanded by the ascetic, Janakis' son, Lava and Kusa, the slayers of enemies, issued out there from saying. So we shall do." Like to the two Asvins following the moral precepts of Sukra, the two princes, placing those wonderful counsels of Vālmiki in their minds, spent the night with a heart stricken with curiosity.