Hearing the words of Räma of unwearied actions, the ascetic, with his face downwards, said. O highly illustrious Rāma, I am born in the race of sūdras; and with a view to reach the region of the celestials with my body I am going through these austere penances. O Kākutstha, I shall never utter a falsehood since I am willing to conquer the region of gods. I am a Sūdra and my name is Sambūka. The Sūdra ascetic having said this, Rama took out of scabbard a beautiful sharp sword and chopped off his head therewith. And that Śūdra being slain, Indra, Agni and other celestials praised him again and again and showered flowers. And being greatly delighted, the celestials said to Rama, having truth for his prowess:-0 you of a great mind, you have nicely performed this god-like work. O slayer of foes, do you now crave a boon. O descendant of Raghu, being slain by you this Sūdra has been able to attain to the abode of the celestials. Hearing the words of the deities, Rāma, having truth for his prowess, said with folded hands to Purandara, of a thousand eyes: If the celestials are pleased, I beg for this boon that the son of the twice-born one may be restored to life. Do you confer upon me this boon; this is my wished for object. It is for my iniquitous conduct that this only son of the Brāhmaṇa has met with untimely death. Do you restore him to life. I have promised before that leading twice-born one that I would restore his son to life, do you therefore, make not me a liar. Hearing the words of Rāma the leading celestials delightedly said, Do you return, O Käkutstha, The Brāhmaṇa boy shall immediately gain back his life and be united with his father, mother and friends. Rāghava, with the death of the Sudra the boy has regained his life. Be you at ease; may good betide you. O foremost of men, we too, return with delighted hearts. O Rāghava, we desire to behold the hermitage of the great saint Agastya. Having been initiated, that highly effulgent Brāhmaṇa saint has lived within waters for twelve years; his vow has now terminated. O Kākutstha, we shall now go to welcome that Muni. Do you also follow us to see that saint. Saying 'so be it' to the words of the celestials that descendant of Raghu ascended his golden car Puspaka. And having ascended spacious cars the celestials proceeded to the hermitage of Agastya born of a Kumbha. Rāma too also followed i them. There upon beholding the celestials present the virtuous-souled Agastya, the jewel of asceticism, welcomed them particularly. Having accepted his worship and adored in return that great Muni, the immortals, delighted, proceeded to their abodes with their followers. The celestials having departed Rāma descended from Puspaka and saluted that foremost of Rşis Agastya. Rāma saluted that high-souled and highly effulgent Rșis Agastya. And having received due hospitality he sat there. Thereupon the highly effulgent and leading ascetic Kumbhayoni said: O Rāghava, I have been greatly delighted with your coming, By my good fortune I have seen the today. O Rāma, I love you because you are gifted with many qualities. O king, you are my worshipful guest. I was thinking of you. The celestials informed me that you went coming having slain the Sūdra ascetic. You have observed piety and have given back life to dead child of the Brahmana. Do you spend this night with me, O Rāghava. You are the graceful Nārāyaṇa. In you the whole universe is established. You are the lord of all creatures and the eternal Purusha. You shall go to your city next morning in your Pușpaka car. This ornament, O gentle one, has been made by the architect of the celestials; its make is very beautiful and it is dazzling by its own lustre. By accepting this, O Kākutstha, do you satisfy my desire. It is said, that one attains to best fruits if he makes present to his deity, of best articles he gets from another. You are the only worthy person to use this ornament. You are alone capable of conferring best fruits. You do protect Indra and other celestials. Therefore I do duly present you with this ornament. O king, do you accept it. There upon meditating upon the duties of the Kşatriyas, the heroic Rāma, the foremost of the intelligent, said:-O illustrious Sir, the Brāhmaṇas only can accept presents— how can the Ksatriyas do? To take gifts is the function of the Brāhmaṇas—for Kşatriyas it is a source of censure. Besides, to receive presents from a Brahmana, is highly culpable. Do you therefore tell me, how I may accept this ornament. Hearing the words of Rāma, the great saint Agastya replied saying:-0 Rāma, O son of Dasaratha, at the beginning of the golden age, people had no king; but Väsava was the ruler of the celestials. Therefore to obtain a king, men approached Brahmā, the god of gods and said, O deity you have placed Indra as ruler over the celestials; therefore, O lord of creatures, do you also confer upon us a king who shall be foremost among men; by worshipping him we shall be freed from all sins. We shall not live without the king-even this is our firm resolution. Thereupon the Patriarch Brahmā sent for Indra and other deities and said:Do you all give a portion of your respective energies. Thereupon the deities gave each a portion of their own energies. Thereupon Brahma made a Kșupa or sneezed and there from originated a king under the name of Kșupa. And in his person Brahmă placed in equal proportions the energies of the deities. There after he made Kșupa the foremost king of men. By virtue of the portion of Indra's energy the king Kșupa brought the earth under his control; by that of Varuna's energy he fostered his own body; by Kubera's portion he conferred riches upon his subjects; and by that of Yama he governed them. Therefore, O Rama, by virtue of Indra's portion, do you accept this omament and confer upon me the salvation. Hearing the words of the Muni, Rāma took from him that brilliant celestial ornament burning like the rays of the Sun. And having taken that excellent ornament, Dāsarathi asked the great saint Kumbhayoni, saying. When have you obtained this celestial ornamens of a wondrous make? Who have given you this? O Brāhmaṇa, I do accost you thus out of curiosity. You are the mine of many wonders. Whereto Agastya replied, saying Hearken, O Rāma, how I did obtain this ornament in the Tretă age.