The night being over and having invited the leading ascetics, Rāma told his sons to sing the poem fearlessly. There upon the high-souled Rșis having taken their seats Kusa and Lava began the last portion of the Uttarakāņdam. Sītā having entered Pātāla by the strength of her vow, and the sacrifice having terminated, Rāma grew poorly in spirit. In Janaki's absence the whuic orld appeared to him as blank. Now being overwhelmed with grief he lost all mental peace. Having conferred various gifts upon the kings, Rākşasas, monkeys and leading Brāhmaṇas, Räma sent them away and meditating upon Sītā's absence entered Ayodhyā. And from the time of Sita's entering into Pātāla he did not take any other spouse. And having made a golden image of Sītā he engage in the performance of various sacrifices. In this wise for thousand years he celebrated many Horse-sacrifices, many Vajapeyas with profuse gold, Agnistomas, Atiratras, numberless Gomedhas and various other sacrifices. Rāma being engaged in governing the kingdom and performing many pious rites long time passed away. And being under his subjection, bears monkeys, Raksasa and kings always afforded delight to him. On account of showers in proper time there was enough of food in his kingdom. The quarters were pure and delightful. The citizens and villagers were happy and healthy. None met with premature death. In fact, in his regime all calamities were removed. There upon after many years, the illustrious, Kausalyā, Rāma's mother, surrounded by her sons and grand-sons, breathed her last. Performing many pious observances Kaikayi followed her and obtained peace in the land of immortals. Those noble ladies, being united with the king Dasaratha, in heaven, were greatly delighted and obtained all virtues. Besides, having worshipped the deities and manes on the occasion of his father's Śrădha ceremony the high-souled Rāma distributed many jewels and engaged in the performance of a very difficult sacrifice. In this wise having performed many sacrifices and multiplied pieties he spent many thousand years in happiness.