When the sages had spoken thus, Käkutstha said: "O ascetics, tell me what is the work which I shall have to accomplish in your behalf. Your fear shall be removed." As Käkutstha was speaking thus, Bhārgava remarked! O lord of men, do you hear of the origin of the fear that threatens our country. O king, formerly in the Kita age, there was a magnanimous offspring of Diti, the mighty Asura, Madhu, eldest son of Lotā. He was well disposed towards Brāhmaṇas, kind to those seeking his refuge, and gifted with high intelligence. The exceedingly generous deities delighted in him greatly. And by way of honouring him, Rudra conferred a wonderful boon upon Madhu endowed with prowess and ever intent on religion. And extracting a dart from his own, possessed of terrific energy, endowed with great force; and furnished with exceeding splendour that highsouled one, well pleased, made it over (to Madhu) and spoke to him. You have practised excellent and unrivalled righteousness, which has won my good graces, and (therefore), I highly gratified, bestow on you this choice weapon. So long as you, O mighty Asura, do not assail celestials and Vipras, so long shall this be your, otherwise it shall come to naught. Reducing to cinders the person that shall rashly enter upon conflict with you, this dart shall return to your hand. Having thus obtained the boon from Rudra, the mighty Asura, again bowing to Mahādeva, addressed him, saying. O reverend one, may this excellent dart be the possession of my family O god, you are the lord of the immortals. Thereat the lord of all beings, the mighty deity Śiva, answered Madhu, when he had spoken thus: This will not be. But in order that your prayer may not go for nothing. I graciously say in your behalf that one of your sons shall sway this dart. So long that dart-handed one shall be incapable of being destroyed be any creature. Having obtained this wonderful boon from the god, Madhu, foremost of Asuras, caused a splendid city to be constructed. His beloved wife the exalted and majestic Kumbhīnasſ is the offspring of Viśvāvasu by Anala. Her son, the highly powerful wicked, and fierce Lavana, ever since his boyhood, gave himself up to a sinful course of life. Seeing his son, committed to an impious course Madhu was overcome with grief, but he did not say anything to him. And forsaking this world, he entered the region of Varuņa; and making over the dart to Lavana, communicated to him all about the boon he had obtained. And by virtue of the power of the dart, he oppress the three worlds in especial the ascetics; such is the power of Lavaņa, and such is his dart. Hearing all this O Kākutstha, you are capable (of righting our wrong.) You are our chief resource. O Rāma, many a monarch has been already sued by the sages, O hero, to deliver them from this fear, but we have not yet found a deliverer. Hearing, O child, that Ravana together with all his forces and vehicles has been destroyed (by you), we know that there breathes not another king on earth capable of delivering us. Therefore our prayer is that you may deliver us afflicted with the fear of Lavana. Thus, O Rāma, have we acquainted you with the occasion of fear that has arisen. You are capable of coping with the same. Do you of undeteriorated prowess, do the needful.