Rāma having thus described the wonderful birth of Pururavā, the illustrious Bharata and Lakşmaņa asked him again saying. O foremost of men, tell us what did Ila afterwards do after living in the company of Soma's son for a year. Hearing their sweet words Råma again began with the story of Kardama's son and said. In turn, the heroic Ila, having regained his manhood, the highly illustrious and intelligent Budha, well-informed of birth and well-skilled in the are of speech, sent for the highly liberal Samvarta, Bhrgu's son Cyavana, Aristanemi, the foremost of Munis, Durvasa, capable of affording delight, and other friends gifted with patience and said. You all know well, how this mighty-armed Ila, Kardama's son, attained to this peculiar condition. There upon while those high-souled ones were conversing upon this subject, the highly effulgent Kardama arrived at the hermitage. Pulastya, Kratu, Vaşatkāra and the highly effulgent Omkāra came there following him. Being greatly delighted for their arrival they all gave out their individual opinion for bringing about the well-being of the king of Valhika. For the welfare of his son, the patriarch Kardama said: Hear, O twice-born ones, how the well-being of the king Ila may be secured. For this decease do not find any other good medicine but Umā's lord. And save Aśvamedha there is no other sacrifice more favourite to the high-souled deity. Let us all therefore celebrate that hard sacrifice on behalf of this king. Thereupon the wors of Kardama, Samvarta's disciple, the royal saint Marutta, the conqueror of enemies, collected all articles for the sacrifice. There upon in the vicinity of Budha's hermitage that mighty sacrifice was celebrated. And by that the Great Rudra lord of Umā, attained to delight and said to the twice-born ones, and others at the end of that sacrifice in the presence of the king Ila. O foremost of twice-born ones, I have been greatly delighted with this sacrifice and your devotion. Tell me now, what I can do for this king of Valhika. Hearing the words of Mahādeva, the Brāhmaṇas having propitiated him with great devotion, prayed for Ila's manhood. There upon delighted the highly effulgent Mahādeva, having having conferred upon him manhood, disappeared. In this wise the horse-sacrifice being finished and Mahadeva having disappeared, the farseeing and leading twice-born ones repaired to their respective hermitages. And having placed his eldest son Śaśabindu as the king of the country of Valhika, the king Ila reared another city in the middle country. In time Ila attained to the excellent Brahmä region and his son Pururavå obtained that Pratişthāna kingdom. O foremost of men, such is the power of the horse-sacrifice, that the king Ila, though converted into a female, regained manhood by virtue thereof.