Kakutstha, knowing himself, being thus duly installed, the first night, enhancing the delight of the citizens, was spent. At dawn, the prisoners to wake up the king, arrived at the palace. And those songsters, well trained and having a musical voice like the Kinnaras, began to eulogise the heroic king, to the increase of his joy. Awake, O gentle hero, increasing Kausalya's joy, O foremost of men. Yourself being asleep the whole universe will be laid up with sleep. In prowess you are like Vişnu, in beauty you are like two Asvins, in intellect you are like Brhaspati and in the capacity of governing you are like, the Patriarch Brahmă. Your patience equals that of earth, your effulgence equals that of the sun, your velocity equals the wind and your gravity resembles the deep. You are stable like a stake, gentle like the moon. No king like you had flourished beforeno other shall follow. O foremost of men, you are irrepressible, ever pious and engaged in bringing about welfare to your subjects. Fame and wealth shall never renounce you. O Kākutstha, in you are perpetually stationed grace and wealth. Thus did the panegyrists eulogise him in various sweet accents and Raghava got up. Like to Hari rising up from the bed of serpents Rāma, thus eulogised, rose up from his bed covered with a white coverlet. Taking white vessels full of water, thousands of well-trained survivors stood waiting before the high-souled (Rāma). Washing his mouth, being purified and offering oblation to fire, he entered the holy room of the tutelary deity much honoured by the Iksvākus. And there having worshipped duly the celestials, manes and the Brahmans, he, encircled by men, came to the outer apartment. There arrived the leading priests headed by Vaşistha and ministers all resplendent like to fire. And there sat around Rāma the Kasatriya kings hailing from various provinces as the celestials sit encircling their lord Indra. The illustrious Bharata, Laksmana and Śatrughna began to worship him and he appeared like a sacrifice conducted by Vedic hymns. Many servants came cheerfully with folded palms, and others named by Muditā, sat around him. The twenty heroic monkeys headed by the highly powerful Sugrīva also began to worship him. As the Guhyakas worship Kubera so Vibhiş aņa, accompanied by four Rākşasas, waited upon him. All those who were advanced in the study of Vedas, born in respectable families, and learned, bowed to the king lowering their heads. Like to the celestial-king Indra worshipped by the saints the king Rāma was being perpetually honoured by the effulgent saints, kings, monkeys, and Raksasas. He appeared more beautiful than Indra at that time. And religious themes were recited in that assembly by persons conversant with the knowledge of Purāņas. Hearing the whole history, Rāma, the descendant of Raghu, said to Agastya : “O Reverend Sir, Rkşarajā is the name of the father of Vāli and Sugrīva (but you have not told me the name of their mother). However I am curious to learn who was their mother where was their residence and how they had been named so-do you favour me with the account." Rama having said this Agastya said:"O Rāma, I shall relate to you everything in short of what I had heard from Närada when he came to my hermitage. Once on a time while travelling that highly pious ascetic arrived at my hermitage; I duly worshipped and welcomed him; and when I asked him out of curiosity, he, seated at pleasure, said. Hear, O great ascetic, the foremost of the pious; there is a mountain named Meru, highly picturesque, made of gold and greatly charming. The middle peak is much liked by the celestials, on which is situate the beautiful assemblage hall of Brahmă extending over a hundred leagues. The four-mouthed deity, sprung from lotus, always. reside there. And from his eyes while going through the Yoga practices tears trickled down. No sooner the Patriarch Brahmä, with his hands, wiped them off into the ground than a monkey originated from those tears. O foremost of men, as soon as that monkey was produced, the high-souled Brahma consoled him in sweet accents and said, "Do you proceed to that leading mountain where the celestials perpetually reside. O foremost of monkeys, living upon many a fruit and root in that picturesque mountain you should always live by me. And while you shall live in this wise for some time you shall be crowned with auspiciousness.” Brahmā having thus said this, O Raghava, the foremost of monkeys saluted that god of gods, placing his head at his feet and said to that Primeval deity, the creator of beings and the lord of the universe. "O god, you are placing me under your behests-verily I shall follow them." Having said this to Patriarch that monkey immediately went to a forest abounding in fruits and flowers. There living on fruits and collecting honey and various flowers, he, every day, used to come to Brahmă in the evening. O Rāma, in this wise he used to make an offering of an excellent fruits and flowers at the feet of Brahmā, the god of gods. Journeying in this way over the mountain he spent many long years. Some time having elapsed in this way, O Raghava, Rksaraja, the foremost of monkeys, being distressed with thirst, repaired to the excellent mountain Meru. There is a pond of pure water, resonant with the notes of various birds. Having shaken his manes with a delighted heart, Rkşarāja saw his reflection in his waters. Beholding his own image there that monkey-chief, stricken with anger and anxiety thought-“What arch-enemy of mine is living in the waters? I shall destroy the excellent abode of the vicious-souled one.” Thinking thus within himself, that monkey, out of fickleness, jumped down into the lake. And he again sprang up therefrom. And at the time of rising, O Rama, that leading monkey found himself-metamorphosed into a female form, which was highly charming, graceful and beautiful. Her waist was spacious, eye-brows beautiful and hairs were black and curling; her countenance was beautiful and smiling, breast high and beauty matchless. And there appeared charming on the banks of the lake, lighting up all quarters that female, agitating the mind all, and beautiful in the triple world like to simple Sastilatā, Ramā, without lotus, pure rays of the moon, Pärvatī more beautiful than even Lakşmi. At this time was returning by that way, Indra, the leader of the celestials after having worshipped the feet of Brahmă. And the sun too journeying arrived there. They has simultaneously espied that female form and were possessed by Kandarpa. What more, their whole body, as soon as they saw her, was moved and the firmness of the mind shaken. Thereupon Indra begot on her a son named Vālī for he originated from her hairs and the sun beget on her another son, who was named Sugrīva for he originated from her neck. Thus the two highly powerful monkeys being born, Indra went back to his region having conferred upon Vāli an un-ending garland of gold. And having engaged Hanumăn, the Wind god's son in the service of Sugrīva, the sun too went back to the sky. O king, the sun having risen after that night Rkşarajā again obtained his own real monkey shape. Having thus regained his monkey form he made his two highly powerful sons, leading monkeys, assuming shapes at will and having tawny eyes, drink honey like nectar. Thereupon taking them, he came to the abode of Brahmām, the grand-father of celestials, consoled him in diverse ways. Then he ordered the celestial messenger saying, "At my behest, O emissary, do you proceed to the highly picturesque city of Kişkindha. That golden, big and charming city is worthy of Řkşarajā. There live many thousand monkeys besides others assuming shapes at will. It abounds in various jewels, invincible, is inhabited by four Varnas, holy and sacred. At my command Viśvakarmā has constructed the celestials and picturesque city of Kişkindhā. Do you place there Rksaraja, the foremost of monkeys, with his sons; and having invited the leading monkeys and others and received them courteously do you install him on the throne. On beholding this monkey-chief, gifted with intelligence they shall be all subject to hirm." Brahma, having said this, the celestial emissary, with Ķkşarajā before him, proceeded to the highly picturesque city of Kiskindhā. And having entered there with the velocity of the wind, he, at the command of the Patriarch, crowned the leading monkey Řkşarajā as king. And being sprinkled according to the ceremonies of installation, and adorned with a crown and various other ornaments he, with a delighted heart, engaged in governing the monkeys. All the monkey, residing on earth consisting of seven insular continents and bounded by ocean, came under his subjection. Thus Rkşarajă was both the father and mother of Vali and Sugrīva. may god betide you. The learned who listen to and make others hear this story, conducing to the enhancement of their delight, get all their desires and objects accomplished. I have duty described to you at length all events and have recounted the stories relating to the birth of the Kings of monkeys and Rākşasas. Hearing this excellent Paurānic theme in the company of his brothers, Rāghava was greatly surprised. Thereupon hearing the words of the Rși he said:-“By your favour I have listened to the highly sacred theme. O foremost of Munis, I was greatly worked up with curiosity in this matter. I am not the least surprised to learn, O twice-born one, that those two sons of the celestials would be two highly powerful leading monkeys since their origin is divine.” Rāma having said this Agastya said: “O you having long arms, thus in the days of yore the birth of Vali and Sugriva was brought about. o king, I shall now again relate to you another divine theme. O Rāma I shall now describe to you why did Rāvana steal Sītā. Do you hear it attentively. O Rāma, in the golden age, having bowed to the Patriarch's son, the truthful Rși Sanaskumar highly effulgent, resplendent like to the sun, shining in his native brilliance and seated at his own place, Rāvana, the lord of Raksasas, said:-"Which is now among the celestials can brave and powerful, by whose help the celestials can vanquish their enemies and whom the twice-born ones daily worship and the devotees meditate upon. O you having piety for wealth, O you gifted with six sorts of wealth, do you describe this to me kindly.” Being apprised of Ravana's intention, the saint Sanatkumar, who saw every thing through his devotion, said to him out of love-_ “Hear my son. The learned duly, in their sacrifices, worship that Hari, respected of people and drinking nectar, who is the lord of the universe, whose origin we do not know, who is daily worshipped by the celestials and Asuras, who is highly powerful Närāyaṇa from whose navel has sprung Brahmă, the creator of the world, and who has created the universe consisting of mobile and immobile beings. The Yogis meditate upon him and celebrate sacrifices in his honour according to the Vedas Purānas, Pancharatra and other rituals. He always vanquish in encounter Daityas, Danavas, Raksasas and all other enemies of the celestials and every one of them worships him." Hearing those words of the great ascetic Sanatkumar, Ravana, the lord of Raksasas, bowing, replied:-“Being slain by Hari to what station do the Daityas, Dānavas and Räkşasas attain? And why does, Hari destroy them?” Whereto Sanatkumar replied:-"Whoever are slain by the celestials do eternally reside in their region. And being banished therefrom, they again take their birth on earth. Thus by the misery and happiness acquired in their pristine existence, they go through births and deaths. O king, all the monarchs, slain by Janärddana, holding discuss and the lord of the triple world, attained to his own region; even his anger become like a boon." Hearing those words given vent to by the great ascetic Sanatkumar the night-ranger Råvaņa, being worked up with delight and surprise, began to meditate how he should enter into conflict with Hari. The vicious-souled Răvaņa thinking thus the great ascetic, again gave vent to accents. “o you having long arms, what you have desired in your mind shall be encompassed in the great encounter. Be you happy and wait for some time.” Hearing this the long-armed (Ravana) again said to the ascetic:-"Do you tell me at length what are his marks." Hearing the words of the lord of Raksasas, the ascetic replied:-"Hearken, I shall relate to you every thing, O foremost of Raksasas. That great deity pervade all, is minute, invisible ever-existing, and manifest over the universe consisting of mobile and immobile creations. He is present in the celestials region, in the earth, in the region underneath the earth, on the mountains, in the forests, in all stationary objects, in all rivers and in all cities. He is Om, truth, Sāvitri and earth. He is known as the deity Dharādhara (holder of earth) and Ananta. He is day, night, morning and evening, Yama, the moon, Kāla, the wind, Brahmā, Rudra, Indra and water. He makes the world manifest and shine; he creates them, destroys them and governs them. He sport, is eternal, the lord of men, Vişņu, Purāņa and the only destroyer of the world.. What is the use of speaking more, O Dasanana, He comprehends the three worlds, the mobile and immobile. Wearing a yellow raiment like to the filaments of lotus, Narayana, resembling dark-blue lotus in colour, is resplendent like to clouds in the welkin accompanied by lightening. And covering his person, Laksmi, in the shape of warfare, lies stationed in his body like to lightning in the clouds. The celestials, Asuras or Nagas-none is capable of casting his looks upon him. He alone can see him with whom he is pleased, O my son; neither by the fruits of sacrifices, asceticism, selfcontrol, gifts, sacrifices, nor by anything else can one behold the Illustrious Deity. Those alone can see Him, who have devoted themselves, their life and being, to him and who, by virtue of discriminative knowledge, have got their sins burnt. if you are willing to behold him hear, if you do like, I shall describe everything at length. At the end of the golden age and the beginning of Tretā Yuga the deity Nārāyaṇa shall assume a human form for the benefit of men and celestials. A son by the name of Rāma shall be born to Dasaratha, of the Ikşvaku race who shall govern earth. Rāma shall be highly effulgent, highly powerful and in patience like to earth-and the enemies in the encounter shall not be able to eye him as they cannot the sun. In this wise the lord Nārāyaṇa shall appear in a human form. At the behest of his sire, the pious and the high-minded Rāma shall sojourn in the forest of Dandaka in the company of his brother. His spouse the gracious Lakşmi, shall be celebrated under the appellation of Sītā. She will be born as the daughter of Janaka, the king of Mithilā and will come out of earth. In beauty she shall be matchless on earth and be gifted with auspicious marks and shall be matchless on earth and be gifted with auspicious marks and shall always follow Rāma like a shadow as the rays follow the moon. She will be graced with a good conduct, chaste and patient; and Sitã and Răma shall always together like the rays to the sun. Rāvaņa, I have thus related to you everything about the Närāyaṇa, the great Brahmana, eternal and incomprehensible." O Raghava, hearing those words, the highly powerful lord of Raksasas began to concert plans for entering into conflict with you. Meditating again and again over Sanatkumāra's words and delighted he began to journey for battle." Hearing those words, Rāma with his eyes expanded in surprise, was greatly wondered. And being delighted he again said to Agastya, the foremost of the wise:-"Do you recount the ancient stories." The highly effulgent and illustrious Agastya, spring from a vessel, again addressed the humble Rāma as the great Patriarch sprung from lotus spoke to the Great Deity. He said to Răma, having truth for his prowess:-"Do you hear." Saying this, the highly effulgent Agastya began to narrate the last portion of the story. The high-minded saint, with a delighted heart, described to Rāma all he has heard and narrated." O high-minded Rama, having long arms, it is for this reason that the vicioussouled Rāvana stole away Janaki, the daughter of king Janaka. O you having long arms! O you of many glories! O you invincible! Närada recounted this story to me on the summit of mountain-chief Meru. O Rāghava, the highly effulgent one narrated to me the last portion of this story in the presence of the celestials, Gandharvas, Siddhas, ascetics and other great men. O lord of kings, O conferror of honours, do you listen to that story which remove monstrous iniquity. Hearing this you having long arms, said to the ascetic Nārada “He who shall reverentially listen to this story every day, shall be bless with sons and grandsons and be honoured in the region of the celestials. Thereupon being desirous of achieving victories, Ravana, the lord of Raksasas, proud of his strength, began to journey over the earth in the company of the heroic Rākşasas. Whoever, among the Daityas, Dänavas and Räkşasas was reported to him as being powerful he used to invite for battle. O king of earth, having thus traversed the whole world, the ten-necked demon saw the saint Nărada returning to his own region from Brahmaloka. Like the second sun he was proceeding through the clouds. Rāvana, with a delighted heart, neared him and addressed the celestial saint Nārada with folded palms, saying:-"O you gifted with six sorts of wealth, you have seen many a time all creations from Brahmā down to an insect. Do you tell me, O great one, the inhabitants of which, world are more powerful? I wish to fight with them according to my desire." Whereto, thinking for a moment, the celestial saint Nārada replied: "O king, there is an insular continent near the milky ocean. All the inhabitants that live there are gifted with strength-effulgent like the rays of the moon, huge-bodied, highly powerful and have a voice deep as the muttering of the clouds. They are all greatly beautiful, patient and have huge arms. O king of Rākşasas, I have seen in Swetadvipa such powerful men, as you do want to see on this earth.” Hearing the words of Narada, Ravana said. “O celestial saint, why are the inhabitants of Svetadvipa powerful? And how did those highsouled ones come to live there? O lord, do you relate to me everything at length. You do observe the whole universe like a myrobalam in your palms." Hearing the words of Ravana, the celestial saint said:-"o lord of Raksasas, the inhabitants of Svetadvipa are perpetually devoted to Nārāyaņa with whole-mindedness and earnestly worship Him. They have always their hearts and minds devoted to Him and are all high-souled. Having rendered their lives and souls to Nārāyaṇa, they have been blessed with their abode in Svetadvſpa. Those, who are slain in the encounter with his bow bent by Vişnu— the holder of discuss and the preserver of the world, attain to the celestial region. Neither by sacrifice, devout penance, self-control nor excellent gifts may be obtained the celestial region full of bliss.” Hearing the words of Nārada, the Ten-necked demon was worked up with surprise and meditating for some time said "I shall enter into conflict with him." Thereupon inviting Nárada he proceeded to Śvetadvipa. Thinking for a long time and being curious to witness that wondrous encounter, Nārada speedily went there. He was ever fond of sport and warfare. Filling all the quarters with dreadful leonine roars Rāvana with all the Rākşasas moved towards the Svetadvīpa. After Närada had reached there, the illustrious Daśānana went to that insular continent beyond even the reach of the celestials. Being struck by the radiant heat of that insular continent, the Puspaka car, of the mighty Ravana, could not stand, there like clouds scattered by the wind. Having arrived at that dreadful insular continent the councillors of the lord of Raksasas, fearfully said to Ravana. "O lord, we are all stupified and beside ourselves with fear. We cannot anyhow stand here: how shall we fight?” Saying this the Rakşasas fled away into all directions. And Daśānana too sent away his golden car Puşpaka with them. And Daśānana too sent away his chariot and assuming a dreadful figure he alone entered Śvetadvīpa. At the time of his entering he was seen by the females there. One of them of his entering he was seen by the females there. One of them beholding him by the hand and smiling said "Why have you come hither? Who are you? who is your father? and what for have you come here? Do you definitely say." Hearing those words, oking, Ravana, in anger said:-"I am the son of the ascetic Visrava, I am Ravana by name; I have come hither being desirous of fighting; but I do not behold anyone here.” The vicious-souled Rāvana having said this all the young damsels laughed gently. But one of them, being enraged, took up Rāvana, like a child, as if in sport and hurled him among her companions. And addressing another she said: "Behold, I have caught this black Rāvaņa, having twenty arms and ten faces, like a small insect. Thereupon Rāvana, being worn out with hurling, passed from one hand to another. Being thus hurled the learned and powerful Rāvana, in anger, severely bit the palms of that fair one. Being overwhelmed with pain that damsel let him off. Thereupon, another, taking that Raksasachief, rose up in the welkin. Ravana, again waxing wroth tore her with his nails. And being left off by that damsel, the terrified night-ranger fell down into the waters of the deep. The females, inhabiting that insular continent again and again in this wise hurled Rāvaņa. Beholding his thus distressed the highly effulgent Nārada danced in joy and surprise. O you having long arms, being apprised of this, the vicioussouled Răvaņa stole away Sită with a view to meet death at your hands. You are Narayana, holding discuss, conch and club; you have in your hands the bow, a lotus, thunder-bolt and other weapons; you are worshipped of all deities; you are graced with the mystic mark Sribatsa, adored by all celestials, have a lotus navel, are a great ascetic, and Harishikesha declaring fearlessness to all devotees. You have assumed a human form to bring about the destruction of Ravana. Do you not recognise yourself as Nārāyaṇa? O great one, do not forget yourself; do you recollect your real self. The Patriarch Brahma said that you are subtler than the subtle. You are the three qualities, the three Vedas and the regions-that of the celestials, of the mortals and the region under the earth. Your work is manifest in time, past, present and future; you are the observer of three Vedas and destroyer of the enemies of the celestials. With your three steps, you did in the days of yore, transverse the three worlds. You went born of Aditi, as the youngest brother of Indra for binding Bali. You are the eternal Vişnu. To extend your flavours to humanity you have been born as man. O foremost of the celestials, the work of the deities has been accomplished. The vicious Răvaņa, with his sons and relatives, has been slain. The Rşis, having piety for their wealth and all the deities have been pleased. O foremost of gods all this has been brought about by the flavours; and the whole universe has been pacified. Sita is the very presentation of Lakşmi, sprung from earth. It is for you that she has been born in the race of Janaka. Bringing her into Larkā Rāvana protected her with care like his mother. Rāma, I have thus related to you the entire story. Hearing this from the Rşi Sanatkumăra, the long-lived Närada described this to me. Daśānana, to a letter I followed the instructions of Sanatkumāra. Who ever listens to this story at the time of Sraddha, the rice, offered by him, becoming, inexhaustible, reaches his manes." Hearing this celestial theme, the lotus-eyed Rāma along with his brothers was greatly surprised. And having their eyes expanded with delight the monkeys, with Sugrīva, the Rāks asas with Vibhisana, the kings, with their councillors, and all other assembled pious Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras, they all delightedly espied Rāma. Thereupon the highly effulgent Agastya said to Rama: "O Rāma, we have all seen you and been honoured; now we shall depart.” Saying this, they, being honoured, repaired to their respective habitations.