Having vanquished Marutta, that lord of Rākşasas the Ten-faced Răvaņa, eager for encounter, began to range the capitals of the foremost monarchs (of the earth). And coming to the most powerful crowned heads (in the world) resembling Mahendra and Varuna, the Raksasa king said: 'Give me battle; or declare we have been defeated. This I am resolved upon. Otherwise there is no escape for you?' Thereat those wise kings, possessed of great strength, and ever abiding by righteousness, being frightened (at Ravana's intimidation), took counsel of each other. And knowing the superior strength of the foe, they said, “We have been defeated. O child, Dusyanta, Suratha, Gadhi, and Gaya and king Pururavă all these kings said: 'We have been defeated.' And then Rāvaņa sovereign of the Rākşasas presented himself before Ayodhyā, governed by Anaranya, like Amarāvati ruled by. Sakra. And coming to that foremost of men king like to Purandara himself in prowess, Rāvana said, 'Give me battle; or say I have been defeated. This is my mandate.' The lord of Ayodhyā, on hearing the words of that wicked-minded one, Anaranya, enraged, addressed the Raksasa-chief, saying, 'O king of Raksasas, I will give you combat, stay you. At once prepare for fight, and I also shall go and prepare myself.' When he had heard everything (regarding Răvaņa), the forces of that foremost of kings that had been intended for conquering (Ravana), sallied forth ready for bringing about the destruction of the of the Raksasa, ten-thousand elephants, a niyuta horse, and many thousands of cars and infantry, O best of men; and, that host consisting of infantry and cars, marched for encounter, covering up the earth. Then, O you proficient in fight, there took place a mighty and wonderful encounter between king Anaranya and that lord of Raksasas. That host, of the king encountering the forces of Rāvana, were extinguished like to clarified butter thrown into the (sacrificial) fire. And having fought valorously for a long time, the remnant of the royal forces, suddenly coming in contact with the flaming Räkşasas ranks, were destroyed like to swarms of locusts entering into fire. He saw the mighty army of that powerful monarch destroyed by the (adversary), like to a hundred streams absorbed by an approaching ocean. And then himself drawing his bow resembling the bow itself of Sakra, that foremost of sovereigns, beside himself with wrath, approached Rāvana. Brought down by Anaranya, his (Ravana's) councillors Mārica, Suka, and Sarana with Prahasta, took to their heels like to dear. Then that son of the Ikşvāku race discharged eight hundred arrows at Rāvana's head. And like to showers pouring down on the top of a mountain, his shafts did not inflict any wound (on Ravana). Then the king, smitten on the head with a slap by the enraged king of Rākşasas, dropped down from his car. The king, deprived of his senses, fell down on the earth, with his body trembling all over; as falls in a forest a sāla scathed with heaven's fire. Thereat the Raksasa, laughing, spoke to that Iksvāku, lord of the earth, 'What is this that you have gathered as the fruit of your encounter with me. O king, there is none in this triune sphere that can combat with me. Having hitherto been sunk in lunacy, you have not heard of my strength. As he was speaking thus, the king, whose sounds were fast running out said: 'What can I do in this matter. Verily time is incapable of being controlled. I have been overcome by Time; you are merely an instrument. What can I do now, when I am going to-lose my life? I never turned away from fight; I have been slain fighting. But, O Raksasas, I shall tell you something in consequence of the disgrace that the Ikşvāku race has met with (today). If I have practised charity, if I have offered oblations into fire, if I have carried on pious penances, if i have governed my people well, then be my words verified! There shall spring in the line of the highsouled Ikşvāku, one named Rāma son to Dasaratha who shall deprive your life. As he uttered this imprecation, the celestial kettle-drums sounded like the roaring of clouds; and blossoms showered down from the sky. Then, that best of kings, went to heaven; and when that king had gone to the celestial regions, the Raksasa (also) went away.