On that host being sore pressed at its back by Padmanabha,* Mālyavăn turned back even as the ocean does on meeting with its shore. *Lit. the lotus-naveled-a name of Visnu. And with his eyes reddened, that night-ranger waxing wroth, shaking his head, addressed that prime of male persons Padmanabha, saying. O Nārāyaṇa, you are ignorant of the timehonoured morality of Kşatriyas; and therefore like a base wight you slay us, desisting from fight and exercised with fear. O lord of the celestials, he that commits the crime of slaying one that desists from fight cannot go to the celestial regions as the fruit of meritorious acts. If you are bent upon battle, a holder of the conch, the discus and the mace, taking up my post (here), I shall see (your strength). Do you show (me) the same. Seeing Mālyavān resembling the mountain, Mālyavān, stay, the powerful younger brother of the sovereign of the celestials spoke to him. I have removed the fear of the deities, affrighted at you, by promising that I will make root and branch work with the Räkşasas; and that same promise I am now fulfilling. I should always lay down my life for serving the celestials and you I will slay even if you should go to the nethermost regions. As that god of gods having eyes resembling the red lotuses was speaking thus, the lord of Rākşasas in high wrath pierced his breast with a dart. And hurled by the hand of Mālyavān, the dart resonant with bells, appeared graceful on Hari's breast like lightening embosomed in clouds. Thereat drawing out the same dart, that one dear to the Wielder of the Dart,* having eyes resembling red lotuses, aiming at Mālyāvan, hurled it at him. *A name of Kārtikeya, the celestial generallissimo. Thereat the dart discharged by the hand of Govinda like to the Dart discharged by the hand of Skanda, rushing towards the Rākṣasa like a meteor coursing towards the Anjana mountain, descended on the spacious chest of the lord of the Rākşasas decked with the weight of a chain, even as the thunder clap bursts at the summit of the mountain. On having his mail rent, Mālyāvan was utterly deprived of his senses; but (anon) reposing for a while, he again stood like a moveless hill. Then taking up a javelin made of black iror girt with many a thorn, he furiously smote that deity on the chest. And that night-ranger delighting in battle, dealing a box at Vāsavā's younger brother, moved away a distance measuring a bow's length. And now there arose a mighty tumult in the sky of 'Excellent!' 'Excellent!' and having struck Visnu, the Raksasa also hit Garuda. Thereat Vinata's son, growing engaged, drove the Rākşasas away with the wind of his wings, even as the lusty wind bloweth about sere leaves. Seeing his elder brother driven by the wind produced by the wings of that bird, Sumali along with his forces, made for Lankā. And pushed off by the violence of the wind of (Garuda's) wings, the Rākṣasa Mālyavān also, joined by his own forces, departed for Lankā, covered with shame. Thus, O Rama, O lotus-eyed one, (the Rākşasas) had innumerable warriors beaten down and their foremost leaders slain. And albeit inflated with pride, they, incapable of coping with Vişnu, leaving Lankā, went to the nether regions with their wives dwelling there. O best of the Raghus, these Rākşasa of celebrated prowess, related to the race of Sälakatankața, remained under the leadership of the Rākṣasa Sumāli. All those exalted Rākşasas going under the name of Pulastya that had been headed by Sumāli, Mālyavān and Māli, were stronger than Ravana. No other than the god Nārāyaṇa, holding the conch, the discus and the mace, could slay those Råkşasa-foes to the celestials and thorns in the side of the deties. And you are that eternal god the four armed Narayana, the lord, undeteriorating and unconquerable, sprung to exterminate Rāksasas. The creator of beings that one ever cherishing those seeking his refuge appeares at times to compass the destruction of marauders, bringing the religion of the people to rack and ruin.* *This tallies wonderfully with the corresponding view given in the Bible. Great men appear in the fullness of time to bring about reforms in religion, when, as was the case before the birth of Christ, men have wandered farthest from the true path. Thus, O lord of men, to-day I have truely related to you at length the origin of the Raksasas. Again, O foremost of the Raghus, do you understand the matchless birth and potency of Rāvana and his sons related in detail. And that powerful Rākṣasa, Sumāli, afflicted with the fear of Vişnu, along with his sons and grand-sons for a long time ranged the nether regions, and the lord of riches resided in Lankā.