Yayāti the son of Nahușa, was greatly distressed on hearing of the ire of the preceptor Sukra. Thereupon meeting with the infirmities of age by the imprecation of the saint he said to his son Yadu. O Yadu you are cognisant of religion; do you therefore take this decrepitude for me; I shall satisfy myself with various enjoyments. O foremost of men, I have not yet been satisfied with worldly enjoyments, I shall therefore again take upon myself this decrepitude after having enjoyed all objects of sense. Hearing those words of Yayāti, the foremost of men, Yadu replied: "Let your most favourite son Puru take upon himself this decrepitude. O king, you have deprived me from all things, what more, you do not allow me to come near you. Let that Puru take this, with whom you do eat and live. Hearing the words of Yadu, Yayāti said to Puru: “O you having large arms, do you take the decrepitude for me." Hearing the words of Yayāti, Puru, with folded hands, said: “I am always ready to satisfy your commands; and I have been favoured and honoured by this command of your." Hearing those words of Puru Yayāti was highly pleased and attained to an excess of delight and then transferred his won decrepitude to him. Thereupon regaining his youth the king reigned in earth for many thousand years celebrating thousands of sacrifices. Thereupon after a long time Yayāti said to Puru O my son, do you bring the decrepitude I have kept as deposit with you, let it now assail me. I transferred it to you as a deposit. For this I shall take it back; be not sorry for this. I have been greatly pleased that you have satisfied my behests. I shall, now pleased, install you on the royal throne. Having thus addressed his son Puru, the king Yayāti angrily said to Yadu, the son of Devayāni. You, vicious Rākhasa, are born of me in the shape of a Kşatriya, or else why should you disobey my orders? For this you shall never be a king. I am your father and preceptor and still you have disregarded me. You shall be the father of dreadful Räksasas. O vicious minded; your descendants shall be degraded from the lunar race and your children shall be equally vicious-minded like you. Having thus imprecated Yadu, the royal saint Yayāti honoured Puru, Puru, the enhancer of prosperity of the kingdom, with installation and then retired to woods. Thereupon after a long time he breathed his last and went to the abode of the celestials. The highly illustrious Puru reigned piously in the foremost of cities Pratisthan. Yadu begot thousands and thousands of Räkşasas and being degraded from the royal family reigned in a city named Krauñcavana, hard to be got at. In this wise, according to the custom of the Kșatriya the king Yayāti took upon himself the imprecation of the preceptor śukra, but he did not forgive him. I have thus related to you everything. O gentle one, we shall follow the examples of these illustrious men. And in that case we shall not be degraded like the king Nļga. While Rāma, having moon-like countenance, was speaking thus, the stars became fewer in the welkin, and east, stricken with the early rays of the sun, appeared like a damsel, clothed in a raiment coloured with the dye of flowers. Thereupon having performed the morning rites the lotus-eyed Rama, in the early morning, sat on his royal throne and in the company of Brāhmaṇas and citizens engaged in looking into state affairs. The assembly consisted of the priest Vasiştha, the saint Kashyapa, ministers well versed in politics, other religious preceptors, moralists, members and kings. The assembly of Rāma, of unwearied, actions appeared like that of Mahendra, Yama and Varuna. Rāma said to Lakşmaņa, gifted with auspicious marks “O Saumitri having long arms, do you proceed to the city-gate to receive those who have come here for business." According to Rāma's command Laksmana, gifted with auspicious mark, arrived at the gate and called those who had come there for business. But none said that he had been brought there by any business. For there was neither decease nor poverty in the kingdorm. During Rama's regime, the earth was filled with corns and Asadhis. Children, youngmen and middle-aged people did not meet with death. The earth was governed piously so there was no obstacle. Thus during the administration of Rāma none was seen who wanted justice. Laksmana, with folded hands, said to Rāma, “None has come for business." Thereat, Rāma, with a delighted heart, replied"Do you go, O Saumitri, and see if nay one has come for business. Royal policy if properly adopted, impiety can stand nowhere. It is for the fear of the king that people protect one another. And although laws, instituted by the are protecting the subjects like so many arrows, still, O you having long arms, do you be engaged in governing the subjects.” Being thus addressed Lakşmaņa issued out of the house and saw that a dog was waiting at the gate. Casting its looks around it was again and again barking. Beholding it in that plight the valiant Lakşmaņa said. "O generous sir, what business has brought you hither-do you relate it confidentially.” Hearing the words of Lakşmaņa the dog replied. "I wish to relate it to Räma of unwearied actions, who is the refuge of all creatures and who declares fearlessness to all. Hearing the words of the dog Laksmana entered the beautiful palace to relate it to Rāma. And having communicated it to Rāma he issued out and said to the dog:-"If you have anything true to speak you may come and communicate it to the king." Hearing the words Lakşmaņa the dog said, "We cannot enter into the house of divinities, kings and Brāhmaṇas nor can we go there where is fire, Indra, the sun or the wind, for we are the vilest born; so I cannot enter there. For king is the personification of virtue and specially the king Råma is truthful, well versed in the science of fighting and ever engaged in the welfare of all beings. He is perfectly cognisant of where the six qualities are to be applied master of morality, know all, see all and the best of beautiful. He is the moon, death, Yama, Kubera, the giver of riches, fire, Indra, the sun and Varuna. O Saumitri, do you go and communicate to the king protecting his subjects that without his permission I do not wish to go there." Thereupon the highly effulgent and noble-minded Lakşmaņa entered the palace and said to Rama: "O you having long arms, O you the enhancer of Kausalya's joy-I have communicated your orders—I shall relate shortly everything regarding that; do you hear. That dog, as a beggar, is waiting at the gate for your commands.” Whereto Rāma replied: “Bring him speedily here who is waiting at the gate for business." Hearing the words of Rāma the intelligent Laks maņa immediately sent for the dog and informed Rāma, who, on beholding it, said "Do you communicate your desire to me; be not afraid.” Thereupon beholding the king Räma, the dog, having his head cut off, said. “The king is the preceptor of animals and their lord. The king is awake when the subjects are asleep and he protects them. By administering the laws properly the king protects piety. Without his shelter the subjects meet with destruction. The king is the lord and father of the whole universe. He is time, he is Yuga and he is the creation, mobile and immobile. He is called Dharma because he hold all. It is Dharma (virtue) that uphold all mankind. It is by Dharma that the three worlds are being preserved. It is Dharma or virtue that thwarts the enemies. It is virtue that governs the subjects duly. It is for this that virtue is called Dhārana or the holder. The virtue of preservation is the greatest and confers fruits in alter life. There is nothing like virtue hard to acquire in this world, Charity, kindness, honouring the pious and innocent conduct constitute the chief virtues; for by those the well-being of this life and the next is brought about. O Rāghava, O you of firms vows—you are an example of examples. You are cognisant of the conduct of the pious. You are like an ocean, the refuge of all virtues. O foremost of kings, out of ignorance, I have spoken to you so many things. With my head downwards, I beg for your satisfaction. Be not offended with me.' Hearing those wise words of the dog, Rāma said. “What shall I do for you? Do you mention it confidentially.” Whereto the dog replied, saying: It is by piety that a king governs his kingdom-it is by virtue that a king protects his subjects, becomes a refuge to all and removes the fear of his men. Keeping an eye on this, O Rāma do you hear, what I say. In the house of a certain Brāhmaṇa there lives a': beggar by the name of Sarvārthasiddha (i.e., who has got all his desires satisfied). And although I am innocent, he has for nothing hurt me. Hearing those words Rāma sent his messenger who brought Sarvărthasiddha, master of all subjects. Thereupon beholding Rāma in the assembly that effulgent and leading twice-born one said: "O blameless Rāma, tell me what I shall do for you. Whereto Rāmă said "Otwice-born one, you have hurt this dog. What offence did it commit by you that you did strike it severely with a rod. Anger in an enemy which take away life. Anger is a sweet-speeched enemy in the grab of a friend. It is the foremost of passions and like to a sharp dagger. And it is anger that steal away everything. It pilfers all that is acquired by asceticism, sacrifices and gifts. it is proper therefore by every means to kill anger. Passions are running amok on all sides like so many exceedingly wicked steeds. Being satiated with of all objects of enjoyments it is better to govern them by patience. By mind, actions, words and eyes a man should engage in the well being of people. He should not injure any body and he not addicted to any thing. The harm, that a mind not under control, can accomplish, is beyond the range of a sharp dagger, trodden serpent and of an enemy always enraged. Even the nature of one, who has learnt humility, cannot be trusted. He, who hides his nature, himself reveals his true self.” Răma, of unwearied actions, having said this, Sarvarthāa, siddha, the foremost of twice-born ones, said: "Knocking about whole day for alms I was highly enraged and struck this dog. It was sitting in the mid-way and I asked it again and again to more away. Thereupon, moving away and standing with reluctance. It stood fearfully on the roadside. O descendant of Raghu, I was at that time stricken with hunger, and struck it for its vicious conduct. O king of kings, I am guilty in this, and you must punish me, O lord of kings, do you administer punishment to me,-I shall then be released from the fear of hell." Thereupon, Rāma asked all the ministers, saying:-"What is to be done now? What punishment is to be inflicted on him? We can protect subjects, if we can administer punishment proportionate to crime." Thereat, Bhrgu, Angiras, Kutsa, Vasistha, Káshya and other ascetic, the leading preachers, the ministers, the citizens, and other sages conversant with Sastras present there, said:-“A Brahmana should not be punished with death.” The sages conversant with laws having said this, the ascetics addressed Rama, saying:-"O Rāghava, a king is the governor of all-specially yourself. You are the chastiser of the three worlds, the eternal Visnu.” They all having said this, the dog began:“You did solemnly say 'What shall I do for you?' Therefore, if you are gratified with me, and if you do wish to confer boons on me, do you appoint this Brahmana as the head of family.” Thereupon, having been thus honoured and pleased and ascending an elephant, he proceeded to occupy his new dignified station. At this, the councillors of Råma, surprised, said:-"O you of great effulgence, he has not been punished. Rather you have conferred on him a boon." Hearing the words of ministers., Rāma said: "You do not know the real truth of the whole thing-the dog knows it well." Being accosted by Rāma, the dog said: "O Rāghava, I was the head of the family of Kālanyava. After the worship of the deities and Brāhmaṇa and the feasting of the servants, male, and female, I used to take my food. I used to parcel out things duly, and my mind was not in the least attached to sin. I used to preserve with great care the articles belonging to the tutelary deities, was humble, good-natured and engaged in the wellbeing of all animals. Still I have fallen into this dreadful and wretched condition. O Rāghava, this Brāhmaṇa is angry by nature, and impious, injures others, and is impatient, cruel, harsh in words and ignorant, and therefore shall degrade his seven generations up and down. He will by no means be able to discharge the duties of a head of a family. He, whom you wishes to take to hell with her son, beasts and friends, should be engaged in the serving the Brāhmaṇs and kine. For all his good actions, he is slain who steals the wealth of a Brāhmaṇa, a deity, a woman, and a boy, and the riches given away by him. O Rāghava, one who pilfers the riches of a Brāhmaṇa or a deity falls into a hell called Vici. Even he who thinks in his mind of stealing it goes once and again into hell." Hearing the words of the dog, the eyes of the effulgent Rāma were expanded with surprise. The dog went back from where it had come. In its pristine birth the dog was high-minded it is now cursed for being born in a degraded state of existence. Thereupon, repairing at last to Vārāṇasi the dog took the vow of fasting. There lived for a long time a vulture and an own on a mountain extending over the banks of a river, resonant with the notes of cuckoos and filled with lions, tigers and various birds, situated in a pleasant forest abounding in trees near the city of Ayodhyā. Once on a time the vicious vulture alleging that the nest of the owl was his own, began to quarrel with "The lotus-eyed Rama is the king of all people; let us go to him and he will decide to whom the nest belongs." Having thus settled the vulture and the owl, being impatient with rage, quarrellirg with one another, appeaid before Rāma and touched his feet. Beholding that lord of men, the vulture said: "O preserver of humanity, you are the foremost of celestials and Asuras. O you of great effulgence, you are gifted with intelligence and learning more than BỊhaspati and Sukrácārya. You are cognisant of the good and bad conditions of creatures. In beauty you are like the Moon and are irrepressible like the Sun. In glory you are like Himālaya, in gravity like the Ocean, in prowess like the Patriarch, in patience like the Earth, and in velocity like the Wind. O Råghava, you are the preceptor of the mobile and immobile creation, gifted with all sorts of wealth, illustrious, devoid of a revengeful spirit, unconquerable, victorious, and master of all Sāstras and laws. O foremost of men, hear. I have an application to you. O Raghava, I had built a nest for myself; this owl is now occupying it as his own; therefore, O king, do you save me.” The vulture having said this, the owl began:"True, it is, o king, that is him are the portions of the Moon, Indra, the Sun, Kubera and Yama, but there is in him also a portion of man. But you are yourself the omnipresent deity, Narayana. You, impelled by your own self, do judge all creatures impartially; therefore, a portion of gentleness is well manifest in you and therefore do people call you, a portion of the Moon. O patriarch, in anger, punishment, gift with and fear, you are our giver, destroyer and protector,-it is for this that you are called Indra. in energy you are like fire irrepressible to all creatures, and because you do spread your lustre upon all creatures that you are called the Sun. You are the very lord of riches or are even superior to Kubera; like Padmā to the lord of riches. Sri is always by you. Because you do discharge the functions of Kubera, you are the giver of wealth to us. O Rāghava, you look upon all creatures, mobile and immobile, with an impartial eye-you do regard your friends and foes with impartiality, and you are duly protecting, your subjects. O Rāghava, death pursues him with whom you are offended and it is for this reason that you are styled by people 'the highly powerful Yama. O foremost o kings, because you are forgiving to all creatures and a kind king that people sing your glories as of a man on earth. The king is the strength of the weak and helpless and he is the eye of the blind and the refuge of those who have no shelter. You are also our king: therefore do you listen to our petition. O king, entering into my nest, this vulture is oppressing me. You only, O foremost of men, are the divine chastiser of mankind. Hearing those words, Rāma sent for his councillors. The ministers of Dasaratha and Rāma, Brhaspati, Yayanta, Vijaya, Siddhartha, Rast ravarddhana, Asoka, Daramapāla the highly powerful Sumantra and others were all versed in laws, high-minded, conversant with all the Sastras, intelligent, born in respectable families, and adepts in counsel. Having invited them all and ascending his Puspaka car, he went to the place in question, and, descending there, asked the vulture, “How long has this nest been made? Tell me, if you remember it." Whereto the vulture replied:"From the time when mankind were first born and spread over the four quarters of the globe have I been living in this nest." The owl also said: "At the time when the earth was (first) adorned with trees that this nest of mine was constructed." Hearing these words, Rama said to the councillors:-"That assembly is not an assembly where there are no friends—nor are they old men who do not dwell upon religious topics. That religion is not a religion where there is no truth and that truth is not the truth where there is hypocrisy. Those councillors are liars who do not give proper replies in time on the subjects they are well-informed on. He who does give reply to a question under the influence of passion, anger or fear, binds himself with. thousand nooses of Varuņa, and at the expiration of full one year he is released from a single sin.” Hearing these words, the ministers said to Rāma: "0 you having a large mind, what the owl has said is true the vulture has not spoken the truth. You are the evidence this, O great king-for the king is the last refuge of all-the root of the subject and the eternal religion. He who is punished by the king, is not doomed in a degraded state. He is, in truth, saved from the fear of hell and reaches a better state." Hearing the words of the ministers, Rāma said: "Hear what is mentioned in the Purānas. Formerly the Sun, the Moon, the welkin with the stars, the earth with the mountains and forests—the three worlds, the mobile and the immobile, were under water. At that time only Nārāyaṇa existed as the second Sumeru. In Nārāyaṇa's belly was stationed the earth with Lakşmi. Having destroyed the creation and entered water, the highly effulgent Vişnu, identical with the souls of creatures, lay asleep there for many long years. Beholding Vişņu asleep after the destruction of the universe and knowing Vişņu of obstructed breath, the great ascetic Brahmā entered his abdomen. Thereupon, when a golden lotus sprang from Vişnu's navel. That great lord, ascetic Brahmā, originated therefrom and was engaged in austere penances for the purpose of creating earth, air, mountains, trees, men, reptiles and all animals born from womb or egg. At that time from the ears of Nārāyaṇa originated two valiant and dreadful demons under the name of Madhu and Kaitabha. Beholding the Patriarch, there they were greatly enraged and pursued him. Thereat the self-born cried aloud hideously. Awakened by that sound Nārāyaņa engaged in fighting with Madhu and Kaitabha, and slew them with his discus. And with their gore the whole earth was delighted. Thereupon, purifying the earth again, Hari, preserver of the world, covered it with trees. And various drugs were also created. And the earth was called Medini because it was filled with Medas, marrow of Madhu and Kaitabha. It is for this that I hold, O ministers, that this house not belong to the vulture, but to the owl. Therefore, this vicious vulture should be punished for this wicked, vicious-minded one, robbing another's nest, is oppressing him.” years.' In the interval a voice was heard in the sky stating the true facts: "O Rāma, do not slay the vulture,—for it has already been reduced to ashes by the force of Gautama's asceticism. O lord of men, this vulture, in its pristine birth, was a heroic truthful and pure king by the name of Brahmadatta. Once on a time a Brhāmaņa, by the name of Gautama, the very personification of Kāla, came to the house of Brahmadatta for food and said:-'0 king, I shall feed in your house for more than a hundred Thereupon, offering that effulgent Brāhmaṇa, with his own hands, water to wash his feet the king Brahmadatta, made arrangements for his meal. Accidentally flesh was mixed with the food of the high-souled Gautama. Being enraged thereat, the ascetic imprecated him with a dreadful curse and said: "O king, you become a vulture.' The king said: 'Be propitiated, O you of great vows, do not imprecate me thus. I have out of ignorance committed this offence. O great one, O blameless one, do you act so that this curse may find termination.' Thereat understanding that this offence was committed by the king unwittingly, the ascetic said-'o king, in the race of Iksawkus a king shall be born under the name of Rāma. O foremost of men, you shall be released from the curse when he shall touch you.' Hearing the voice in the sky, Rāma touched Brahmadatta. Thereupon renouncing his venture from and assuming a beautiful body smeared with celestial perfumes, he praised Rāma and said: "O you conversant with piety, by your favour have I been saved from the dreadful hell—here has ended my curse."