Hearing those sorrowful words of the Brāhmaṇa, Rāma was greatly sorry and sent for Vasistha, Vamadeva, his brothers, citizens and councillors. There upon having entered the apartment in the company of Vasiştha, eight Brāhmaṇas blessed the king Rāma, resembling a celestial, saying 'may victory crown you.' Markandeya, Maudgalya, Vamadeva, Kashyapa, Katyayana, Javali, Gautama, and Nārada, these eight leading Brāhmaṇas having takes their seats, Rāma with folded hands, saluted them. And he showed due civilities towards his minister, citizens, Rșis and all others. There upon all the highly effulgent Rșis being accommodated with seats Råma narrated duly before them the account of the Brāhmaṇa and said. This Brāhmaṇa is waiting at the Palace-gate. Hearing those words of the poorly king, Narada, in the presence of all other Rsis, replied. Hear, o king, why this boy has met with untimely death. And hearing this, O descendant or Raghu, do you settle what you think proper. O king, in the golden age, only the Brahmanas used to engage in asceticism. At that age save the Brāhmaṇas no other caste used to lead the life of an anchoret. And for this, the Brāhmaṇas were the highest caste, effulgent in asceticism, asceticism, shorn shorn of ignorance, above death and conversant with three ages. There upon at the end of the golden age, Brāhmaṇa's understanding became loose and the Tretā Yuga set in. At this age Kşatriyas, gifted with the power acquired by pristine asceticism, were born. And those men, intent upon austere penances, that were born in the Tretā age, were more powerful and greater devotees than those in the former age. In the golden age the Brāhmaṇas were more powerful than the Kșatriyas. But in the Tretā age the Brāhmaṇas and the Ksatriyas were equally powerful. Thus in the Tretā age, not beholding prominence of the Brāhmaṇas greater than that of the Kşatriyas, Manu and other religious leaders of the time composed the Sastra describing and setting in the four divisions of castes. In this wise the Tretā age was prolific with virtues of the four Varņas, and many pious sacrifices and was shorn of iniquities. But being attacked a little with iniquity, one portion of sin appeared on earth. And growing impious people of sin appeared on earth. And growing impious people lost their strength. And for houses and farms that were the property of the former age, people of the Tretā Yuga were possessed by envy, the outcome of the quality of darkness. And with the treading of impiety on earth during Tretā, the soiled sin of untruth appeared. And this iniquity stretching one footstep, the lease of people's lives, for sins, became limited. And the sin of untruth descending on earth, people, to a void the extinction of life in consequence thereof, became truthful and engaged in many pious observances. During the Tretă age the Brāhmaṇas and Kș atriyas engaged in austere penances and the Vaiśyas and Sūdras engaged in serving them. And the greatest piety of the Vaiśyas and Śūdras at that time consisted of serving the Brāhmaṇas and Ksatriyas and specially for the Śūdras the highest religion was to serve people of all Varnas. O foremost of kings, at the end of the Tretă age, Vaiśyas and Śūdras being fully overpowered by the sin of untruth, the Brāhmaṇas and the Kșatriyas also grew feeble. And the second foot of impiety being ushered into the world the Dvāpara age set in. O foremost of men, during this age two legs of piety being cut off, impiety and untruth multiplies. And in Yuga named Dvāpara the Vaisyas engaged in devout penances. In this wise in three ages the three Varnas gradually engaged in ascetic performances. The piety of asceticism by Yugas gradually became established in three Varmas, But, O foremost of men, in these three Yugas the Sūdras were not entitled to the virtues of devout penances. O foremost of men, the degraded caste, the Śūdras, during your rege me, have engaged in austere penances. And in the Kali Yuga asceticism shall be established in the Sūdras. O king, even in Davāpara, devout penances for Śūdras were considered as impiety, what to speak of the Tretāage. O king, one Śūdras, under the influence of vicious understanding, has begun devout penances within your kingdom. And for that reason this boy has met with death. Calamity sets in that kingdom where a vicious-minded person commits an iniquity and that vicious wight and the king forsooth speedily repair to hell. The king, who piously govern his subjects, receive the sixth portion of there study asceticism and good actions. While the king is entitled to the sixth portion of everything why should he not fully protect his subjects? Therefore, O chief of men, do you bring all informations of your kingdom. And be then studious to repress vices wherever you shall find them. And by that, O foremost of men, the piety of the subjects shall be increased, the lease of their life shall be prolonged and this boy shall regain his life.