Once upon a time in came to pass that, despatched by the lord of creatures, Steep in her (native) form powerfully overpowered Kumbhakarna. Then Kumbhakarņa spoke to his brother, who was seated, 'O king, Sleep obstructs me. Do you, therefore, have my mansion made. Thereupon, employed by the king, architects resembling Viśvakarmă constructed an edifice beautiful to behold, measuring the smooth space of a Yojana diagonally and two in area; graceful to the view and having no obstruction (to hide its beauty). And the Rākşasa caused a splendid and delightful pile to be built, adorned all round with pillars decked with gold and crystal, having stairs composed of lapises, furnished with networks of small bells, set with ivory gateways, and containing daises-dight with diamonds and crystal elegant throughout, and enduring, like to a goodly cave of Maru. There, overcome with slumber, the wondrous strong Kumbhakarņa, lying down for many thousand years, did not wake up. While Kumbhakarna was overpowered by sleep, Daśānana* without let began to destroy Devarşis, Yakşas and Gandharvas, and going to graceful gardens, Nandana, etc., he devastated them (ruthlessly). *Henceforth we shall use this significant surname of Rāvana, meaning Ten-faced. That Rākşasa spread destruction, even as an elephant sporting agitates a river, as the wind bring down trees, or as the thunder-bolt rive mountain-peaks. Hearing of the doings of Dasagrīva,* and remembering his conduct chiming in with his race, the righteous lord of riches Vaisravanashowing his fraternal affection, despatched a messenger to Lankā, seeking the welfare of Dasagriva. *Ten-necked. Going to the city of Lankā, he presented himself before Vibhīşaņa. And having received him with honour, he asked him as to the cause of his visit. Having enquired after the welfare of the king as well as his kindred, Vibhīşaņa, showed him to Daśānana seated in his court. Seeing the king there flaming in his own energy, he (the messenger), saluting him (Rāvana) with the word Jaya* stood silent. *Jaya may mean (1) victory and (2) all the deities of the Hindu pantheon. The envoy addressed Dasagrīva, seated on a superb couch, graced with a costly coverlet. O king, I shall tell you all that your brother has said, worthy of both the character and race of your father and mother, Enough of wrong doing. Now you should mend your ways. If you can, stay in righteousness. I have seen Nandana ravaged; and I have heard of the sages slain, and Oking, of the preparations the deities are making against you. I have been utterly disregarded by you; but even if a boy should transgress, he should, for all that be protected by his family members. Self-restrained and controlling my senses, I, adopting a terrific vow, had gone to the breast to the Himavān for practising righteousness. There I saw that lord of the gods in company with Umā. There I happened to cast my left eye on the goddess, for ‘knowing, O mighty king, who she was, and not for any other reason. Rudrāņi was staying then, wearing a surpassing form. Thereupon through the divine energy of the goddess my left eye was burnt and seemed to be covered with dust, and its lustre became tawny. Then I, going to another spacious peak of the inountain, became engaged in silently observing a mighty vow. On my term of restraint having been complete, that lord of the gods Maheśvara with a gratified heart addressed me, saying. O righteous one, you of fair vows, I am wellpleased with this asceticism of your. I also had observed this vow; and you also, O lord of riches, have done the same. A third person there is none that practise such a vow. This vow is hard to perform, and formerly it was I that introduced it. Therefore, O mild one, O lord of riches, do you contract friendship with me. And you have conquered me by your penances. Therefore, O be you my friend. This your left eye has been burnt through the energy of the goddess, and has turned tawny in consequence of having seen the grace of the goddess; your shall be Ekāksipingala. Then at Saikara's command I sinless one, SO name ever have obtained the privilege of companionship (with him). Having come here I have heard of your evil designs. Do you then desist from this impious course, tending to sully your line. The celestials along with the sages are pondering over the means of compassing your death. Thus addressed, the Ten necked one, with his eyes reddened in wrath, rubbing his hands and knashing his teeth, said. O messenger, I have learnt what you have uttered. Neither you nor this brother of mine by whom you have been despatched, (shall live); nor does the keeper of riches say what is for my good. And the fool makes me hear the circumstance of his having made friends with Mahesvara. I shall never forgive what you have said. Up to this I had borne him, considering that he, being my elder brother and as such my superior should not be slain by me. But now hearing his (utterances), even this is my resolve. Depending upon the might of my arms, I shall conquer the three worlds. On his account solely I shall on the instant despatch the four Lokapālas to the abode of Death. Having said this, Lanka's lord killed the emissary with his sword and made him over to the wicked Räksasas for being eaten. Then, having performed Svastyayana, Rāvana, ascending his car, went to where the lord of riches was, bent on conquering the three worlds.