Hearing the words of Laksmana, Rama, the slayer of enemies, said:-0 you of firm vows, do you at length, describe the destruction of Vrtra. Hearing the words of Rāghava, Lakşmaņa, the enhancer of Sumitra's delight, again took up that theme. Hearing the words of Indra and other deities Visnu replied. From before I am bound with the high-souled Vrtra by the ties of friendship. For this, even for your satisfaction, I shall not (myself) slay him. Again I am to afford excellent felicity to you. I shall say the solution by which Indra will able to slay him. I shall myself divide you into three classes and then forsooth your king shall be able to destroy Vrtra. Of those three portions the first will stay in Indra, second into thunderbolt and the third one into the earth, then he will be able to slay him. Visnu, the god of gods, having said this, the deities, replied, saying: O slayer of demons, undoubtedly, what you have said, shall prove true; may victory crown you; we proceed now to slay Vſtra. O highly generous deity, do you now make Våsava powerfully by infusing your own energy. There upon the highly powerful immortals headed by Indra entered the forest where the great Asura Vſtra was performing austerities. Arriving there they observed that the leading Asura was spreading rays all over, the outcome of his own effulgence, as if devouring the three worlds and burning down the quarters. Beholding that foremost of Asuras, the deities were greatly terrified and began to thing of plans by which they would be able to slay him and not be defeated. While they were thus thinking, Indra, of thousand eyes, taking up a thunderbolt, hurled it against Vrtra's head. That dreadful burning thunderbolt, like to the fire of dissolution, falling on Vrtra's head, the three worlds were agitated. There upon thinking that he has perpetrated an iniquity by slaying Vịtra engaged in asceticism, Indra, out of fear, fled to the other side of Lokāloka mountain, perpetually enshrouded with darkness. And the sin, consequent upon the destruction of a Brahmana, pursuing him vehemently, entered into his person. In this wise Indra became subject to dreadful afflictions. Beholding the enemy slain and Indra fled, the deities headed by fire again and again chanted the glories of Vişņu —the lord of three worlds saying: O great god, you are the refuge of the three worlds. You are the first-born and the father of the universe. For protecting all creatures you have assumed this Vişnu from. You have slain this Vặtra but the sin of slaying a Brahmana has visited Indra. Therefore, O excellent Puruşa, do you so arrange that he may i be freed from sins. Hearing the words of the celestials Vişņu said, Let your Chief celebrate a sacrifice in my honour, and by that he shall be cleansed off the sin. If the slayer of Pāka celebrates a horse sacrifice, he shall again fearlessly be installed as the chief of deities. Having addressed these nectar-like words to the deities and being glorified by them, Visnu, the god of gods, returned to his abode.