Thereupon Rāma, being stricken with curiosity, with folded palms and humbly accosted Agastya, residing in the southern quarter, with pregnant accents, saying. You say that Rávaņa and Vāli had unequalled strength but I think their can not equal that of Hanuman. Heroism, liberality, strength, patience, intellect, knowledge of lawn and means, prowess and energy all exist together in Hanuman. on When the monkey host lost heart beholding the ocean, Hanumān, consoling crossed over the deep extending over a hundred leagues. Having discarded the presiding goddess of Lanka he went to the mansion of Rāvana and on beholding Sita there, he consoled her. What to speak of more, Hanuman, singlehanded, slew Ravana's commander-in-chief, the minister's son, his servants and his one son. Being released from the Brahma weapon Hanuman remonstrated with Rāvaņa, and reduced Larkā into ashes like to fire burning down earth. What I have seen myself performed by Hanumān in the conflict is above the power of Kala, Vasava and even the lord of riches. It is by the strength of the arms of that Windgod's son I ave obtained Lanka, Sita, Lakşmaņa, Victory, kingdom and my friends. What more, had not Hanumăn, the friend of the king of monkeys-Sugrīva, been in my company who could have brought Sītā intelligence? Why did not Hanumän, although wishing welfare to Sugrīva, reduce Vāli to ashes like so many creepers on the occasion of his quarrel with Sugriva? Methinks, Hanuman was not cognisant of his own prowess then? And therefore he did stood to witness the miseries of Sugrīva— the king of monkeys who was dearer than his life. O you worshipped of the immortals, do you truly describe to me in detail this action of Hanuman. Hearing those well-meaning words of Rāghava, the ascetic Agastya said to him in the presence of Hanumān. O foremost of Raghus, what, you have said regarding Hanumān, is all true. As regards, strength, velocity and intellect there is none who can equal Hanuman. O repressor of enemies, in the days of yore Hanumān was imprecated by the ascetics, whose curses never become fruitless, to the effect that he would never be conscious of his whole strength. I am not capable of describing to you the wondrous childish feat which Hanuman did perform in his boyhood. But if you are, O Raghava, greatly anxious to hear it, I shall relate do you hear with a quiescent mind. Hanuman's father Keśarī reigned in the mountain Sumeru which resembles gold by the influence of the sun. Kesari had a well-known wife by the name of Añjanā to whom he was greatly attached. The deity Wind begot on Añjană an excellent son. Repairing to a dense forest for collecting fruits, the excellent damsel gave birth to Hanumān resembling the tip of a ſala tree and went away. Being distressed with hunger on account of the absence of the mother, Hanuman, just born, cried like Kartikeya, the commander-in-chief of the celestials, in the forest of Saras. At this time the sun resembling Japā flowers, having risen, Hanumān, to get a fruit, sprang up. Being desirous of holding the newly risen sun, Hanumān, resembling it, began to leap in the middle of the welkin. The child Hanuman having thus ascended the sky, celestials, Dānavas and Yakşas surprisingly exclaimed. The velocity, with which Marut's son is going, is not possessed even by the Wind, Garuda and mind. If he has got such vehemence in his boyhood what great strength he shall have in his youth. His own son thus leaping, the wind, becoming cool by the touch of snow, began to follow him proceeding in the sky lest the rays of the sun might scorch him. Rising high up in the sky on account of childish freaks and traversed many thousand leagues by the help of his father Hanuman neared the sun. Considering that he was a mere child and therefore not tarnished by any sin and that a great divine work would be accomplished by him in future the sun did not burn Hanuman. At the every day when Hanuman sprang up to hold the sun, Rāhu too essayed to possess him. Having reached the top of the sun's car Hanuman touched Rāhu; so he, the repressor of the moon's rays, accordingly went back on beholding the sun thus possessed. And repairing to the house of Indra, Sinhika's son, in wrath and with frowns, said to him encircled by the celestials. O Vasava! O slayer of Bala and Vrtra-to remove my hunger you did give me both the sun and moon; why you have then given them to another? On account of the Parva I came to devour the sun but another Rahu came and possessed him. Hearing the words of Råhu, the King of the deities, wearing a golden garland, having his understanding bewildered, proceeded, on the back of his elephant-chief Airavata, huge like the summit of the Kailäsa hill, with temporal juice always trickling, having four tasks, roaring, and adorned with golden bells, towards Hanumān and the sun with Rāhu before him. Having left behind Indra, Rāhu, quickly went there but fled away on beholding the hugebodied Hanumān resembling a mountain summit. Thereupon leaving aside the sun and being desirous of holding Rāhu, the son of Siṁhikā considering him as a fruit, Hanumān again sprang up into the sky. Beholding Hanuman approach renouncing the sun, Rāhu with his countenance only visible, desisted and went back. And considering Indra as the saviour the son of Simhikā, stricken with fear, again and again cried aloud "Indra! Indra!!" Understanding everything by the piteous accents of Rāhu Indra said, “No fear, I shall soon slay him.” Thereupon beholding the huge-bodied Airāvat and considering him as a bigger fruit Măruti ran towards him. Proceeding thus tempestuously when he rose above the head of Indra, Hanuman, looked in a moment dreadful like the fire of dissolution. But not greatly enraged the thousand-eyed lord of Saci, with the thunder bolt in his hand, struck the running Hanumān. Belaboured by the thunder-bolt of Indra Hanuman fell down on a summit and broke his left jaw. He being thus overwhelmed by the stoke of Indra's thunder-bolt, the Wind-god became displeased with the king of celestials and was determined upon bringing about mischief to all created beings. The all-comprehending wind, not spreading himself, entered into a cave with his son. Like to Väsava distressing all creatures by putting a stop to the showers, the wind too put all animals into unbearable suffering by obstructing all execrations. On account of the anger of the Wind-god their breath was completely obstructed, and the joints-as if pierced, became hard as wood. Svādhyāya Vaşațkāra and all the religious observances of the triple world were put a stop to by the anger of the Wind-god. So the three world appeared as if stricken with sorrow. Thereupon the affixed celestials, Gandharvas, Asuras and men repaired to the Patriarch Brahmă with a view to bring about the wellbeing of created beings. With their bellies swollen for the obstruction of the wind the celestials with folded hands said: "O lord of created beings, you have created four classes of beings and you have given us wind to preserve our lives. But we do not know, why the wind, the lord of our beings, is distressing us, by obstructing our movements like to females confined in an inner apartment. Being thus distressed by the wind we have come to seek your shelter. O you the remover of miseries-do you remove our affictions consequent upon the obstruction of the wind.. Hearing those words of the created beings, and saying the reason of that the lord of creation (the Patriarch Brahma) again said. Hear, O created beings, why the wind, being enraged, has obstructed the course of all beings. All that deserves to be listened and it is right too. Hearing the words of Rāhu, Indra, the king of ION 35 RĀMĀYAŅAM the celestials, has belaboured the Wind-god's son. It is for this that he has been offended. Preserving the bodies, the wind, having no persons, passes through them all. Without wind the body becomes like wood. Therefore the wind constitutes the life, the happiness and the whole universe. Renouncing the wind the world cannot attain to happiness. Being cast off by the wind and having their breaths obstructed, behold, the world, today appear like dried wood. Let us therefore go there where the wind, the giver of our afflictions, wait. If we do not please the son of Aditi we shall all meet with destruction. Thereupon the Patriarch Brahmā, the celestials, Gandharvas, serpents, Guhyakas and other created beings went where the wind was waiting with his own son belaboured by the king of the celestials. Thereupon beholding that boy, on the lap of the Wind-God, resembling gold and Baiśvānara, the four-mouthed Brahmā, the celestials, Gandharvas, Rșis, Yakşas and Rākşasas were all moved with pity.