Hearing those words of Rāghva, the exceedingly energetic Kumbhayoni spoke as follows. Having regard to his (Indrajit's) energy and might, I shall relate to you the history of his race, in the light of which you will perceive why Rāvana's son had been capable of slaying his enemies, but could not himself be slain by them. I shall, O Rāghava, describe to you Răvaņa's race and birth, as well as the boon that had been conferred on him. Formerly in the Krita age, O Rama, there was a Brahmarsi-lord (of creatures), son to Prajapati, and like to the very self of the great-father. His virtues, springing from righteousness and excellency of character, are past all delineation; I can only say that, forsooth, he went by the name of Prajāpati's son. Verily on account of his being the son of Prajāpati, he was the darling of the deities; as by virtue of his spotless perfections, that magnanimous one was loved of all creatures. And on a religious mission that foremost of ascetics, repairing to the asylum of Triņabindu at the side of the mighty mountain, Meru, took up his abode there. And with his senses centred on the study of the Vedas, that righteous-souled one, going to the hermitage, carried on austerities; but his religious rites were disturbed by certain girls. And daughters of sages and Pannagas and those of Rājarşis, as well as those of Apsarās, sporting, arrived at that quarter. And an account of every season being genial at that spot and also of the loveliness of the wood, the damsels, repairing to this place. ever disport there. And on account of the beauty of that region, those wenches, coming to where that twice-born one, Pulastya was, used to sing, to play on instruments, and to dance; and thus those blameless beauties disturbed the rites of that anchoret practising austerities. Thereat, the mighty ascetic, waxing wroth, said, ‘She that comes within my kin, shall conceive.' Hearing the words of the high-souled one, (the damsels), afraid of a Brāhamana's curse, ceased to to haunt that place. But Triņabindu's daughter had not heard anything of all this, and going to the asylum, she ranged it fearlessly. She did not see there any of her associates come to that spot. And at that time that exceedingly energetic and mighty sage, Prajāpati's son, with his soul sanctified through eticism, was engaged in the study of the Veda. Hearing the sounds of Vedic recitation, and seeing that storehouse of asceticism, she had her body turned pale, and signs of pregnancy displayed themselves. Seeing that evil befall her, she was wrought up with anxiety; and, understanding matters, she said, "What is this?' And, going to her father's hermitage, stayed there. Seeing her in this condition, Triņabindu said, "Wherefore is the person that you bear unlike what it used to be?' Thereat, in .woe-begone guise, with joined hands, his daughter replied to that one having asceticism for the riches, 'O father, cause know I none whereby I have come by this appearance. But searching for my associates, I had ere this alone repaired to the noble asylum of the Maharși Pulastya of a purified spirit. But associate found there I none, that had come thither. And seeing this change for the worse of my form, I from fear have come hither. Thereat the Rajarsi, Trinabindu, having a live effulgence through asceticism, entered into contemplation, and saw the consequence of the sage's act. And coming to know that curse of the Maharși of a purified spirit, he, taking his daughter, went to Pulastya and said. O worshipful one, O mighty sage, do you accept this daughter of mine, adorned with her native perfections, who of herself has come to you as alms. She will, without doubt, constantly tend you, practising asceticism, and having your senses fatigued. When that virtuous (sage) had said this, the twice-born Räjarși, desirous of accepting the girl (after due nuptial rights), said to the former, 'Well !' Having given away his daughter, the king went (back) to his asylum; and the girl stayed there, gratifying her husband with her virtues. And that best of ascetics was gratified with her character and behaviour. And well pleased (with her), that highly energetic one said. 'O you of shapely hips, well-pleased am I with you with your wealth of worth, and therefore, O exalted one, I will today confer on you a son like to yourself, who will perpetuate both the lines*-being celebrated as Paulastya. *(i.e. maternal and paternal lines.) And as you had heard the Veda recited by me, so, without doubt, he shall be named Visravā.* *(From the root, Śru-to hear.) Thus addressed, that noble damsel with her soul wrought with delight, in a short time brought forth her son Visravā, famed over the three worlds and furnished with virtue and fame: versed in the Vedas, of an impartial spirit, and ever engaged in observing vows. And the ascetic, Viśravă, was furnished with asceticism even like his sire. ever