Thus accosted by Rāma, the exceedingly energetic Satrughna was powerfully wrought up with bashfulness, and replied slowly. O lord of men, this does not appear to be in consonance with morality. Wherefore, an elder brother existing, would you install a younger one? I must, O best of men, do your behest: for, O exalted one, your mandate can never be passed by me. O hero, I have heard from you as well as from the Śruti (touching the morality concerned).* i.e. of being installed as a king during the life of my elder brother. When my second brother had already vowed (that he would slay Lavana), I ought not to have returned the answer I actually have. I saying, 'I will in battle slay the dreadful Lavaņa.' I have been guilty of an unrighteous speech. And it is for this transgression that, O powerful one, I shall have to undergo this improper process. *(i.e. of being installed as a king during the life of my elder brother.) But, albeit this course is unrighteous and entails perdition, yet desired by an eldest brother, I certainly ought not to make any answer. And, O Kākutstha, a second answer I would not return; so that, О bestower of honour, I may not, by a second reply, render myself liable to a fresh punishment. In this matter, O chief of men, I will even do your desire. Do you, O descendant of Ragu, so order that sin may not be mine (in having obeyed your mandate.) Thus addressed by the heroic and high-souled Śatrughna, Rāma, delighted, spoke to Bharata and Laksmana. Do you carefully provide the things necessary for the coronation: this very day shall I install that foremost of men, the descendant of Raghu. And by my order do you summon the Purodhasas, O Kākutstha, and the citizens and the Rtvijas, and the councillors. Having received the royal behest, the mighty car-warriors did accordingly. And the Kșatriyas and the Brāhmaṇas entered the royal mansion with the priest as well as the requisite things for the installation. And then commenced the auspicious sprinkling of the high-souled Satrughna, gladdening (the hearts of all in) the palace of Rāghava. And on being installed Käkutstha resembled the sun; and he like Skanda formerly installed by the celestials led by Indra. And when Šatrughna had been installed by Rāma of untiring deeds, the citizens as well as the Brāhmaṇas of vast Vedic, attainments experienced excess of joy. And Kausaly, and Sumitrā and Kaikeyi and the other wives of the king set up festal salutation in the palace. And on Satrughna having been installed the high-souled sages dwelling on the banks of the Jamunā, thought that Lavaņa had been slain. Then placing the installed Satrughna on his lap Rāghava, extolling his prowess, addressed him sweet words. O captor of hostile capitals, this divine arrow never missing is your. With this, O son of Raghu, you, O spliced one, with slay Lavana. O Kākutstha, this shaft was forged when invisible by celestials and Asuras the divine selfsprung and invincible (deity) reposed on the mighty main, and when creation was oppressed by Madhu and Kaitabha as well as other Räks asas. He, overwhelmed with rage desirous of creating the three worlds, created the best of arrows invincible to all beings, for the extraction of the wicked ones; and destroyed them in battle by means of this very arrow. And having with this foremost of shafts finished Madhu and Kait abha, they set about creating the worlds. When, O Satrughna, formerly I sought to slay Råvaņa, I did not discharge this arrow, thinking that if discharged, it would inflict great havoc on creatures. Keeping in his abode that great and redoubled which had been bestowed on Madhu by the high-souled Tryambaka, for the destruction of foes, and worshipping the same ever, Lavaņa go about and secure excellent fare( for himself) when one challenge him, desirous of reducing him (his antagonist) to ashes. Therefore, O foremost of men, you should, before entering the city, stand at the gate obstructing his course. O you having long arms, you should invite him for battle when he shall be weaponless and in that way would be able to destroy him. And by no other means he is to be slain. If you can encompass this, he shall forsooth be slain. O my son, I have thus told you the way in which the dare should be thwarted. It is impossible to surpass the prowess of the graceful Nilkantha.