Having crossed the mount Kailāsa, the highiy powerful Ten-necked demon, with his army, reached the region of Indra. There arose in the region of celestials an uproar from the Rākṣasa army, like to the sound of the agitated deep. Hearing of the arrival of Rāvana, Indra shook on his throne and said to the assembled gods, Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Sadhyas and Maruts"Prepare yourselves, for fighting with the vicious-souled Ravana." Being thus addressed by Sakra, the celestials, his equals in the encounter and gifted with great prowess, armed themselves for fight. some Mahendra, afraid of Ravana, poorly went to: Vişnu and gave vent to the following accents. “How shall I, O Vişņu, withstand, the Rákş asa Rāvaņa? The highly powerful Rākṣasa has come here for battle. It is by virtue of the boon that he is powerful, not for any thing else. It is proper to make the words uttered by Brahmă, truthful. As resorting to your prowess I destroyed Namuci, Vrtra, Bali, Naraka and Sambara, so do you make arrangements (for his destruction). There is no other excellent refuge but you in the three worlds, mobile and immobile, O lord, O gods of gods, O slayer of Madhu. You are the graceful, ever-existing Nārāyaṇa, having a lotus naval. By you the worlds have been settled and myself and Sakra, the lord of the celestials. You have created the three worlds, the mobile and immobile, and in you all these shall, O glorious deity, end at the time of dissolution. Do you tell me, the truth, O god of gods, that I may myself fight; or do you, with your sword and discus, vanquish Ravana. Being thus addressed by Śakra the lord Narayana; said, "Do not fear, hear what I say. He is invincible by virtue of the boon, and that vicious-souled one is incapable of being vanquished even by the celestials and Asuras. Irrepressible by virtue of his prowess, that Raksasa, with his son, shall accomplish a mighty object. It seems to be real. O lord of celestials, even if I am requested by you. I shall not withstand the Rākşasa, Rāvana in the conflict. Without slaying the enemies in the encounter, Vişņu does never go black, but it is hard to fulfil my desire from Rāvaņa, well protected by the boon. However I do promise before you, O lord of the celestials, O performer of hundred sacrifices, I shall, soon become the cause of this Räkşasa's death. I shall soon destroy Rāvana with his family in due time and afford delight to the celestials, O lords of ſacī; do you divested of fear, O you gifted with great strength, along with the celestials. Thereupon having issued out of the city, Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, Maruts and Asvins well armed with mails, appeared before the Raksasas. Meanwhile at the latter part of the night there was audible the uproar of Rāvana's army fighting on all sides. Having got up and cast their looks upon one another the highly powerful Rākşasas waited there for the battle, delighted. Thereupon beholding that inexhaustible huge army at the commencement of the battle the celestial host lost heart. Thereupon there ensued a conflict, setting up a terrible sound, with various weapons between the Räksasas and gods. In the interval issued out for another encounter the heroic and grim-visaged Räksasas, Rāvana's councillors. And encircled by Mārīca, Prahasta, Mahāparśva, Mahodara, Akampana, Nikumbha, Suka, Sarana, Sanghrāda, Dhumaketu, Mahadanstra, Gatodara, Jambumali, Mahahrada, Virūpākșa, Şuptaghna, Yajñakopa, Durmukha, Khara, Trisira, Karaviraksa, Süryasatru Mahakāya, Atikāya, Devāntaka, Narāntaka, all those of gifted with great prowess, there entered the battle-field, the highly powerful Sumālin, Rāvana's maternal grandfather. With various sharp-pointed weapons, he, highly angered, began to assail the celestial host like to the winds scattering clouds. Being thus distressed by the night-rangers the hoist of the gods fled away into diverse directions like a herd of deer attacked by a lion. In the meantime, entered the battle-field, the heroic and brave Såvitra, the eight Vasu, encircled by soldiers and striking terror into the hearts of the enemies. Then the two Ādityas, the highly powerful Tvaştă, and Puşă undaunted and united with the forces entered the arena. Thereupon there arose with Rākşasas a terrible encounter of the celestials unable to bear their fame in battle. Then the Rākşasas, with thousands of terrible weapons, began to belabour the deities in the encounter. The celestials, as well, began to send the redoubtable, powerful and terrific Räkşasas, with the stroke of blameless weapons, to the abode of Death. In the interim, O Rāma, a Rākşasa, Sumāli, by name, getting enraged, and with diverse weapons, ran amok of the soldiery. As the winds scatter clouds, so he, under the influence of rage, with various sharpened weapons, committed a havoc among the celestial soldiers. Thereupon being assailed by a downpour of huge shafts, maces, Prāsas and diverse dreadful weapons, the celestials could not keep their ground upon the field of warfare. The celestials being thus distressed by Sumāli the eighth of Vasu, Savitra stood there enraged. And encircled by his own car-warriors that highly powerful one, with his prowess, repulsed the striking night-rangers. Thereupon there arose a terrible encounter, capable of making down erect, between Sumālin and the Vasu, who did not retire from the field of battle. His chariot drawn by serpents was pulled down and destroyed by the high-souled Vasu by means of his huge shafts. Having destroyed his car in the warfare with hundreds of arrows Vasu took up mace in his hands for his destruction. Having taken up that mace having a burning head and resembling the rod of Death Sāvitra struck Sumálin on his head there with. Having fallen on his head that mace shone like a fire-brand as the thunderbolt discharged by Indra, falls roaring on the summit of a mountain. By the stroke of that mace his person was reduced to ashes and therefore, there was not seen in the battle field either his bone, head or flesh. Having beheld him slain in the warfare the Räkşasas bewailing ran about on all sides and being distressed by Vasu they could not stay in the battle field.