Thereupon when the night set in Śatrughna accosted Bhrgu's son Cyavana saying, “O Brāhmaṇa how powerful is Lavaņa? And what is the strength of his dart? What persons before had been destroyed by this dart in conflict?” Hearing the words of the high-souled descendant of Raghu, Satrughna, the highly effulgent Cyavana replied saying. O descendant of Raghu, Lavaņa has accomplished many works by this dart; among them, hear, what Māndhāta, born in the race of Iksawaku, did. The early king of Ayodhyā was known over the three worlds under the name of Māndhātā. He was the son of Yuvanāśva, highly powerful and strong. Having brought the whole world under his subjection the king Māndhātā engaged in the conquest of the celestial region. He having been engaged in making preparations to conquer the world of gods—the celestial chief Indra with other immortals was greatly terrified. With this promise, the king Mândhāta went into the celestial region that he would occupy the half of Indra's throne and kingdom and the celestials would adore him. Being apprised of this vicious intention of his, Indra, the slayer of Pāka, consoled him in sweet words, saying. O foremost of men, even in the land of men, you have not been able to become the real king. Without perfectly subjugating the earth how do you wish to lord over the celestial kingdom? If the whole world is under your subjection, O hero, be you, with the whole host of your servants and soldiers, installed on the celestial throne. Indra having said this, the high-souled Māndhātā replies: O Sakra, who on this earth, has disobeyed my commands.? Whereto Indra replied o sinless one, the night-ranger, Lavana, Madhu's son, living in Madhuvana, is not under your control. Hearing those dreadful and unpleasant words from Indra, the king lowered his head in shame and became silent. Thereupon, having welcomed Indra in that way, he left there and returned earth. O slayer of enemies, with an angry heart, army and conveyance he went to subjugate Madhu's son Lavaņa and sent an emissary inviting him to battle. The ambassador, having gone there, addressed many unpleasant words to Lavaņa and the nightranger devoured him. On the other hand finding the delay of his return the king Māndhāta, enraged, began to assail the Raksasa Lavaņa with arrows from all sides. Laughing wild Lavaņa took up the dart in his hand and discharged it to destroy the king with his followers. Thereupon growing powerful the dart reduced the king with his servants and army into ashes and returned to Lavaņa. In this wise the high-souled king Māndhāta, with his huge army, was slain. O gentle hero, incomparable and great is the strength of the dart.. Forsooth you shall slay Lavaņa next morning. Certain is your victory if Lavana cannot take up his dart. People shall be at ease if you can bring about the destruction of Lavaņa. O foremost of men, I shall then describe to you the incomparable and dreadful prowess of the vicious-souled Lavaņa and his dart. O king, with great exertions did Lavaņa slay Māndhāta and not easily. O high-minded one, next morning you shall surely destroy Lavaņa. He shall issue our for flesh without taking his dart. And at that time, O lord of man, you shall, forsooth, be crowned with victory.