Cveing Sukeśa righteous and furnished with the boon, a virtuous Gandharva, named Grāmani, of the effulgence of fire, who had a daughter, called Devavati, like to a second Sri herself, famed over the three worlds, and endowed with beauty and youth, bestowed her on Sukeśa as if he had bestowed the goddess of fortune of the Rākşasa. And like an indigent person on obtaining wealth, Devavati, on obtaining her beloved husband, affluent in consequence of having received the boon, was (greatly) delighted. And in her company, that night-ranger appeared graceful, even as a mighty elephant sprung from Añjanā* does in the company of a she-elephant. *The designation of an elephant. In good time Sukesa, O Raghava, begot (on her) three sons, resembling the bodies of the three Fires. That lord of Rākşasas begot (on her) three sons, resembling his three eyes the Raksasas, Mālyavän, Sumāli and that foremost of the strong-Māli; all resembling the three worlds possessing themselves in calmness; like to the three Fires established; fierce like to the three mantras, dreadful like three diseases springing respectively from morbid Air, Bile and Phlegm.* *The entire edifice of Hindu Pathology is based on the three-fold division of the morbid humours into Air, Bile and Phlegm. This division, albeit it may appear crude and unscientific to Europeans, taken all, in all, wonderfully answers its purpose. The tact displayed by Hindu physicians in diagnosing diseases on this method is wonderful. From feeling the Pulse alone, a Hindu physician, getting at the predominance of one or more morbid humours of the system, can accurately ascertain a patient's health. The infallibility with which predictions of death are generally made, attests the scientific soundness of the division in question, and renders superfluous any elaborate argument in its defence. The three sons of Sukeśa, having the energy of the three fires, grew up like a disease which has been disregarded. And learning that their father had received a boon by virtue of his power proceeding from asceticism, the brothers, firmly resolved, went to Meru for practising penances. And adopting rigid restrictions, the Rākṣasas, O best of kings, entered upon austerities, terrible, and capable of arousing the fear of all beings. Practising penances rare on the earth with truth and candour and self-control, they afflicted the three worlds with gods, Asuras and human beings. Then that lord-the four-faced one-stationed on a superb car, addressed Sukeśa's sons, saying, “I am for conferring boons (on you).' Knowing that Brahmā surrounded by Indra and the other celestials was ready to bestow boons, they, with joined hands, said, trembling like trees. O god! that have been adored through asceticism, if you do intend to confer on us a boon, let us be invincible, capable of slaying foes, immortal, lordly, and ever devoted to each other.' Thereat saying 'So be it,' to the sons of Sukeśa, the lord Brahmā, (ever) cherishing Brāhmaṇas with affection, went to the Brahmā regions. O Rāma, having obtained the boons, those night-rangers, rendered intrepid in consequences of having the boon conferred on them, began to disturb celestials and Asuras. And like to men abiding in hell, the celestials, chāraṇas and hosts of sages, being harassed (by Raksasas), did not find any deliverer. And then, O foremost of the Raghus, the Raksasas, assembled together, joyfully said to the undeteriorating Viśvakarmá—prince of artist. 'You by your own energy are the architect of the great gods, endowed with energy and prowess and strength. Do you, O magnanimous one, construct a fabric for us after our heart hard by Himavān, or Meru, or Mandara. And do you erect a magnificent mansion for us resembling the mansion itself of Maheśvara.' Thereat Viśvakarmā the mighty-arm of the Rākṣasas spoke of a building like the Amarāvati of Sakra. 'On the shore of the Southern sea is a mountain named Trikūța. A second also is there called Suvela, you lords of Raksasas. On the midmost peak of that mountain resembling clouds, inaccessible even to the fowls of the air, all the four quarters have been hewn with bones.* If I am desired by you, I can construct the city of Lanka (there), having an area of thirty Yojanas, and measuring an hundred in length; surrounded with a golden wall and furnished with golden gateways. *Tanka-may also mean a hatchet or a sword. In her do-you dwell, you irrepressible ones, you foremost of Rākşasas; even as do the elestials with Indra, approaching Amaravati. And occupying the citadel of Lankā, backed by innumerable Rākṣasas, you will be invincible to foes and capable of destroying them.' Hearing Viśvakarmā's speech, those foremost of Rākṣasas, accompanied by thousands of followers, went to the palace and set-up in the same, having a strong wall and a moat, abounding in hundreds of golden edifices. And obtaining Lanka, the night-rangers, exceedingly delighted, began to dwell therein. At this time, O Rāghava, there lived at her pleasure a Gandharvi, named Narmadā. O son of Raghu, She hai three daughters, resembling Sri, Hri, and kirti in splendour. And albeit no Rāks asi herself, she, beginning with the eldest, gladly married to the Räkşasas her daughter having faces resembling the full moon. And under the influence of the star, Bhagadaivata, those three exalted daughters of a Gandharvi were respectively conferred by their mother on the three several Raksasas of eminence. And having wedded, O Rama, Sukesa's sons began to sport with their wives, like celestials sporting with Apsarās. Malyavän's beautiful spouse was named Sundari. On her he begot, do you understand, whom. Vajramuşti, and Virūpākşa, and the Räksasa Durmukha, and Suptaghna, and Yajñakopa, and Matta and Unmatta; and, O Rāma, there was also born a lovely daughter of Sundari, Anala. And Sumāli's wife of face like the full Moon, named Ketumati, was dearer to him than his life itself. O mighty king, do you, gradually, know the offspring that were begot by Sumāli on Ketumatī-Prahasta and Akampana, and Vikata, and Kālikāmukha, and DhumrāKșa, and Danda, and the redoubtable Supārsva, and Sañhrãi, and Praghasa, and the Rākşasa, Bhāsakarņa, and Rākā, and Pushpotkată, and Kaikasi of luminous smiles, and Kumbhinasi these are known as the offspring of Sumali. Māli had for wife a graceful Gandharvi, named Vasudă having having eyes resembling lotus-petals, of a lovely look and like to the most magnificent Yakși of them all. Do you, O master, listen to me as I mention to you, O Raghava the offspring that Sumali's younger brother beget on her, Anala, and Nila, and Sampāti. These night-rangers sons to Mali were the courtiers of Vibhișana. And those three foremost of Rākṣasa, accompanied by hundreds of sons night rangers all-elated on account of their measureless prowess, began to worry the sages and serpents and Yakşas, and celestials with Indra (at their head). Incapable of being confronted (in battle), these resembling Death himself in energy, wondrous elated in consequences of the boon having been conferred on them, ranging the world like to the Wind, were ever engaged in disturbing the sacrifices (of the sages).