Having reflected thus, that foremost of Vipras endowed with fleet vigour, bent his steps towards the abode of Yama, for the purpose of relating to him all that had taken place. There he saw that god Yama sitting in front of fire and offering into it the good and evil fruits of their actions. * *Ordaining happiness and misery to the lives of people according to their acts.' Seeing the Maharși Nārada arrive there, Yama offering him arghya according to the ordinance, addressed him saying, when he was seated at his case: 'O Devarsi, is it well with you? And does virtue deteriorate.'* And, why, O you honoured of deities, and Gandharvas, do you come?' *The Original has: "Do not virtue wane." This in English would imply the very reverse what Nārada intends to say. He says: 'Do religion deteriorate?' i.e. 'I hope, religion does not deteriorate.' This is an idiom and natural usage accounts for it, although that usage must in the nature of things be based on a subtle ground of season. Thereat the reverend sage, Narada, said; Hearken. I shall tell (you); and (after hearing me out) do you what is fit. o king of the Pitrs, here come the night-ranger named ten-necked, for bringing you under his sway you who are incapable of being conquered. O master, for this reason it is that I have come hither hastily, doubtful what shall befall you who have the rod for your weapon. In the meanwhile they saw the Rākṣasa's car approach from afar, flaming and like to the rayfurnished (one) risen. And dispelling the gloom of that region with the effulgence of Pușpaka; that exceedingly powerful (Raksasa) came forward. The mighty-armed ten-necked one all around saw creatures reaping the consequences of their fair and foul acts. There he saw Yama's soldiery along with Yama's followers, fierce-forms, grim-visaged and terrific. And he saw corporeal beings undergoing torments and pain, and emitting loud cries and sharp shrieks; preyed on by worms and fell dogs: and uttering words capable of striking pain and terror into the heart (of the hearer): and people swimming in the Vaitarani profusely running blood; and momentarily burning with hot sands; unrighteous wights pierced in a wood of asipatra, (plunged) in Raurava, in the river of borate of soda; and (cut) with razor-edges; asking for drinks; and afflicted with hunger and thirst; converted into corpses, lean, woe-begone, and pallid with hair flowing loosely; having dust and filth (on their bodies), and running about distressfully with dry forms; on the way saw Rāvana by hundreds and by thousands. Rāvana also saw some in front of houses engaged in merry-making with songs and strains of instruments, as the fruit of their pious acts; and (saw) the giver of kine regaling themselves with milk; the dispenser of rice, feeding on the same, the bestower of abodes, enjoying mansions, as the fruit of their several acts; and persons living with damsels decked with gold and gems and jewels; and other pious folks, flaming in their native energy, all these saw Rāvana lord of Rākşasas. And by his might that mighty one delivered those that were being tormented by their wicked acts. On being liberated by that Rākṣasa the tennecked one, those creatures in a moment began to enjoy their release, that had come to them without thought or suspense. And on the dead being delivered by the magnanimous Rākşasa, the guards of the dead, getting enraged, rushed at the Rākşasa sovereign. There arose a mighty clamour from all sides; from the heroic warriors of the king of righteousness rushing (all around.) And those heroes by hundreds and by thousands assailed (Puspaka) with prāsas, and bludgeons, and darts and maces, and spears and tomaras. And swiftly swarming like bees, they began to break the seats, blocks, daises and gateways (of the car.) In that conflict Pușpaka presided over by divine energy, incapable of being destroyed by virtue of Brahma power, being broken, resumed its former shape. Countless were the soldiers of that highsouled one consisting hundreds and thousands of heroic warriors, (ever) forward for fight. According to the measure of their might his (Rāvana's) councillors great heroes all, as well as the ten-faced one himself with might and main, fought with trees and crags and hundreds of blocks of buildings. And those councillors of the lord of Räkşasas, assailed with every kind of weapons, with their persons bathed in blood, fought fiercely. And O large-armed the exalted councillors of Yama and Răvaņa sore assailed each other with And leaving the councillors alone the highly powerful warriors of Yama rushed against and Daśānana* with a shower of spears. *Ravana. And then pierced through and through by those weapons, with his person covered with blood, the Rākṣasa king appeared like a flowering Kinśuka in Pușpaka. * *This simile is peculiarly appropriate and beautiful. Puspaka, the name of Ravana's car, means composed of flowers; and this signification shining one arms. a askance, as it were, over the direct sense of the sentence, heightens the delight the reader feels on imagining the principal figure. "Rāvana seated in Puspaka, covered with blood, looked likeblossoming Kinsuka.' Thereat that powerful one, by virtue of his mastery over weapons, began to hurl darts and maces, prāsas and spears and tomaras and crags and trees. That terrific shower of trees, rocks and arms, alighted on the army of Yama (fighting) on the earth. And snapping those weapons and resisting (those volleys of) arms, they smote at the Räkșasa fighting alone by hundreds and thousands. And encompassing him even as clouds encompass mountain, they rendered (Ravana) inert by means of Bhindipālas and darts. And with his mail torn open, his anger raging fiercely, and covered with blood streaming over his person, he, forsaking, his car, stood upon the ground. Then furnished with his bow and holding his shafts, (Ravana) regaining his senses in a short time, increased in energy and stood in the field like the finisher. Now fixing the divine Pāśupata on his bow, and saying to them, 'stay! stay!' he drew that bow. And enraged, (Ravana) resembling Rudra himself, in fight drawing his bow to his car, discharged that shaft even as Sankara had discharged at Tripura. And the appearance of the shaft was like an extinguishing fire in summer with smoke with flames, burning up a forest. And garlanded with glory that shaft followed byghosts,* in that encounter; rushed on, burning to ashes the loose bushes and trees lying in its way. *The instrument being Siva's, it naturally was followed by ghosts as his attendants. And burnt up by its energy, the most of Vaivasvata fell down in the field like to banners of Mahendra. Thereat the Räksasa of terrific prowess along with his councillors began to set up tremendous shouts; as if making the earth tremble.