Rama having said this, Laksmana, the slayer of enemies, burning in his native effulgence, said. O foremost of kings, this ancient account of the ascetic Vasiştha and the king Nimi is highly surprising and wonderful. But Nimi is a Ksatriya king and a hero besides although initiated he did not forgive the highsouled Vasiştha. Being thus accosted Rāma, the Kșatriya-chief, said to the effulgent Lakşmaņa conversant with all Sastras. O hero, forgiveness is not to be seen in all men. O Saumitri, do you hear attentively, the unbearable anger which was you hear attentively, the unbearable anger which was forgiven by the king Yayāti resorting to the quality of goodness. Yayāti, the enhancer of the prosperity of cities, was the son of Nahusa. He had two beautiful wives, one of whom was Sarmistha, grand daughter of Aditi, the daughter of Vrsaparvan. She was the more beloved of the two; his other spouse was Devayāni, grand daughter of Ušanas. She was not liked by her husband. Both of them gave birth to a son each and both the sons were beautiful and attentive. Puru was born of Śarmisthā and Yadu of Devayāni. Puru was the favourite son of the king, both on account of his mother and of his personal graces, Thereat Yadu, greatly sorry, said to his mother. Born in the race of the illustrious Bhārgava of unwearied actions, you are going tough mental afflictions and unbearable insults; therefore, O mother, let us both enter into fire. Let the king spend many nights with Śarmişthā, the daughter of a demon. You may withstand the insults but I shall never broke them. Permit me, I shall, in sooth, renounce my life. The son having, weepingly and distressingly, said this, Devayāni was greatly engaged and thought of her father. As soon as he was thought of by his daughter Bhargava speedily came there and beholding her senseless and deprived from joy said "Daughter, what is the matter? The effulgent father having addressed his daughter repeatedly in this wise, Devayāni, enraged, replied, O foremost of ascetics, I shall either enter into fire water or drink poison, by no means I shall preserve this life of mine. You do not know of the miseries and insults I have been subject to. O Brāhmaṇa, when a tree is neglected, those who live thereon are also distressed. The king having disregarded me, forsooth you have also been neglected. Hearing the words of his daughter, Bhārgava, being enraged said to the king Yayāti. You are vicious-minded, O son of Nahusa; you have dishonoured me and therefore in your youth shall be subject to decrepitude and infirmities of age. Having thus imprecated the curse and consoled his sorrowful daughter the highly illustrious Rși Bhārgava repaired to his own habitation. Having thus conferred solace to his daughter that leading Brahmana, effulgent as the son, returned therefrom.