Hearing the wondrous words of the great saint Kumbhayoni, Rāma, out of great curiosity and importance of the subject, again asked him, saying. O Brahmana, why was that dense forest, in which the king Sveta of Vidarbha used to perform hard penances, divested of birds and animals? And how did he proceed to that forest devoid of men and animals for undergoing penances? I wish to hear the truth. Hearing the words of Rāma stricken with curiosity, the highly effulgent saint Agastya said. O Rāma, formerly in the golden age, Manu was the king. His son was ikṣvāku. Ha. ing instaned the irrepressible Iksvāku, Manu said: 'By you the lord over creatures.' Saying so be it Ikşvāku accepted the command. There upon greatly delighted Manu said to his son. I have been highly pleased with you. For sooth you shall become a very liberal price. You shall govern the subjects meting out proper punishment to them, but do not punish them without any fault. If the punishment, which a king inflicts upon the guilty, be just it becomes the instrumental in taking the giver to heaven. Therefore, O my son having large arms, be particularly studious as regards punishment for thereby you shall acquire great piety. Having in this wise advised Ikşvāku Manu delightedly repaired to the region Brahmā. After Manu's departure towards the heaven, the effulgent Ikşavku thought of the means for creating progeny. Thereupon performing many pious rites Manu's son engendered a hundred sons. O descendant of Raghu, the youngest of all those sons became stupid and ignorant and did not respect his elder brothers. And thinking that he should therefore be punished he named this son 'Danda.' Thereupon finding no other province worthy of Danda he allotted the region between Vihdhya and Saivala to him. Danda became king of that picturesque valley. And having reared a fine city there he named it as Madhumanta and appointed śukrācārya of firm views as his priest. Having thus established his kingdom, Danda, with his priest, began to lord over it filled with healthy and delighted people like to the lord of celestials in their region. O Rāma, like to Mahendra governing his kingdom of heaven under the guidance of Brhaspati, the preceptor of celestials, Danda, the grandson of Manu, governed his own kingdom with the help of Uśanas.