There upon on the completion of the twelfth year, Satrughna, with few servants, soldiers and followers, desired to proceed to Ayodhyā protected by Rama. Having prevented his minister and leading generals he proceeded with one hundred chariots and cavalry. And having counted seven halting stations on his way, the highly illustrious descendant of Raghu, Satrughna, arrived at the hermitage of Valmiki. And having bowed to the feet of the leading Muni, that foremost of men took from his hands water to wash feet and Arghya and accepted his hospitality. The great ascetic Valmiki addressed to the high-souled Śatrughna many sweet word. Having referred first Lavana's destruction, he said: Having slain Lavana you have performed a very hard work. O gentle one, O foremost of men, Lavana had slain in conflict many hundred highly powerful kings with their army and conveyances. at to And you have easily slain that vicious-souled Rākşasa, Lavaņa. By your prowess the whole world has been divested of fear. With great difficulty Rāma had slain Rāvana but without any trouble whatsoever you have accomplished this mighty work, Lavaņa being slain, the celestials have been greatly delighted-what more the well-being of the whole universe and all creatures has been brought about. O Rāghava, O foremost of men, being present in the assemblage of Vāsava I duly witnessed your combat. O Śatrughna, I too have been greatly delighted I therefore smell your crown for this is the best expression of love. Saying this the high-minded Vālmīki smelled his crown and made arrangements for his reception as well as that of his followers. After meals, Satrughna, the foremost of men, listened to themes relating to Rāma and set musical notes. Those themes were composed describing the early actions of Rāma. They were composed in Sanskrit, set to the tune of a musical instrument, adorned with all the marks of vocal music and arranged in accompaniment with notes. Śatrughna, the foremost of men, heard them from the beginning to the end, pregnant with truth and composed of those words. And on hearing it he was beside himself with joy and his eyes were full of tears. And remaining stunned for some time and regaining his sense afterwards he began to breathe hard out of excess of surprise. He heard in that song, of pasi events as things passing on. And hearing it, his followers, with their heads down and sorrowfully said: Wonder; and saying this they began to converse with one another: Alas! Where are we? Is this a dream? WE have been hearing at this hermitage what we had not seen before. What wonder, that in a dream we hear such an excellent song. Being in this wise greatly surprised they said to Satrughna. O foremost of men, do you ask particularly, about this, Vālmīki, the foremost of ascetics. They being all thus struck with curiosity, Satrughna said: It is not proper for us, O You soldiers, to question him in this way. There are many such wonders in the hermitage of this ascetic. It is not therefore becoming to ask him about this our of curiosity. Having thus addressed the soldiers and bowed to the ascetic, Satrughna, the descendant of Raghu, entered his own quarter.