Hearing the words of the highly effulgent Rama, Laksmana, conversant with discriminative knowledge, replied with folded hands, saying. "O Kakutstha, it is for a very simple folly that the two Brāhmaṇas imprecated that curse upon the king Nrga, dreadful as the rod of Yama. May I ask you, O foremost of men, what did that king say to the Brāhmaṇas when he saw thus imprecated? Where to Rāma replied saying:-O gentle one, hear, what the king Nrga said when imprecated. Hearing of the departure of the Brāhmaṇas he sent for his priest, minister, the citizens and subjects and filled with sorrow said: "Do you all hear attentively my words. Having imprecated a dreadful curse upon me the jolly saint Nārada and the ascetic Parvata have speedily, like the wind, repaired to the region of Brahmă. Do you therefore even today, place the prince Vasu on the throne, and let the architects prepare ap leasant den for me. Living therein I shall waste the curse of the Brāhmaṇas. Let the architects dog one den to protect me against the rains, one against the affliction of the winter and one against the distresses of summer. Let them enhance the picturesqueness of those dens by planting many trees having profuse branches and fruits and flowers. As long as time shall not change so long I shall spend my days happily in the den. For a half league on all sides around me let flower trees be planted. Having made those arrangements and placed Vasu on the throne the king Nļga said:-“Do not leave the path of morality, O my son, and do you duly govern the subjects according to the custom of the Ksatriyas. You have seen, with your own eyes, the curse that the Brāhmaṇas have given me being enraged for a very trifling folly of mine. Do you not repent for me. My son, time is the lord of happiness and sorrow; it is by the influence of time that I have fallen into such a disaster. Creatures must meet with what is kept in store by destiny; they must go where they are bound for and they must acquire what is set apart for them. Pristine actions are the root of all these; so, be not sorry, O my son. O foremost of men, having given this advice to his son, the highly illustrious king Nțga proceeded to live in the sweet fragrant den. Having entered the den filled with many jewels the high-souled king began to spend his days in the satisfaction of the curse imprecated by the two Brāhmaṇas.