Hearing those wondrous words of Lakşmaņa Rāma was greatly delighted and said. O you having an auspicious look, you are gifted with great intellect and after my heart; a friend like you is rare at such a time. But O beautiful Saumitrī, do you, apprised of my intention, carry out my words. O gentle son of Sumitrā, for not looking to state business for these days I have been pierced to the very vitals. Do you therefore call here men, or women, priests or councillors who have come for business. For sooth do a king falls into the dreadful bell where the wind does not blow, who does not daily look into his state affairs. I have heard, O foremost of men, that there lived in the days of yore a highly illustrious, truthful and pure-minded king, ever devoted to the Brahmanas, by the name Nrga. Once on a time at the sacred pilgrimage of Puşpaka that king conferred upon the Brāhmaṇas one Koți of kine with calves adorned with golden ornaments. Accidentally on that occasion, a cow with calf belonging to a poor Brāhmaṇa, living upon law means, was given away along with other kine. Undergoing hunger and thirst, the master of that cow travelled for a long time in many places in search of it. Thereupon having reached the province of Kanakhala he espied his own cow in the house of a Brāhmaṇa. The cow was well kept and the young one was grown up. Thereupon the Brāhmaṇa called the cow by the name given by him saying “Sabalā, come." The cow heard that and recognising the voice of the Brāhmaṇa followed him. And he preceded her burning like fire. And the Brāhmaṇa, in whose house the cow so long remained, speedily pursued her and approaching the ascetic said. “This cow is mine. The king Nrga conferred this upon me.” So there arose a great quarrel between the two learned Brāhmaṇas. And thus quarrelling they both approached him who had given away the cow. And though they waited for a long time at the gate they did not obtain permission to enter the palace. Thereat both of them were greatly enraged and imprecated dreadful curses, saying Since you have not granted us an interview though we have been waiting here for a long time, you shall, by our curse, remain invisible, being a lizard. You shall in this state live in a den for many hundred and thousand years. When Vişņu assuming a human person shall be born in the Vasudeva family of Yādavas and enhance their glory he shall liberate you from the curse. Immediately before the advent of the Kali Yuga the Rși Nara Nārāyaṇa gifted with great prowess shall descend upon earth to relieve her of the burden. Having thus imprecated the curse upon the king the Rșis became silent. The cow was old and weak so they both, with mutual consent, conferred that upon another Brāhmaṇa. O Lakşmaņa, the king Nțga is still suffering from that dreadful curse. It is the king's folly that is manifest from the mutual disagreement of the workers. Do you bring them all speedily to me who have come for business. For, sooth shall the kings profit by the just administration. Do you therefore go in person, O Lakşmaņa and see who has come for business.