Having thus addressed his both brothers, Rāma, the descendant of Kākutstha of unmitigated prowess, again said to Laksmana, in words pregnant with morality. O Laksmana, having invited Vasistha, the foremost of twice-born ones, conversant with all the rites of Aśvamedha, Vāmadeva, Jābāli, and Kaśyapa and consulted with them duly I shall set free a horse gifted with all marks. Hearing the words of Rama, Laksmana, of unmitigated prowess, invited all those Brāhmaṇas and approached Rāma. Seeing them, Rāma saluted them touching their feet. And the Brāhmaṇas too, beholding the irrepressible celestial, like Rāghava, welcomed him with blessings. The.. upon Rama, with folded hands, asked of those leading twice-born ones, questions regarding the Aśvamedha sacrifice. And hearing the words of Rāma, they, too, saluting the deity Rudra, began to speak highly of the ceremony of horse-sacrifice. And being informed from the Brāhmaṇas of many unheard of virtues of Aśvamedha, Rāma was greatly delighted. And according to their desire he said to Lakşmaņa:— you having long arms, do you soon send an emissary to the high-souled Sugrīva, communicating to him 'Do you come here to enjoy festivities in the company of all those highly powerful monkeys and hears under you; may good betide you. See that Vibhīşaņa of unequalled prowess, the king of Räkşasas, encircled by his followers coursing at will, may be present at the horse sacrifice. Let the great kings, wishing my welfare with their followers be present at the sacrifice. O Laksmana, do you also invite carefully, for witnessing the ceremony, other pious foreign kings who are friendly to me. O you having long arms, do you also invite the Rșis, having asceticism for their wealth and other pious Brāhmaṇas living in various provinces with their wives. Do you also invite actors and songsters. Do you order that a spacious, sacrificial ground may be made on the banks of the river Gomati in the Naimișa forest, O you having long arms, that part of the country is best suited and holy. And let ceremonies, invoking peace, be celebrated everywhere. O you conversant with piety, do you soon invite hundreds of subjects. so that they all, having witnessed the ceremony in the Naimiņa forest, may return delighted and honoured. O you having long arms, let Bharata go before with a million of beasts carrying rice, sessamun seed, Kindney bean, Chickpea, pulse, Masha (a sort of Kindney bean) salt, oil, clarified butter and a hundred koti of silver and golden coins. Let merchants, to set up shops on the way, actors, dancers, cooks, and many youthful females follow Bharata. Let soldiers go before him. And let the highly illustrious Bharata, with children, old men, Brahmanas, citizens, servants, cashiers, mothers, wives and the golden image of my wife to be initiated at the sacrifice, go before. According to the command of Rāma, Bharata, with Śatrughna, made arrangements for highly valuable quarters, food, drink and clothes. And the highly powerful monkeys with Sugrīva and Brāhmaṇas engaged in the work of distribution. And Vibhīşaņa, surrounded by various Räkşasas and females, engaged in the service of the high-souled Rsis intent on hard penances.