Hearing the words of the great saint, Rāma, to perform the evening adoration, went to the pond filled with Apsarās; and having performed the worship he again returned to the hermitage of the high-souled Agastya. Thereupon the great ascetic offered him food many substantial Kanda, roots, Osadhis and the holy Sali rice. And taking that nectar-like cooked rice, Rāma, the foremost of men, was greatly delighted and spent the night there. Having got up in the morning and performed the necessary ceremonies he approached the ascetic to bid farewell, and saluting him said: O great Rșis, I do crave for your permission to go to my own habitation. Do you permit me. O high-souled one, I have been highly favoured and blessed by beholding you. I shall come again some other time to free myself from sins. Hearing those wondrous words of Rāma, Agastya having asceticism for his wealth, delightedly said. O Rāma these words, set in charming letters, are highly wonderful. O descendant of Raghu, you are the purifier of all creatures. O Rāma, one, who beholds you, even for a moment, becomes pure and worthy of repairing to heaven. Even the leading deities worship him. Those on earth, who cast dreadful looks on you, are immediately brought under the control of Yama and are constrained to go to hell. O foremost of Raghus, you are the purifier of all creatures; people become perfect even if they only chant your glories. Kākutstha, do you now go with ease and fearlessly, and govern your kingdom righteously. O Rāma you are the refuge of the world. Hearing the words of the great and truthful Rşis the wise Rāma, with folded hands, saluted him and other Rșis, and with serene air ascended the golden car Puşpaka. Like to the immortals welcoming the Chief of the deities the Rșis showered blessings upon Rāma from all sides while he was proceeding. And seated on golden car, he appeared like the moon, after the expiry of the rainy season. Thereupon being welcomed by the villagers on his way he reached Ayodhyā at noon and descended at the middle apartment. And having permitted the charming chariot coursing at will to go away he said: Do you now go; may good betide you. Thereupon Rama said to the warder, Do you speedily go and having communicated my arrival to Lakşmaņa and Bharata bring them here.