Having thus described at length and finished the story of Vſtra's destruction Lakşmaņa said:-The mighty Vţtra, the terror of the deities, being slain, and the slayer Indra being assailed by the sin of Brahmanicide, was bewildered and at a loss to ascertain his duty. Being at his wit's end he repaired to the other side of the Lokāloka mountain and remained there for some time like a coiled serpent. And again in consequence of Indra's separation, the whole world was agitated, the forests grew dried and the earth was devoid of water. On account of the rivers being dried up and want of rain all creatures grew impatient. In this wise, the celestials being stricken with anxiety, according to the previous command of Visnu, engaged in celebrating the sacrifice. With Rșis and Rtvikas they fearfully approached Purandra; and beholding him assailed by the sin of Brahmanicide, they with him, at their head, engaged in celebrating a horse-sacrifice. After the sacrifice the sin issued out of Indra's person and addressing the high-souled deities said: Do you all ascertain, where I shall go now. There upon highly pleased the deities replied: Do you divide yourself into four portions. Hearing the words of the high-souled celestials she divided herself into four parts and wishing for a separate habitation said:-By one portion, I shall at my pleasure, live in rivers full of water during rains and shall obstruct people from going there. By my second portion I shall live perpetually on lands as Uşara;* I tell you the truth. By my third portion I shall for three nights every month live in youthful women proud of their youth-So that men might not live with them. And by my fourth portion I shall enter into the persons of those who shall slay innocent Bråhmaņas. *(A spot with saline soil.) Hearing those words the deities said What you have said shall be carried out. Do what you wish. There upon the celestials, delighted, adored their Chief divested of sins and crowned with victory. And Väsava being installed again on the throne, the whole universe was at rest. There upon Indra worshipped Vişnu in the shape of that wonderful sacrifice. O descendant of Raghu, such is the power of a horse-sacrifice. O honourable king, therefore, you may perform this sacrifice. Hearing the charming words of Lakşmaņa, the energetic and high-souled king, Rāma, powerful like Indra, was greatly delighted.