Having vanquished Yama, the foremost of celestials, Rāvana delighting in warfare, saw his adherents. Then seeing Rāvaņa, with his person bathed in blood, bettered by the weapon discharged at him, they were seized with surprise. And hailing him with victory, the councillors headed by Mārīca, having been encouraged by Ravana, ascended Puspaka. Then the Rākṣasa entered the region of waters the abode of Daityas and serpents, well protected by Varuna. Arriving at Bhogavati the city governed by Vāsuki, he brought the serpents under subjection and then, delighted, bent his course to the palace Manimayi. There dwelt the Nivātakavacas, who had obtained boons. Those Daityas were possessed of prowess and endowed with strength, carrying various weapons, breathing high spirits and invincible in battle. And the Dānavas and Rāks asas growing enraged fell to raving each other with darts and tridents, Kuliśas and axes and pațțiśas. And as they fought one entire year passed away and neither side obtained victory or was worsted. Then that way of the triune sphere, that God, the undeteriorating Great-father, swiftly presented himself on the scene mounted on his excellent car. Making the Nivātakavacas desist from battle the ancient great-father spoke in clear words. Even the celestials and the Asuras are not able to vanquish this Rāvaņa in battle; nor can the Dänavas backed by the gods can destroy you. Do you therefore turn your minds to making friendship with the Rākşasas. All interests are forsooth the common possession of friends. Thereat Rāvaņa made friendship with the Nivātakavacas in the presence of Fire; and then rejoiced greatly. And duly honoured (by then) Daśānana passed there a year, without any feeling of that place being different from his own home: and spent his time agreeably. Having learnt there a hundred sorts of illusion, he directed his course to Rasātala, searching for the city of the lord of waters. And then going to the city named Asma ruled by the Kālakāyas, (Rāvana) slew the Kālakāyas endowed with terrific strength; and then with his sword cut off his brother-in-law,' the husband of Śūrpanakhā, he mighty Vidyutjibha possessed of terrific strength; as the Rākşasa in the encounter was licking (the limbs of Ravana's followers). Having vanquished him, he, in a moment, destroyed four hundred Daityas. And then the lord of Rākṣasas saw the grand abode of Varuņa resembling a mass of white clouds, and effulgent like to Kailāśa itself;—and also saw the milkconserving Surabhi stationed there; from the streams of whose milk was produced the ocean named Ksiroda. There Ravana saw the mother of kine and the foremost of bulls; from whom spring that maker of night the mild-beaming-moon; taking refuge under whom subsist the prime saints and those living on froth, the froth' (of milk): and wherefrom sprang ambrosia as well as the Svadha of Svădhă-subsisting ones,' even her that go with human beings under the name of Surabhi. 1. A typical instance of the lengths which the selfdenial of the Hindu sages went is furnished by the case of a certain class of ascetics, who, abstaining from every other kind of food, lived solely on the froth of milk, falling off from the udders after the calf had drunk it. This froth-drinking, in preference to drinking the milk itself was dictated by a motive of charity viz., not to deprive the calf of her legitimate fare. 2. The ancestral manes. Having gone round this wonderful (cow), Rāvaņa entered the exceedingly dreadful abode of Varuna) guarded by various kinds of forces. Then he beheld Varuna's splendid mansion, streaming with hundreds of torrents, resembling a mass of autumnal clouds, and always wearing a delightful aspect. And killing the generals of the forces, after having been resisted by them, he addressed the warriors, saying, 'Do you speedily acquaint your king with this "Rāvana has come here seeking battle." Do you give him fight, or say with joined hands. 'I have been defeated by you, and then you have no fear whatever?' In the meantime the sons and grandsons of the high-souled Varuņa, as well as those of Puskara issued forth. They, endowed with every virtue, accompanied by their own forces, yoked cars furnished with the effulgence of the rising Sun, and coursing at the desire of their riders. Then there took place a mighty encounter capable of making people's down stand on end, between the sons of the lord of waters, and those of the intelligent Rāvana. And in a short while that entire host of Varuņa was brought down by the highly powerful councillor of that Raksasa Daśagrīva. Seeing their own forces brought to straits in the conflict and driven back in the fight with networks of shafts, and down on the ground and seeing Rävaņa in Puspaka, Varuņa's sons swiftly shot into the welkin with their fleet-footing cars. After they had attained a station of equal vantage (with Ravana) in the sky,* great was the encounter that then took place in the sky, resembling the encounter of the deities and the Dānavas. *Ere the Rāvana was fighting on Puspaka, while Varuna's sons fought on the earth. And turning away Rāvana in the conflict by means of shafts resembling fire, they, exceedingly rejoiced, emitted various shouts. Then Mahodara, enraged on seeing the king sore pressed, casting off fear, and wrought up with rage, began to go around, eager for fight. And smit with his mace by Mahodara, Varuna's sons coursing at will and resembling the wind in velocity) dropped down to the ground. Having slain those warriors and also those horses of Varuna's sons (Mahodara) seeing them lying down deprived of their cars swiftly sent up a tremendous cheer. And destroyed by Mahodara, their cars and horses together with their foremost charioteers, lay down on the earth. Then forsaking their cars, the sons of highsouled Varuna, stationed in the sky, did not experience any pain* by virtue of their native power. *By virtue of their immortal origin. Having stretched their bows they pierced Mahodara, and then, all together they greatly angered prevented Rāvana. As the clouds, with a thousand torrents cleave a mountain, so they, with dreadful shafts, resembling thunderbolts and discharged off the bows, pierced him. Thereupon the Ten-necked (demon), excited with wrath like the fire of dissolution, pierced them to their very vitals with highly dreadful arrows. And stationed above, he showered on them variegated maces, Bhallas* Pattisas, Saktis and huge ſataghnis. Though pierced through and through these valiant foot-soldiers rushed forth. *An arrow with a crescent-shaped head. Thereupon with the arrows the infantry were greatly exhausted like to young elephants six years old, fallen in mire. Beholding Varuņa's sors thus worn out and over-whelmed the highly powerful Rāvana roared in delight like to clouds. Thereupon emitting loud cries the Rākşasa, like to a cloud, with a downpour of diverse shafts, destroyed the offspring of Varuna. There upon they were all defeated and fell dead on the ground and all their followers fled away from the field of battle to their homes. Răvaņa spoke to them. “Do you communicate this to Varuņa.” Whereto his minister Prahasta replied to Rävana. O great king Varuņa's sons are slain and the lord of waters, whom you are inviting for battle, has gone to the region of Brahma, to hear songs. While the king is away, what is the use of taking trouble, O hero? And all these heroic sons (of Varuna) have been vanquished. Hearing these words and spreading his own name the lord of Rākṣasas expressing sign of joy, issued out of Varuna's abode. And returning by the way by which he had come the Raksasa, stationed in the welkin, proceeded towards Lankā. And again journeyed in the city of Aśma (the followers of Rāvana) dreadful in fight. There the Ten-necked demon beheld a highly picturesque house adorned with networks of pearls, having gateways crested Vaiduryas, golden pillars and abounding in pavements. And the stairs, of that picturesque house resembling the abode of Mahendra, covered with girdles, were made of crystal. Beholding that excellent house the highly powerful Rävaņa thought within himself “Whose is this beautiful house, resembling the summit of Meru?" Go, O Prahasta, and learn quickly whose house is this.” Thus ordered, Prahasta entered that excellent house and finding none in one apartment he at last in seventh apartment saw a flame of fire. There was a man in that flame, who, when seen, laughed aloud. Hearing that dreadful laughter Prahasta's down stood on their end. There was another man in that flame, as if in a swoon, engarlanded with golden lotuses, incapable of being looked at, like the sun, and resembling the Yama's self. Beholding that the night-ranger speedily issued out of the house and communicated it to Rāvana. Thereupon, O Rama, having descended from Pus paka, the Ten-necked demon, black as collyrium, entered that house. (Immediately) obstructing the door there stood a huge-bodied man, dreadful like Śiva his tongue was all flame, his eyes were red, rows of teeth beautiful, lips like Bimba, his form was handsome, nose dreadful, neck like a shell marked with three lines, jaws were spacious, beards thick, bone fleshy, teeth huge and his appearance was all dreadful. And taking up an iron mace he stood at the gate. Beholding him, Daśānana's hairs stood on their end his heart and body trembled. And seeing these bad omens, O Rama, he began to think within himself. He thus meditating that man said, 'What are you thinking, O Raksasa? Tell me all in confidence. I shall confer upon you the hospitality of fighting, O hero, O night-ranger.' Having said this he again spoke to Ravana, saying, 'Do you wish to enter into conflict with Bali, or what else is your intention?' Răvaņa was so overwhelmed that his hair stood on their end; but resorting to calmness he said, 'O you foremost of those skilled in speech, who resident in this house? I shall fight with him; speak out what you wish.' He again said (to Ravana) Ocean The lord of Dānavas lives here, he is highly generous, heroic, and has truth for his prowess. He is gifted with many qualities, resplendent like to Yama with mace in his hand or the newly risen sun and incapable of being defeated in conflict, impetuous, invincible, victorious, powerful, a veritable of accomplishments, sweetspeeched, supporter of the dependants, fond of preceptor and Brähmaņas, always waiting for opportune hours, gifted with high powers, truthful, of a handsome person, skilful, gifted with all accomplishments, heroic and engaged in the study of the Vedas. He sometimes walks on foot and moves about like the wind, he shines like fire and spreads heat like the sun. He travels with the gods, spirits, serpents and birds. He does not know fear; do you wish to right with him? If you do wish to fight with Bali, O lord of Raksasas, o you gifted with great energy, do you speedily enter (this house) and engage in the encounter.' Being thus addressed the Ten-necked demon entered where Bali was. Beholding the lord of Lankā, the foremost of Dănavas, resembling the flaming fire, and hard to look at like the sun, laughed. And taking that Rākş asa by the hand and placing him on his lap he said. 'O Ten-necked lord of Raksasas, O you having long arms, what desire of your may I satisfy? Do you tell me what for you have come hither.' Being thus addressed by Bali, Ravana said. I have heard, O illustrious sir, that formerly you was bound by Vişņu. Forsooth I am capable of releasing you from the bonds.' Hearing that Bali laughed and said, 'Hear, I shall relate to you what you have asked, O Rāvana. The red-hued man, who stands always at the door, by him formerly all the leading Dānavas and other powerful lords were brought into subjection by him I was also bound. He is invincible like to death; who is there on this earth that can deceive him? He, who stands at the door, is the destroyer of all beings, creator and preserver and the lord of the three worlds. You do not know him nor I do. He is identical with past, future and present and is the lord. He is Kali and he is Time, the destroyer of all beings. He is the destroyer and the creator of the three worlds, and he slays all beings mobile and immobile. And that lord of all gods again creates the universe without beginning or end. O night-ranger, he governs and preserves all sacrifices, gifts and oblations to fire. Forsooth he is the creator and the preserver of the universe, there is none so wonderful in the three worlds. O son of Pulastya, He has been guiding the former Dänavas, myself, yourself like so many beasts bound with ropes. Vrtra, Danu, Suka, Sambhu, Nisumbha, Sumbha, Kalanemi, Prahlada and others, Kuta, Vairocana, Mrdu, Yamala, Arjuna, Kansa, Kait abha, and Madhu used to impart heat like the sun, appear resplendent, like the rays, move about like air and pour showers like Indra. All of them celebrated many a sacrifice and were engaged in austere penances. All of them were high-souled and considered the practice of Yoga as a great virtue. Having got by an immense accession of wealth they enjoyed many pleasures, made many gifts, celebrated many sacrifices, studies (many lores) and governed their subjects. They were all protectors of their own kith and kin and slayers of enemies; and in battle, there was none equal to them in the three worlds. They were all heroic, of a high pedigree, versed in all sacred writings, proficient in all branches of learning and indomitable in warfare. Having defeated thousands of celestials in conflict, the high-souled ones conquered the regions. They were always engaged in those works which were not liked by the celestials and used to maintain their own men. They were all inflated with pride and haughtiness and effulgent like the newly-risen sun. The glorious Hari, the lord Vișņu, know only how to bring about their destruction who perpetually assail the celestials. He creates all these and He, bringing about their destruction, exist in Himself at the time of dissolution. These highly powerful and highsouled Dänava chiefs, assuming shapes at will, have been destroyed by the glorious God. Besides, all these heroes, who have been heard of as being irrepressible and invincible in warfare, have been discomfited by the wondrous power of Kștānta.” Having said this the lord of Dānavas again spoke to the lord of Rākşasa-'O hero, O you gifted with great strength, take that flaming discus which you behold and come to my side. I shall then relate to you the means of eternal liberation. Do what I have told you, O you having long arms. Delay not O Rāvana." Hearing this the highly powerful Raksasa proceeded, laughing, O descendant of Raghu where that celestial kundala was. Rāvana, proud of his prowess, easily took it up but could not move it by any means. And being ashamed that highly powerful one again attempted. As soon as it was uplifted the Rākşasa dropped down on ground, bathed in a pool of blood, like to an uprooted Sāla tree. In the meantime there arose a sound from Pus paka, and the councillors of that lord of Rākşasas cried aloud. Regaining his sense that Rākṣasa rose up in a moment and lowered his head in shame. Bali said to him. "Do you come, O foremost of Raksasas and hear my words. O hero, the kundala, crested with jewels, which you did assay to take up, is an ornament for the ear of one my forefathers. This fell here on the ground, O you gifted with great strength; another kundala was thrown on the summit of the mountain. Besides these kundalas his crown was also cast off on the ground before the altar during the encounter. Formerly none bore enmity towards my ancestor Hiranyakasipu, Time Death, or illness. He had no death during the day, night, evening or morning. O foremost of Rākşasas, he did not experience death from any weapon whatsoever. He created a dreadful enmity with Prahlada. This conflict having taken place with the high-souled and heroic Prahlāda there rose up a dreadful figure of manlion, a terror to all, O foremost of Raksasas. And that terrible figure casting his looks about, all the worlds were over-whelmed. Thereupon taking him up with his arms he destroyed him with his nails. The person, who is standing at the door, is this supreme Väsudeva, void of passion. I shall now relate to you the words of that supreme God; do you hear, if your heart is filled with spiritual thoughts. The person, who is standing at the door, has brought into subjection, is thousands of years, a thousand of Indras, an Ayuta of Gods and hundreds of great Rşis.” Hearing these words Rāvana said. (I have seen) Krtanta, the lord of spirits with Death himself, with hairs standing erect. Serpents and scorpions are his hairs, his tongue is hard as the lightening, his teeth are dreadful, his eyes are red and is gifted with great velocity and a terror to all beings. He is incapable of being looked at like to the sun, unconquerable is battle and is the chastiser of the sinners. He even was defeated by me in conflict. There I did not feel the least pain or fear, O lord of Danavas. I do not know (this person) it behove you to give me an account. Hearing the words of Rāvaņa Bali said, "He is the lord Hari, Nārāyana the protector of the three worlds. He is Ananta,' Kapila-Jisnu' and the highly effulgent Manlion. He is Kratudhămas Sudhāman and has the dreadful mace in his hand. He is like to the twelve Adityas, Purāna and the excellent Puruşa; he is like to the red clouds, the lord of gods and the best god. 1. Lit, etermal endless. Here it is the name of Visnu. 2. A celebrated Muni or saint, the founder of the Sāṁkhya system of philosophy; the son of Kardama by Devahuti and according to some an incarnation of Visnu. 3. Lit-victorious, or triumphant, aname of Visnu. 4. Narasinha-a name of Visnu. When sprayed for by Prahlada to appear from a pillar Vişnu came out in the shape of man-lion and slew Hiranyakaśipu— the king of Daityas and father of Prahlada. 5. Protector of sacrifices-a name of Visnu. 6. Here it is evidently one of the names of Vişņu. In Visnu Purana. Book I, Chap. X. we find another account, Vireyas, married to Gauri, had Sudaman, a Lokapāla, or ruler of the east quarter, as his son. O you having long arms, he is encircled by flames, a great devotee and fond devotees, this lord preserve the universe and has created it. And he, gifted with great strength, brought about destruction in the form of Time; and this Hari, with a discus in his hand, is sacrifice and is being worshipped in sacrifices. He is at one with all gods, all beings, all worlds and all knowledge. He is all forms, the great form, Baladeva and has long arms; he slay heroes, has heroic eyes, is imperishable and the preceptor of the three worlds. All these sages, who long for final liberation, meditate upon him, he, who can know this Puruşa, is not sullied with sins. By remembering him, hearing of him and worshipping him, every thing can be obtained.” Hearing these words of Bali, the highly powerful Rāvana, having his eyes reddened with ire, issued out with uplifted weapon. Beholding him thus excited, the lord Hari, with a club in his hand, thought within himself, O Rama! “I shall not slay this sinner for the satisfaction of Brahmā” and assuming his own shape disappeared. And not beholding that Puruşa there, the night-ranger issued out of the abode of Varuna, shouting with joy. He went away by the way he had come. Thereupon meditating for sometime the lord of Larikå went to the region of the sun and spent the night upon the picturesque summit of the mount Meru. And ascending the car Pușpaka having the velocity of the sun's steeds, he, by various courses, went on and beheld the glorious sun. gifted with all radiance, purifying all, wearing golden Keyūras and clothes crested with jewels. His beautiful countenance was adorned with a pair of excellent Kundalas; and his person was embellished with Keyūras, Nişkas and garlands of red lotuses. His body was anointed with red sandal and was radiant with a thousand rays. And beholding that foremost of gods, the sun, that primeval deity, without end or middle, having Uccaiśravas as his carrier, the witness of the world and the lord of the universe, the foremost of Raksasas, being overwhelmed with his rays, said to Prahasta, “O minister, do you proceed at my behest and communicate to him my orders, 'Rāvana has arrived here for battle, do you offer him fight.' Or say 'I have been defeated.' Do you follow one of theseextremes." Hearing those words that Rākșasa proceeded towards the sun and beheld two gate-keepers, Pingala and Dandī by name. And communicating to them the resolution of Rāvana he stood there silent, being over-powered with the rays of the sun. And approaching the sun, Dandi communicated to him all this. Hearing of Rāvana's intention from Dandi the intelligent sun, the enemy of night, wisely said to him, ''Do you proceed, O Dandi; either defeat Rāvaņa or tell him 'I have been defeated.' Do whatever you wish.” Hearing those words he approached the high-souled Rāksasa and communicated to him what the sun had said. Hearing the words of Dandi the lord of Rākşasas trumpeted his own victory and went away. Having spent the night on the picturesque summit of the mount Meru and thinking (for some time) the powerful lord of Lārkā went to the region of the moon. (And he saw a person) proceeding, seated on a car, sprinkled with heavenly unguents and attended upon by Apsarās. And worn out with the satisfaction of desire he was being kissed there. Seeing such a person his curiosity was greatly excited. And beholding a Rși there he said to him, “Welcome you are, O celestial saint. Indeed you have come at a proper season. Who is this shameless Wight that is going is seated on a car and attended by Apsarās? Does he not perceive his object of fear?" Being thus addressed by Ravana, Parvata said, "O my child, O you gifted with great intellect, Hear I shall describe to you the truth. By him all the worlds have been conquered and Brahmă has been propitiated. And he is now proceeding to that excellent region full of bliss for obtaining final liberation. As all the worlds have been conquered by you by virtue of your asceticism, O lord of Raksasas, so is he going, undoubtedly performing many pious actions and drinking Soma juice. O foremost of Raksasas, you are heroic, and have truth for your prowess. The powerful are never offended with the pious.” Thereupon he espied an excellent, huge car, filled with all radiance and effulgence and the sound of musical instruments and singing. (And Rāvaņa said, “O great Rșis, who is that person, gifted with great effulgence, who go surrounded by charming songsters, dancing-girls and Kinnaras?" Hearing his words Parvata, the foremost of saints, again said, "He is heroic and a great warrior, he never return unsuccessful from a battlefield. Having performed many heroic feats in battle, and slain many enemies, he has been assailed with many wounds in fighting and has renounced his life for his master. Having destroyed many in battle, he has at last been slain by his enemies and is perhaps now going either to the region of Indra or to some such place. This best of men is now being entertained by these well-versed in the are of singing and dancing.” Rāvana again said, "Who go there effulgent like to the sun?” Hearing the words of Ravana, Parvata said, "The person, resembling the full moon and wearing diverse ornaments and clothes, whom you behold, O great diverse ornaments and clothes, whom you behold, O great king, in the golden car abounding in Apasaräs, distributed gold. He, gifted with great effulgence, is now going in a swift-coursing car." Hearing the words of Parvata, Ravana said. "O foremost of Rsis, do you tell me, who, of these kings going, if prayed for, may offer me the hospitality of a battle? Forsooth you are my father; do you point out (such a man to me) O you conversant with piety." Being thus addressed, Parvata again said to Rāvana, “O great king, all these kings wish for heaven not for battle. I shall point out such a man, O great one, as shall enter into conflict with you. There is a highly powerful king, the lord of seven islands, well known by the name of Măndhāta; he shall enter into an encounter with you.” Hearing the words of Parvata, Rāvana again said, "Do you tell me, O you of great devotion, where this king resides. I shall go where lives this foremost of men.” Hearing the words of Ravana, the sage again said, "The son of Yuvanāśva has conquered the world consisting of seven islands beginning with the sea; Māndhātā, the foremost of kings, is just coming to meet him." Thereupon (Rāvana) having long arms, proud of the boon conferred upon him in the three worlds, beheld the heroic Māndhātā, the lord of Ayodhyā and the foremost of kings. The king of seven islands proceeded in a golden and well-painted car resplendent like that of Mahendra, shining in his beauty and sprinkled with celestial unguents. The Ten-necked demon said to him, “Do you give me battle.” Being thus addressed, he, laughing, said to the ten-necked demon, "If your life is not dear to you, do you fight with me, O Raksasa." Hearing the words of Māndhātă, Rāvana said, "Rāvaņa did not experience any affliction from Varuna, Kubera or Yama; why should he experience fear from you, who are a man?" Having said this, the lord of Rākşasas as if burning in ire, ordered the Rākşasas irrepressible in battle. Thereupon the ministers of the vicious-souled Ravana, highly enraged and well-skilled in warfare, began to make a downpour of arrows. Thereupon the highly powerful king Māndhātā, with sharpened shafts, assailed Prahasta, Suka Sarana, Mahodara, Virupaksa, Akampana and other foremost heroes. Prahasta covered the king with his arrows, but before they had approached him, that foremost of men shattered them into pieces. Like to fire burning down grass, the host of Rākşasas were burnt down by the king Mândhātā by means of hundreds of Bhusundis, Bhallas, Bhindipālās and Tomaras. As Kārtikeya, the son of fire, sundered the mount Krauñca with his shafts so Māndhātā, enraged, pierced Prahasta with five Tomaras gifted with great velocity. Then hurling his mace again and again resembling that of Yama, he struck, vehemently, Rāvana's car therewith. That club, resembling the lightening, vehemently descended (upon Ravana's car) and Ravana, like Sakra's banner, was speedily upset by that. Like to the rising of the waters of the salt ocean on the full moon, the king Måndhātā's joy and strength were greatly increased. Thereupon the entire Raksasa host, emitting loud cries, stood encircling on all sides the lord of Rākşasas. Thereat speedily regaining his sense, Rāvana, a terror to all people, the lord of Lankā,-greatly assailed the person of Māndhātā. And beholding that king in a swoon, the highly powerful nightrangers were greatly delighted and emitted leonine roars. Regaining his sense in a moment the king of Ayodhyā beheld his enemy worshipped by the courtiers and night-rangers. He was instantly worked up with ire; and assuming a person resplendent like that of the sun and the moon he began to slay the Räksasa host with a dreadful downpour of shafts. With his arrows and the noise thereof the entire Räksasa army were overwhelmed like the agitated deep. Thereupon there arose a dreadful conflict between men and demons. And those two heroic, high-souled and foremost of men and Rakşasas seated on warriors' seats and holding bow and daggers entered (the field). And possessed by great anger they began to assail one another with shafts, Māndhātā Rāvana and he again the king. They, being assailed by one another, were both wounded. And setting the Raudra shaft upori his bow Rāvana discharged it and Māndhatā baffled it by means of his fiery shafts. The Ten-necked demon took up the Gāndharva weapon and the king Māndhätă the Brahma weapon striking terror to all. Rävaņa then took up the celestial Pāśuapa weapon, dreadful and increasing the fright of the three worlds, obtained by him from Rudra by virtue of his rigid penances. Seeing this all animal, mobile and immobile, were stricken with terror. Thereupon trembled all the three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile begins, the celestials and all the serpents became inert. Being apprised (of this conflict) by virtue of meditation the two foremost of ascetics Pulastya and Gälava remonstrated with them in many a way and prevented the king (Māndhātā) and the foremost of Rākṣasas. Thereupon that man and demon being reconciled with one another went back by the ways they had respectively come. Those two Brāhmaṇas having departed, Rāvana, the lord of Raksasas, proceeded, at first, by the aerial way, ten thousand leagues. He then went to the excellent upper aerial region where live perpetually ganders gifted with many accomplishments. The extent thereof is also counted by ten thousand leagues and there are stationed closely three classes of clouds* namely Āgneya, Paksaja and Brahma. He then proceeded to the third excellent aerial region where perpetually reside the high-minded Siddhas and Cāraṇas and the extent whereof is also ten thousand leagues. O slayer of enemies, he then speedily proceeded to the fourth aerial region where perpetually dwell the goblins and Vinayakas. *The three classes are (1) Agnija or produced from fire (2) Pakşaja or produced in a fortnight (3) Brāhma or produced from Brāhma. He quickly went to the fifth aerial region which also extends over ten thousand Yojanas where exist Gangā, the foremost of rivers, and the elephants headed by Kumuda, who pour down waters. They sport in the waters of the Ganges and pour down her holy waters. And those waters, parched by the rays of the sun and softened by the wind, pour down holy waters and dews, O Rāghava. Thereupon that Rākṣasa went to the sixth aerial region, you gifted with high radiance, which also extends over ten thousand Yojanas and were dwells Garuda perpetually respected of his kinsmen and friends. He then went to the seventh aerial region which is ten thousand leagues above and where dwell the seven Rşis. and again going up ten thousand leagues he reached the eight aerial region where Gangā, known as the Gangă of the sky, having strong currents and sending high roars, and upheld by air, is situated on the sun's way. I shall now describe the region higher than that where resides the moon, and the extent whereof is counted by eighty thousand leagues. There dwells the moon encircled by stars and planets from whom proceed hundreds and thousands of rays which light up the worlds and conduce to the pleasure of all animals. Thereupon beholding the Ten-necked demon the moon as if burnt (him) down speedily with his cold fiery rays. And stricken with the fear of those rays his councillors could not stand them. Thereupon exclaiming his victory Prahasta said to Rāvaņa, “O king, we are destroyed by cold, so we must go away from here. The Rākşasas have been terrified by the rays of the moon; O foremost of kings, the cold rays of the moon have the natural property of fire in them." Hearing the words of Prahasta, Ravana, beside himself with wrath, having uplifted his bow and twanged it, began to assail him with Naracs. Thereupon Brahmă come speedily to the region of the moon and said, "O Ten-necked one, O you having mighty arms, O direct son of Visravas, O gentle one, do you repair hence speedily, do not oppress the moon (for) this highly effulgent king of twice-born ones wish well-being to all. I shall communicate to you a mystical incantation; He who recollects it at the time of death, does not come by it." Being thus addressed the ten-necked demon, with folded hands, said, "If you are pleased with me O god! O lord of the worlds, O you of great penances, if do you wish to communicate that incantation, do you impart it upon me, O you of great piety; reciting which, O great one, I may be released of the fear of the celestials. Forsooth, by your favour, O lord of the celestials, I shall be invincible by all the Asuras, Danavas and birds." Being thus accosted Brahmā said to the tennecked demon, “O lord of Rākşasas, do you recite it at the time of death and not every day. Taking a string of beads, you should recite this holy incantation, on which, you, O lord of Rasasas, shall be invincible, and if do you not recite it you shall not meet with success. Hear, I shall communicate to you the incantation, O foremost of Rākşasas, reciting which you shall obtain victory in the encounter. 'Salutation to you, O god, O lord of gods, O you worshipped of the celestials and Asuras. O you identical with past and future, O great god, Oyou having red eyes, you are a boy albeit, you assume the form of an old man; you wear tiger skin. O god, you are worthy of being worshipped, and the lord of the three worlds. You are Hara, Haritanemi, Yugāntadāhaka and Baladeva. You are Ganesa, Loka-Sambhu, Lokapāla, and of huge arms; you are great, the holder of a huge dare, having dreadful teeth, and the greatest of gods. You are time, the strength and have blue neck and a large belly; you are the destroyer of the celestials, the foremost of the ascetics and the lord of all created beings. You are the holder of a dart and have the bull as your emblem, are the leader, protector, the destroyer and the preserver; you have beared locks, are Mundi, Sikhandi, have a crown, and are greatly illustrious. You are the lord of sprites and goblins, the soul of all the protector of all, omniscient, the destroyer of all, the creator and the eternal preceptor. You are lord carried a kamandalu' in your hand, are the holder of a Pināka’ and Dhûrjați? you are, worthy of veneration, the most excellent OM, the first chanter of Sāman, the death, the element of death, Pāriyātra" and observant of penances. You are an ascetic, live in a cave and carried a Vina' Panava, and quiver in your hands; you are immortal and are like the newly-risen sun to behold. 1. An earthen or wooden water pot used by the ascetic and religious student. 2. The bow of Siva. A trident or three-pronged spear. 3. A name of Siva from dhur, a burden and tati, a collection; who collects or bears the burden of the three worlds. 4. The name of a mountain, apparently the central or western portion of the Vindhya chain. 5. A kind of stringed musical instrument. 6. A sort of musical instrument; a small drum of tabor. You live in a cremation ground, are the illustrious lord of Umā and above all blemishes you did uproot the eyes of Bhagadeva and teeth of Pūşā. You are the destroyer of fever, hold mace in your hand and are (the very) dissolution and time. You have got a fire-brand in your mouth, have fire as your emblem, are highly resplendent and lord of men You are mad, make people tremble, are the fourth, and most respected of men; you are a dwarf, Vămanadeva and the dwarf who circumbulates the east. You are a beggar, wear the semblance of a beggar and are by nature crooked; you did assail Indra's hands and the Vasus. You are, the season, the maker of seasons, time, honey and have honeyed eyes. You are a tree bearing fruits and blossoms, have arrows as your seat and worshipped by people of all conditions perpetually. You are the protector and the creator of the universe, the Purusa, eternal and certain; the lord of all religions, Virūpākşa, the three qualities and the protector of all beings. You are three-eyed, assume many forms and brilliant as the Ayuta suns; you are the lord of all celestials, the foremost deity and wear bearded locks having the impressions of the moon; you are connected with Brāhmaṇa, worthy of being resorted to and identical with all created beings. You blow all bugles, severest all ties; you do charm and bind (ali) and do always bring about death. You have flowery teeth, are a division, the foremost and the destroyer of all; you have dreadful beards, hold a bow, are fearful and gifted with dreadful might.' These eight hundred holy and excellent names have been uttered by me which remove all iniquities, are holy and afford shelter to those who seek for it; if do you recite them, o ten-necked one, you shall be able to destroy your enemies." Having conferred this boon upon Rāvana the grand father, sprung from lotus, speedily returned to the region of Brāhmaṇa. And having obtained the boon Råvaņa too came back. After a few days that Raksasa Ravana, the dread of all people, arrived at the banks of the western Ocean with his councillors. And on the island a person was seen bright as fire under the name of Mahājāmbūnada, seated there alone. He had a dreadful figure and was like to the fire at dissolution. And beholding that highly powerful person among men like to the chief of gods among the celestials, the moon among the planets, the lion among the Sarabhas,* the Airāvata among the elephants, the Meru among the mountains, and the Pārijāta among the trees, the ten-necked demon said, “Give me battle." Thereat his eyes became agitated like to planets and from the from the clashing of his teeth there arose a sound like the clapping of thunder-bolts. And the highly powerful Dasảnana too roared with his councillors. And with darts, Śaktis and Pațțiśas he again and again assailed that highly effulgent person, having long arms, a dreadful appearance, huge teeth, a grim figure, a conch-like neck, spacious breast, a belly like that of a frog, a countenance like that of a lion, legs like the mount Kailasa, red palms, red hands, emitting dreadful roars, huge-bodied, gifted with the velocity of mind and air, dreadful. carrying quiver, bells and chowries, encircled by a burning flame and emitting a sweet note as a net-work of Kinkiņi does, having a garland of golden lotuses bung round his neck, appearing graceful like to the Rgveda, be-decked with lotus garlands, resembling the Añjana and golden mountains. *A fabulous animal supposed to have eight legs. As the lion is not moved by the attack of wolf, the elephant by that of a bull, the Sumeru by the king of serpents and the great Ocean, by the current of a river, so that great person was not agitated and said to the ten-necked demon. "O vicious-minded night-ranger, I shall soon remove they desire for a battle." O Rāma, the might of that person was a thousand times greater than that of Rāvana which was dreadful to all the worlds. Piety and asceticism, which are at the root of attaining to every thing in the world, are at his thighs; Cupid is his male organ, the Viśvedevas are at his waist and the Maruts are at the sides of his Basti; the Vasus are in the middle portion of his body, the oceans are in his belly, the quarters are on his sides, the Maruts are at his joints, the manes are one his back and the grand-father has taken shelter in his heart; the pious acts of making gifts of kine, gold and lands are his downs; the mounts Himālaya, Hemakūța, Manādara, and Meru are his bones: the thunder-bolt is his paim, the sky his body: the evening and watery clouds are on his neck, the creator, the preserver and the Vidyadharas are on his two arms. Ananta, Vasuki, Visalaksa, Iravata, Kambala, Asvatara, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya, the venomous Takşaka, and Upatakşaka, have taken shelter under the nails of his hands, in order to vomit forth their venom. The fire is in his mouth, the Rudras are on his shoulders, the fortnights, months, years and seasons are on the rows of his teeth; the lunar half and the dark half of the month are in his nostrils, and the airy currents are in the pores of his body. Sarasvati, the goddess of speech, is his neck, the two Asvins are his ears, the sun and the moon are his two eyes. O Rāma, all the divisions of the Vedas, Aagamas, the whole host of stars, good words, energy, asceticism, all these are being supported by his body, assuming the shape of a man. Thereupon that Puruşa easily struck Rāvana with his hands hard as thunder. Being assailed thereby Rāvana immediately fell on the ground. Beholding that Raksasa fallen and having distressed others that huge person, like to the Rgveda, resembling a mountain and be-decked with lotus garlands, entered the region under the earth. Ravana addressed his councillors thus, "0 Prahasta, O Sukasarana and other ministers, where has that person suddenly gone? Do you tell me this." Hearing those words of Ravana the nightrangers said, “That man, who crush down the pride of the celestials and demons, has entered hither.” As Garuda goes speedily taking a serpent so that vicious-minded Rāvana arrived quickly at the entrance of the den. And Ravana, having no fear, entered therein. And having entered there he saw males resembling the red collyrium, wearing Keyüras,* heroic, be-decked with red garlands, pasted with red sandal and adorned with diverse golden ornaments and jewels. He saw there three millions, of such high-minded persons. devoid of fear, pure, radiant like fire, dancing being mad after festivities. Beholding them the Ten-necked demon, of dreadful prowess, was not the least terrified and rather saw their dance, standing at the gate. They were all like the male being he had seen before. They were all of the same colour, same dress, same figure and equally gifted with great energy. They were all gifted with four arms and great energy. *A kind of ornament used on arms. Beholding them the down of the Ten-necked demon stood erect though a boon had been conferred upon him by the Self-born and he speedily issued out of that place. And he again saw another huge person lying down on a bed. His house, seat and bed were all white and valuable and he was sleeping enveloped by fire. And there sat gracefully with a fan in her lotus hands, the goddess Laksmī, most beautiful in the three worlds, (as if) the ornament thereof, chaste, adorned with celestial garlands, sprinkled with excellent sandal paste, be-decked with rich ornaments and clad in a precious raiment. Having entered there without any councillor the vicious Rāvana, the lord of Räkşasas, on beholding that chaste damsel with sweet smiles seated on a royal seat, being possessed by desire, grew anxious to hold her by the hand, as one, under the influence of death, catches a sleeping serpent. Beholding that lord of Rākşasas with loose cloth and understanding him as desirous of holding (her) the deity, having huge arms, asleep and enveloped with flames, laughed aloud. And searched suddenly by his energy, Ravana, the dread of all people, fell down on earth like to an up-rooted tree. Beholding that Raksasa fallen he said the following words: “Rise up, O foremost of Raksasas, you shall not meet with death today; you shall live and be protected, O Raksasa, by the great Patriarch's boon. Do you therefore go away, O Ravana, with confidence, you shall not experience death just now." Regaining his sense instantly Rāvana was stricken with fear. And being thus addressed, that enemy, of the celestials, stood up and with his down erect, said to that highly resplendent deity, “Who are you gifted with great energy and like to the fire of dissolution? Tell me, who are you, O deity and when you have come hither." Being thus accosted by the vicious-souled Ravana, the deity, smiling, replied in words, deep as the muttering of clouds, saying, "What shall you do with me O tennecked demon? You are not to be slain by me now" Being thus addressed the Ten-necked demon, with folded palms said, “By the words of the Patriarch (Brahmā) I shall not tread the path of death; there is none born among men or the celestials who can equal me, and disregard, by virtue of his prowess, the great Patriarch's boon. His words can never be falsified, every great exertion is weak before them; I do not behold any such man in the three worlds who can render that boon useless. O foremost of the deities, I am immortal, I do not fear you; and even if I meet with death, I may have it from you and no one else, O Lord. My death from you is both glorious and praiseworthy.” Thereupon Ravana, gifted with dreadful prowess, behold within the body of that deity, all the three worlds with mobile and immobile creations. The Adityas, the Maruts, the Siddhas, the two Asvins, Rudras, the manes, Yama, Kubera, the oceans, mountains, rivers, all the divisions of the Veda and knowledge, fire, planets, stars, sky, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Caranas, the ascetics conversant with the knowledge of Vedas, Garuda and the serpents, the other deities, Yaksas, Daityas and Rākşasas, were all seen in their incorporeal forms, on the person of that great Purusa, lying down. Thereupon the virtuous-souled Rāma said to Agastya, the foremost of Munis, "Who is that male being stationed in the island? Who are those three koțis male beings? And who is this person who crush down the pride of the Daityas and Dänavas?" Hearing Rama's words Agastya said, “O you existing eternally, O god of gods, hearken, I shall relate (it) to you. The person stationed in the island is the illustrious Kapila. All those dancing persons are the deities equalling that intelligent Kapila in energy and power. And that Raksasa, sent on sin, was not seen by him with angry looks, and therefore, O Rama, Ravana, was not there and then reduced to ashes. And he, resembling a mountain, with his person pierced, fell on the ground. As a wily Wight goes through a secret so he pierced (Rāvana's person) with his shaft-like words. Having regained his sense, however, after a long time, that Raksasa, of great prowess, returned where his councillors were.