Having thus gone for more than a half Yojana, the descendant of Raghu, espied Şurayū of holy waters flowing towards the west. And having crossing that river of rising waves to some extent, Răma, with his followers arrived at the place where he should give up his person. There upon at that moment, Brahmă, the grandfather of all encircled by all high-souled deities and with hundred kotis of celestial cars, arrived there where Kākutstha had addressed himself to repair to heaven. The aerial way was full of lustre but its brilliance was increased the more by the native effulgence of the inhabitants of heavens, always performing pious actions. There blew the holy, fragrant and delightful winds and there fell profusely celestial flowers from the hands of the deities. The place was filled with the noise of hundreds of bugles sounded by Gandharvas and Apsarās. And then Rāma prepared himself to descend to the waters of Sarayů. There upon the Patriarch gave vent to the following accents from the welkin:-Come O Visnu; may good betide you; by our good fortune you are coming here; O Raghava hearO you having mighty arms, do you enter here with your brothers, resembling the celestials in brilliance in whatever from you like either in that of the sky or in your own Vişņu form. You are the refuge of the creatures nobody know you. You are above the range of thought; great immortal and imperishable; nobody know you save Maya, having wide eyes, your former spouse. Do you enter here yourself in whatever effulgent form you like. Hearing the words of the Patriarch and determining everything the high-minded Rāma entered there bodily with his brothers in his Visnu form. There upon all the celestials Sådhyas Marutas, headed by Indra and Agni worshipped that deity, Visnu. So did all the celestial Rşis, Gandharvas Apsaras, Suparnas, Nagas, Yaksas, demons, Dånavas and Räkşasas. There upon eulogising him the celestials said: Our region is now freed from sins and all here have been delighted and all their desires have been fulfilled. There upon the highly effulgent Vişņu said to the Patriarch Brahmă:-It behove you, O you of good vows, to allot to those people their proper regions. These illustrious ones have followed me out of love. They are worthy of my respect for they are my devotees and have renounced their persons for me. Hearing the words of Vişņu, the lord Brahma, father of all creatures, said:-All these people who have come here shall go to the region named Santanaka. This region is intended even for him, who though born in the most degraded state, thinks of all objects as Vişnu. There is no question about their attaining to this region who, out of devotion, have followed you and renounced their persons. This region has the attributes of the Brahma region and is next to it. The monkeys and bears shall enter into their respective celestial forms. They shall enter into the deities from whom they had respectively originated. Sugriva shall enter into the Sun's region. And they shall obtain their respective fathers' forms among the celestials present. The lord of the deities having said this, all those who were present at the holy pilgrimage of Gopratāra descended into the waters of Sarayü with eyes full of tears of joy. Having bathed there, given up their lives delightedly and renounced their human forms they ascended the celestial cars. And having obtained the waters of Sarayū, hundreds of those that were born in the race of birds attained to the land of immortals obtaining the respective celestial forms (they had before). And in those celestial forms, they looked effulgent like the deities. And going to the waters of Sarayü all objects, mobile and immobile, having bathed there, repaired to the excellent celestial region. Having renounced their bodies in the water there of all the bears, monkeys and Raksasas attained to the land of deities. Having thus settled in heaven all those arrived there the father, of creatures with the deities, delighted and happy, repaired to the highest heaven.