Having been despatched by Rama, quickmoving emissaries speedily arrived at Mathurā. Continually travelling for three nights and days, they arrived there and communicated to Šatrughna the intelligence. Having informed him of the renouncing of Lakşmaņa, Rāma's promise and the following of the citizens they said:-The intelligent Rāma has reared for Kuśī the spacious city of Kuśavati at the foot of the Vindhya range. The city of Śrāvasti has been reared for Lava, and the mighty car-warriors Rama and Bharata, making Ayodhyā void of men, have addressed themselves for repairing to heaven. Having speedily communicated to him this intelligence the emissaries took rest. There upon they asked Satrughna to proceed soon. Observing the dreadful destruction of his race, Satrughna sent for his subjects and priests and informed them of everything. He also communicated to them his own destruction with his brothers. There upon the king Satrughna determined upon installing his two sons in the kingdom. Subāhu was placed on the throne of Mathurā and Satrughāti became the king of Vidiśā. Having thus established Subāhu in Mathură, and Śatrughātī in Vidiśā, the great hero Satrughna ascended his car and went to Ayodhyā. And there he saw the great Rāma, clothed in silk raiment burning like fire in the midst of the ascetics. There upon remembering his duty he saluted Rāma, conversant with piety and with folded hands said. I have placed my two sons on the throne of my kingdom. I have now resolved upon following you, O King. O hero, do not command me otherwise. I pray only that I may not neglect your command. There upon understanding the firm resolution of Satrughna, the descendant of Raghu agreed. Immediately after Råma had said this, monkeys assuming shapes at will bears and Rākşasas, began to assemble there. Apprised of Rama's determination of going to heaven, monkeys, born of the celestials, Rșis and Gandharvas taking Sugriva before them, came there to see Rama. All they came there knowing the departure of Rāma to heaven and said: "O Răma, O foremost of men, if you do repair to heaven forsaking us all, it will be hurling Yama's rod upon us.” The highly powerful Sugrīva too saluting Rāma said:— lord of men, having placed Angada on the throne I have come hither. I have determined upon following you, O King. Hearing the words of monkeys, Rāma said that their desire would be fulfilled. He then said to Vibhīşaņa the king of Räkşasas:-As long as people shall breathe, O Vibhisana, O highly powerful lord of Rakşasas, you shall preserve your body in Lankä. As long as the moon, the sun and the earth shall exist and as long as my story shall remain current, your kingdom shall be in existence. You did, out of friendship, carry out my behests and perform my works. Do you piously govern your subjects. I should not speak any thing else. What shall I say more to you, O highly powerful lord of Rakşasas. Worshhip Jagannath (the lord of the world), the presiding deity of the Ikşvāku race. Having thus addressed the king of Rakşasas always obeying Rāghava's command, Käkutstha said to Hanumān:— It is settled that you shall live forever, do you, now observe your promise. As long as my history shall run current in this world do you at my command live happily. Being thus addressed by the high-souled Rāghava Hanumān attained to great delight and said. As long as the sacred theme shall pass current in this world I shall live here carrying out your commands. There upon he said to the Jämbavān, Brahma's son, Mainda, Dvivida and five others in his company: “As long as the Kali age exists do you all live.” Having thus addressed them all Kākuthstha said to bears and monkeys. Do you come all with me.