Once on a time Yudhajit, the king of Kekaya, sent to the high-souled Rāma, Gārgya— son of his own preceptor Angiras-a Brāhmaṇa saint of unmitigated prowess; and with him he sent, as tokens of affections, gifts of ten thousand horses, numberless blankets various jewels, diverse clothes and well washed coverlets. Hearing of the arrival of the great saint Gārgya with above valuable presents sent by his maternal uncle Yudhājit, the intelligent Rāma, with his brothers, proceeded about a Krosa to receive him and adored him particularly likely to the lord of celestials honouring Bịhaspati. Having thus welcomed that foremost of Rșis and accepted the valuable presents sent by his maternal uncle he asked the ascetic about his welfare in every thing. There upon the great Rșis being seated, he said. You are the foremost of those skilled in the are of speech like the very preceptor of the celestials. Since your own self has here My uncle must have commissioned you with a very important message. Hearing those words of Rāma the great saint communicated to him the object of his coming, saying. O you having long arms, if you do like, hear what loving words your maternal uncle Yudhājit, the foremost of men, has said. The Gandharvas, holding weapons and expert in warfare, guard that beautiful province abounding in fruits and roots on the banks of the come river Sindhu. O hero, those Gandharvas are highly powerful and three kotis in number. Having hoisted your flag of victory and conquered that highly picturesque city of Gandharvas do you include that kingdom within your well-established territories. None can enter there. O you having long arms, I do not request you for any harm of you. Let that highly charming country be liked by you. Hearing the words of the maternal uncle communicated by the great saint, Rāma, with delight, said. What you have commanded shall be satisfied. Saying this he looked towards Bharata and delightedly and with folded hands said to the Rsis. O Brahmarsi, these two princes are Bharata's sons and their names are Takșa and Puşkala. Being well protected by uncle Yudhājit and preceded by Bharata with army and followers they shall subjugate the Gandharvas and divide the kingdom between them. Having established two kingdoms and installed his two sons there Bharata, the foremost of the pious, shall come back to me. Having thus said to the Brahmarși, Rāma commanded Bharata and welcomed the two princes. There upon under the auspices of favourable stars, having placed Gargya, son of Aigiras before them, Bharata with the princes and army issued out of the city of Ayodhyā. Răma's army unconquerable even by the celestials went out from the city like a celestial host under the command of Indra. Animals, living upon flesh and huge-bodied Rākşasas longing for blood and many terrible and dreadful carnivorous creatures followed Bharata wishing the flesh of Gandharvas. Besides many thousand birds, moving in the sky, lions, tigers and boars went before the army. The army, consisting of delighted and healthy subjects spending half a month in the way, arrived at the Kekaya kingdom in good health. commanded Bharata and welcomed the two princes. There upon under the auspices of favourable stars, having placed Gargya, son of Aigiras before them, Bharata with the princes and army issued out of the city of Ayodhyā. Răma's army unconquerable even by the celestials went out from the city like a celestial host under the command of Indra. Animals, living upon flesh and huge-bodied Rākşasas longing for blood and many terrible and dreadful carnivorous creatures followed Bharata wishing the flesh of Gandharvas. Besides many thousand birds, moving in the sky, lions, tigers and boars went before the army. The army, consisting of delighted and healthy subjects spending half a month in the way, arrived at the Kekaya kingdom in good health.