Hearing the wonderful words of Bharata both Rāma and Lakşmaņa were greatly delighted. And then Rāma said to Lakşmaņa. O Saumitri, your two sons, Angada and Candraketu well-versed in religions, perfectly qualified in governing the kingdom and highly powerful. I shall therefore install them on throne. O gentle man, do you find out such country where those two skilful archers may unobstructed roam about. And where if a kingdom is established it might:not disturb the peace of hermitage and happiness of other kings. Răma, having finished his speech Bharata replied:-The country of Kårupatha is highly picturesque and freed from all thorns. Let the city for high souled Angada be established there. And let the beautiful and healthy country of Candradkānta be the kingdom of Candraketu. Rāma approved of the words of Bharata and having brought the country of Kārupatha under his subjection gave it to Angada. He reared a beautiful and well-protected city for Angada. And in the country of Malaya he reared a city for Candraketu, named Candrakāntā highly picturesque and like to the city of celestials. There upon greatly delighted Rāma, irrepressible in battle, Laksmana and Bharata, having performed the ceremony of installation ordered them to go their respective cities. Angada started towards the West and Candraketu towards the North. Sumitra's son Lakşmana went with Angada and Bharata accompanied Candraketu. Having spent a year in Angada's city and finding his son well established in the kingdom Lakşmana returned to Ayodhyā. And Bharata, according to his desire, having spent more than a year in the city of Candrakāntă, came back to Ayodhyā and saluted Rama's feet. The pious Laksmana and Bharata— both the brothers, were greatly attached to Råma; and though the spent their days in another place they did not experience any pain in consequence of separation from their sons. Observing all virtues in this way, Rāma, the foremost of the pious, Bharata and Lakşmaņa governed the subjects for ten thousand years. Having spent their days in the city of Ayodhyā, the very city of virtue, the three brothers, appearing graceful like the burning fire receiving oblations in a great sacrifice, attained to joy in the fullness of time.