There upon the great saint said:-Hear, O king, O you gifted with great energy, for what I have come here. O you of great strength, the great Patriarch has sent me to you. O hero, I am your son. You did, in your pristine birth, beget me on Maya-I am Kala, the destroyer of all. Lord Brahmā, the father of all creatures, has said that you did promise to preserve the three worlds. Formerly when having slain all animals by your Māyā you went asleep in the waters of the mighty deep I was born. There after you did create the huge-bodied Ananta, living in the waters as the king of serpents. Then you did create two highly powerful Asuras named Madhu and Kaitabha. At that time the bones of those two Asuras having been scattered far and wide this earth containing many mountains was named Medini. Having procreated me in your lotus navel, dazzling in celestial brilliance you did employ me in the work of generation. I took the charge and procreated men; but finding no other means to preserve them I worshipped you, the lord of the universe and said:-0 lord, you should protect the creatures, for you are my father and giver of energy and therefore irrepressible. Thereupon for concerning means for the preservation of creatures, you did renounce your irrepressible shape and assume Vişņu form. And taking your birth from Aditi's powerful son, you went engaged in enhancing the delight of my brothers. You did use to protect the deities whenever they were assailed by any calamity. O lord of the universe, it is for that reason, on beholding the destruction of creatures you went born on earth to slay the Ten-necked demon. And at that time you did promise that you would live in the land of mortals for eleven thousand years. There upon you did assume a human form to carry out your desire. Now that period is ripe and this is the proper time to inform you of it. O great king, do you wait in this land of mortals if do you wish to govern people for some time more. And if did you wish to repair to the region of immortals, do you again lord over the deities in your Vişņu form and let them be freed from anxiety. O Hero, the Patriarch has sent this intelligence to you. Hearing those unequalled words of the Patriarch from the mouth of Kala, the destroyer of all, Rama smiling said. I have been greatly pleased and happy for your coming here O my son, I descended on earth to bring about the well-being of the three worlds. May good betide you. I shall now repair to from where I have come here. I was thinking of this when you did come here. Therefore, I have no doubt in this. O lord of destruction, the immortals are dependent on me, so I shall be with them in all works. The Great Patriarch has said the truth.