Having forsaken Lakşmaņa and being stricken with sorrow and grief Råma said to his citizens and ministers. Having placed the pious and heroic Bharata on the throne of Ayodhyā I shall today repair to woods. Do you, without any delay collect there all articles of installation. I shall follow the way which has been wended by Lakşmaņa. Hearing the words of Raghava, the subjects with their heads downwards remained motionless like so many dead bodies. Hearing Rāma's words Bharata was also stupified and speaking ill of the kingdom, said. O King, I swear by truth, that far from kingdom I do not wish to live in heaven even without you; O King, of these two princes, Kuśī and Lava do you place Kuśī in Kosala and Lava in North Kosala. And let quick-moving emissaries go to Śatrughna and communicate to him the intelligence of our going there. Hearing those words of Bharata and beholding the subjects stricken with sorrow having their heads downwards, Vasistha said. Behold, O Rama, the subjects have placed themselves on the ground. Do you, therefore; apprised of their intention, satisfy their desire. Raising up the subjects according to the words of Vasistha Rama said:-What good can I do for you. Hearing Rama's words they said:-0 King, we shall follow you wherever you shall go. If you have any love or affection for the citizens do you permit them that they may follow your good path with their wives and children. O lord, if you do not forsake us, let us all go wherever you silt,-be it a forest an intractable tract, a river or an ocean. O great king, by this we shall be greatly delighted. We pray for this boon only. Our delight consists in following you in everything. Observing such a firm devotion of the citizens Rāma agreed to that. Thereupon having gone through his duties he installed Kuša in the kingdom of Kosala and Lava in the northern country. Lava and conferred open each of them thousand chariots, Ayuta Nagas, Ayuta horses and various jewels and riches he established them in their respective kingdoms. Having thus settled the princes he despatched an emissary to Śatrughna.