In this wise the virtuous Rāma having spent some time Kāla, assuming the shape of an ascetic, arrived at the palace gate. I am the messenger of the great saint Atibala of incomparable effulgence. O you of great strength, for a particular business, I have come here to sec Rāma. Hearing the words of the great saint, Saumitri speedily went to Råghava and communicated to him the arrival of the ascetic, saying. O you of great effulgence, observing the royal duties, may you acquire victory in both the worlds; one ambassador radiant like the sun by virtue of his asceticism, has come here to visit you. Hearing the words of Laksmana, Rāma said: “Do you speedily bring here the highly effulgent ascetic bringing in a message." There upon saying so be it, Saumitri conducted, the effulgent ascetic to Råma's house. And having approached Rama the foremost? of Raghus, the ascetic, burning in his own energy, said to him, in sweet accents:-0 great king may prosperity crown you. And having welcomed him with water and Argya, the highly effulgent Rāma asked him about his well-being. Being asked by Rāma as to his welfare, that foremost of ascetics, skilled in the are of speech, sat on a golden seat. There upon welcoming him Rāma said:-Do you communicate to me his words by whom you have been sent. Being thus addressed by Rāma, a lion among kings, the ascetic said:-If do you wish to bring about the well-being of the celestials, my earnest desire is that we may talk over it in a solitary place. And if you have any regard for the words of that foremost of ascetics, do you so order that whoever shall hear or see us, when we shall converse in a solitary place, shall be slain by you. There upon Rāma promised that it should be done and said to Lakşmaņa:-O you having long arms, sending away the warder do you wait at the gate. When I shall talk with this ascetic in this solitary room whoever, shall hear or see us, shall be slain by me. Having thus piaced Lakşmaņa at the gate Rama said to that Rsis:-O great saint, tell me what he has communicated to you. O Muni, what is your intention and by what high-souled Rșis you have been sent here. Tell me all this without any fear, I have become anxious to hear it.