After the night had expired the highly illustrious Rāma having a spacious breast and eyes like lotus petals said to the priest. Let the brilliant umbrellas Agnihotra, and Vājapeya go with the Brāhmaṇas before, which look well in the great road. There upon the highly effulgent Vasiştha arranged duly all the ceremonies necessary for going to the next world. There upon wearing a thin cloth, holding Kuśa grass by his fingers, and reciting Vedic hymns he proceeded to the banks of Sarayū. Having given up all actions of senses, and suffered the pains of going on foot he issued out of the city speechless like to the burning sun. On his right hand side was the lotus-handed Śrī, on his left hand side was the goddess. Earth and before him was the power of destruction. Various arrows, huge bows, and daggers, assuming forms followed him. And also went with him the four Vedas in the shape of the Brāhmaṇas, the all protecting Gayatri, Omkara and Vasatkāra. The high-souled Rșis and great Asuras followed the high-souled Rāma to the open gates of heaven. All the female servants, old and young, the damsels of the seraglio accompanied by servants having no manhood, Bharata and Lakşmaņa accompanied by their wives, followed him with Agnihotra. All those high-souled ones, assembled there with Agnihotra and followed Kākutstha with their wives and children. The ministers and the servants, with their sons, beasts and friends, followed Rama delightedly. There upon all the subjects healthy and delighted went after Raghava, attracted by his accomplishments and cleansed of their sins. All the females and males, with their beasts, birds and friends, delightedly followed Raghava. Bathed and delighted all the monkeys, healthy and joyous following Rāma, created a continued tumult. There was none poorly, aggrieved or miserable—all of them appeared wonderfully happy and delighted. When Råma issued out of the city, whoever came to see him followed him being desirous of going to heaven. Bears, monkeys and Räkşasas and all the citizens, followed him with great devotion and collected minds. And all other animals, that were beyond the view of all in the city went after Rāghava proceeding to heaven. All creations mobile and immobile, whoever beheld Kakutstha followed him. All beings in Ayodhya, whoever breathe and are very minute, accompanied Rāma.