There upon beholding Räma with his head downwards and poorly like to the moon possessed by Rāhu, Lakşmaņa, delightedly and with sweet words, said. Be not aggrieved for me, O you having mighty' arms. Such is the course of time; the movements of creatures are destined by their pristine actions, good or bad. O gentle one, do you satisfy your promise of slaying me without any hesitation. O Kakuthstha, those, who cannot carry out their promises, repair to hell. O great king, if you have any love or affection for me, do you satisfy your promise by fearlessly slaying me. Hearing those words of Lakşmaņa Rāma's mind was greatly moved. There upon having invited his priests and ministers there he communicated to them his priests and ministers there he communicated to them his promise and Durvasa's arrival. Hearing it the ministers and priests remained silent. There upon Vasistha, of unmitigated effulgence, said. O highly illustrious and mighty armed Rāma, I knew before by virtue of my asceticism, of this your present destruction and separation from Laksmana. Time is powerful; do not falsify your promise. Promise not carried out brings on the destruction of virtue. And on the wane of virtue, forsooth, the three worlds, with celestials, saints, mobile and immobile creations, shall be destroyed. Therefore, O foremost of men, do you protect, the universe by suffering separation from Lakşmaņa, in the interest of the preservation of the three worlds. All other ministers and priests agreed with Vasistha's words. There upon hearing their moral counsels, Rama said to Lakşmaņa before the assembly. O Lakşmaņa, it is not proper to act against morality, I do therefore renounce you; for the pious hold that destruction and renunciation are all the same. Răma saying this, Lakşmaņa did not go to his own house, but with eyes full of tears specially repaired therefrom. Having reached the banks of Sarayů and rinsed his mouth he stood there with folded palms. And having obstructed all passages he did not breathe any more. Laksmana, the younger brother of Rama, being thus engaged in penances, having obstructed his breath, Apsarās, Indra and other deities and Rsis showered flowers on him. There upon beyond the sight of men, having taken the highly powerful Lakşmaņa within his body, the king of celestials entered his own city. There upon beholding Lakşmaņa, the fourth portion of Vişnu arrived at their city the celestials were greatly delighted and engaged in his worship.