While Rāma and Kala were thus conversing with one another, the great ascetic Durvāsā arrived at the gate for seeing Rāma and approaching Laksmana said:-O Saumitri, do you soon take me to Rāma; my time goes away, so do you take me first. Hearing the words of the ascetic, Laksmana, the slayer of enemies worshipping the feet of that high-souled one, said. O illustrious Sir, kindly mention your business. What is your object? Order me what I am to do. Råma is engaged in some business so kindly wait here for some time. Hearing those words that foremost of Rșis, red eyes: O Saumitri, if do you not go even this very moment and communicate to Ráma my arrival, I shall imprecate you, Rama, Bharata, Satrughana, your sons and grand-sons. I shall curse also your kingdom and cities. I cannot any longer restrain by growing ire. Hearing those dreadful and resolute words of the Rşis, Lakşmaņa thought within himself. My own destruction is far more desirable than that of all. Having thus resolved Lakşmaņa approached Rāma and communicated to him the intelligence. Hearing the words of Lakşmaņa and having bade adieu, to Kala, Rama soon came out and saw Atri's son. And having saluted that great and powerful ascetic he with folded hands, said. What is your business. Hearing the words of Rāma, the highly powerful Durvāsā, the foremost of Munis, said. Hear, O Rāma fond of virtue. For a thousand years I have carried on the vow of fasting. It has terminated today, so do you give me food as much as possible. Hearing those words Rāma was greatly delighted and gave proper food to that ascetic. And feasting on that nectar-like sweet food, Durvāsā, the foremost of Rşis, thanked Rāma and repaired to his own hermitage. There upon remembering the words of Kāla, Rāma was greatly sorry. And thinking of those dreadful words he was overwhelmed with grief. And with a poorly heart, and face downwards he remained silent for some time. There upon thinking of Kāla's words and determining that every calamity would befall him, that highly illustrious descendant, of Raghus, summoned patience.