SECTION XXXIII
"Sanjaya said, 'The Parthas then, headed by Bhimasena, approached that
invincible array protected by Bharadwaja's son. And Satyaki, and
Chekitana, and Dhrishtadyumna. the son of Prishata, and Kuntibhoja of
great prowess, and the mighty car-warrior Drupada. and Arjuna's son
(Abhimanyu), and Kshatradharman, and the valiant Vrihatkshatra, and
Dhrishtaketu, the ruler of the Chedis, and the twin sons of Madri, (viz.,
Nakula and Sahadeva), and Ghatotkacha, and the powerful Yudhamanyu and
the unvanquished Sikhandin, and the irresistible Uttamaujas and the
mighty car-warrior Virata, and the five sons of Draupadi,--these all
excited with wrath, and the valiant son of Sisupala, and the Kaikeyas of
mighty energy, and the Srinjayas by thousands,--these and others,
accomplished in weapons and difficult of being resisted in battle,
suddenly rushed, at the head of their respective followers, against
Bharadwaja's son, from a desire of battle. The valiant son of Bharadwaja,
however, fearlessly checked all those warriors, as soon as they came
near, with a thick shower of arrows. Like a mighty wave of waters coming
against an impenetrable hill, or the surging sea itself approaching its
bank, those warriors were pushed back by Drona. And the Pandavas, O king,
afflicted by the shafts shot from Drona's bow, were unable to stay before
him. And the strength of Drona's arms that we saw was wonderful in the
extreme, inasmuch as the Panchalas and the Srinjayas failed to approach
him. Beholding Drona advancing in rage. Yudhishthira thought of diverse
means for checking his progress. At last, regarding Drona incapable of
being resisted by any one else, Yudhishthira placed that heavy and
unbearable burden on the son of Subhadra. Addressing Abhimanyu, that
slayer of hostile heroes, who was not inferior to Vasudeva himself and
whose energy was superior to that of Arjuna, the king said, 'O child, act
in such a way that Arjuna, returning (from the Samsaptakas), may not
reprove us. We do not know how to break the circular array. Thyself, or
Arjuna or Krishna, or Pradyumna, can pierce that array. O mighty-armed
one, no fifth person can be found (to achieve that teat). O child, it
behoveth thee, O Abhimanyu, to grant the boon that thy sires, thy
maternal uncles, and all these troops ask of thee. Taking up thy arms
quickly, destroy this array of Drona, else Arjuna, returning from the
fight, will reprove us all.'
"Abhimanyu said, 'Desiring victory to my sires, soon shall I in battle
penetrate into that firm, fierce and foremost of arrays formed by Drona.
I have been taught by my father the method of (penetrating and) smiting
this kind of array. I shall not be able, however, to come out if any kind
of danger overtakes me.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Break this array once, O foremost of warriors, and
make a passage for us. All of us will follow thee in the track by which
thou wilt go. In battle, thou art equal to Dhananjaya himself. Seeing
thee enter, we shall follow thee, protecting thee on all sides.'
"Bhima said, 'I myself will follow thee, and Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki,
and the Panchalas, and the Prabhadrakas. After the array once is broken
by thee, will enter it repeatedly and slay the foremost warriors within
it.'
"Abhimanyu said, 'I will penetrate into this invincible array of Drona,
like an insect filled with rage entering a blazing fire. Today, I will do
that which will be beneficial to both races (viz., my sire's and my
mother's). I will do that which will please my maternal uncle as also my
mother. Today all creatures will behold large bodies of hostile soldiers
continually slaughtered by myself, an unaided child. If anybody,
encountering me, escapes today with life, I shall not then regard myself
begotten by Partha and born of Subhadra. If on a single car I cannot in
battle cut off the whole Kshatriya race into eight fragments, I will not
regard myself the son of Arjuna.'[63]
"Yudhishthira said, 'Since protected by these tigers among men, these
great bowmen endued with fierce might, these warriors that resemble the
Sadhyas, the Rudras, or the Maruts, or are like the Vasus, or Agni or
Aditya himself in prowess, thou venturest to pierce the invincible array
of Drona, and since thou speakest so, let thy strength, O son of Subhadra
be increased.'
"Sanjaya continued, 'Hearing these words of Yudhishthira, Abhimanyu
ordered his charioteer, Sumitra, saying, Quickly urge the steeds towards
Drona's army.'"
it.'
