
SECTION CV
"Bhishma, continued, 'Listen, O mother, to me as I indicate the means by
which the Bharata line may be perpetuated. Let an accomplished Brahmana
be invited by an offer of wealth, and let him raise offspring upon the
wives of Vichitravirya.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Satyavati, then, smiling softly and in voice
broken in bashfulness, addressed Bhishma saying, 'O Bharata of mighty
arms, what thou sayest is true. From my confidence in thee I shall now
indicate the means of perpetuating our line. Thou shall not be able to
reject it, being conversant, as thou art, with the practices permitted in
seasons of distress. In our race, thou art Virtue, and thou art Truth,
and thou art, too, our sole refuge. Therefore hearing what I say truly,
do what may be proper.
"My father was a virtuous man. For virtue's sake he had kept a (ferry)
boat. One day, in the prime of my youth, I went to ply that boat. It so
happened that the great and wise Rishi Parasara, that foremost of all
virtuous men, came, and betook himself to my boat for crossing the
Yamuna. As I was rowing him across the river, the Rishi became excited
with desire and began to address me in soft words. The fear of my father
was uppermost in my mind. But the terror of the Rishi's curse at last
prevailed. And having obtained from him a precious boon, I could not
refuse his solicitations. The Rishi by his energy brought me under his
complete control, and gratified his desire then and there, having first
enveloped the region in a thick fog. Before this there was a revolting
fishy odour in my body; but the Rishi dispelled it and gave me my present
fragrance. The Rishi also told me that by bringing forth his child in an
island of the river, I would still continue (to be) a virgin. And the
child of Parasara so born of me in my maidenhood hath become a great
Rishi endued with large ascetic powers and known by the name of
Dwaipayana (the island-born). That illustrious Rishi having by his
ascetic power divided the Vedas into four parts hath come to be called on
earth by the name of Vyasa (the divider or arranger), and for his dark
colour, Krishna (the dark). Truthful in speech, free from passion, a
mighty ascetic who hath burnt all his sins, he went away with his father
immediately after his birth. Appointed by me and thee also, that Rishi of
incomparable splendour will certainly beget good children upon the wives
of thy brother. He told me when he went away, 'Mother, think of me when
thou art in difficulty.' I will now call him up, if thou, O Bhishma of
mighty arms so desirest. If thou art willing, O Bhishma, I am sure that
great ascetic will beget children upon Vichitravirya's field.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Mention being made of the great Rishi, Bhishma
with joined palms said, 'That man is truly intelligent who fixes his eyes
judiciously on virtue, profit, and pleasure, and who after reflecting
with patience, acteth in such a way that virtue may lead to future
virtue, profit to future profit and pleasure to future pleasure.
Therefore, that which hath been said by thee and which, besides being
beneficial to us, is consistent with virtue, is certainly the best advice
and hath my full approval.' And when Bhishma had said this, O thou of
Kuru's race, Kali (Satyavati) thought of the Muni Dwaipayana and
Dwaipayana who was then engaged in interpreting the Vedas, learning that
he was being called up by his mother, came instantly unto her without
anybody's knowing it. Satayavati then duly greeted her son and embraced
him with arms, bathing him in her tears, for the daughter of the
fisherman wept bitterly at the sight of her son after so long a time. And
her first son, the great Vyasa, beholding her weeping, washed her with
cool water, and bowing unto her, said, 'I have come, O mother, to fulfil
thy wishes. Therefore, O virtuous one, command me without delay. I shall
accomplish thy desire.' The family priest of the Bharatas then worshipped
the great Rishi duly, and the latter accepted the offerings of worship,
uttering the usual mantras. And gratified with the worship he received,
he took his seat. Satyavati, beholding him seated at his ease, after the
usual inquiries, addressed him and said, 'O learned one, sons derive
their birth both from the father and the mother. They are, therefore, the
common property of both parents. There cannot be the least doubt about it
that the mother, hath as much power over them as the father. As thou art,
indeed, my eldest son according to the ordinance, O Brahmarshi, so is
Vichitravirya my youngest son. And as Bhishma is Vichitravirya's brother
on the father's side, so art thou his brother on the same mother's side.
I do not know what you may think, but this is what, O son, I think. This
Bhishma, the son of Santanu, devoted to truth, doth not, for the sake, of
truth, entertain the desire of either begetting children or ruling the
kingdom. Therefore, from affection for thy brother Vichitravirya, for the
perpetuation of our dynasty, for the sake of this Bhishma's request and
my command, for kindness to all creatures, for the protection of the
people and from the liberality of thy heart, O sinless one, it behoveth
thee to do what I say. Thy younger brother hath left two widows like unto
the daughters of the celestials themselves, endued with youth and great
beauty. For the sake of virtue and religion, they have become desirous of
offspring. Thou art the fittest person to be appointed. Therefore beget
upon them children worthy of our race and for the continuance of our
line.'
"Vyasa, hearing this, said, 'O Satyavati, thou knowest what virtue is
both in respect of this life and the other. O thou of great wisdom, thy
affections also are set on virtue. Therefore, at thy command, making
virtue my motive, I shall do what thou desirest. Indeed, this practice
that is conformable to the true and eternal religion is known to me, I
shall give unto my brother children that shall be like unto Mitra and
Varuna. Let the ladies then duly observe for one full year the vow I
indicate. They shall then be purified. No women shall ever approach me
without having observed a rigid vow.'
"Satyavati then said, 'O sinless one, it must be as thou sayest. Take
such steps that the ladies may conceive immediately. In a kingdom where
there is no king, the people perish from want of protection; sacrifices
and other holy acts are suspended; the clouds send no showers; and the
gods disappear. How can a kingdom be protected that hath no king?
Therefore, see thou that the ladies conceive. Bhishma will watch over the
children as long as they are in their mother's wombs.
"Vyasa replied, 'If I am to give unto my brother children so
unseasonably, then let the ladies bear my ugliness. That in itself shall,
in their case, be the austerest of penances. If the princess of Kosala
can bear my strong odour, my ugly and grim visage, my attire and body,
she shall then conceive an excellent child.'"
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having spoken thus unto Satyavati, Vyasa of
great energy addressed her and said, 'Let the princess of Kosala clad in
clean attire and checked with ornaments wait for me in her bed-chamber.'
Saying this, the Rishi disappeared, Satyavati then went to her
daughter-in-law and seeing her in private spoke to her these words of
beneficial and virtuous import, 'O princess of Kosala, listen to what I
say. It is consistent with virtue. The dynasty of the Bharatas hath
become extinct from my misfortune. Beholding my affliction and the
extinction of his paternal line, the wise Bhishma, impelled also by the
desire of perpetuating our race, hath made me a suggestion, which
suggestion, however, for its accomplishment is dependent on thee.
Accomplish it, O daughter, and restore the lost line of the Bharatas. O
thou of fair hips, bring thou forth a child equal in splendour unto the
chief of the celestials. He shall bear the onerous burden of this our
hereditary kingdom.'
"Satyavati having succeeded with great difficulty in procuring the assent
of her virtuous daughter-in-law to her proposal which was not
inconsistent with virtue, then fed Brahmanas and Rishis and numberless
guests who arrived on die occasion.'"
