SECTION I
(Dronabhisheka Parva)
OM! HAVING BOWED down unto Narayan, and unto that most exalted of male
beings, viz., Nara, and unto the goddess Saraswati also, must the word
Jaya be uttered.
"Janamejaya said, 'Hearing that his sire Devavrata of unrivalled vigour
and sturdiness, and might, energy and prowess, had been slain by
Sikhandin, the prince of the Panchalas, what, indeed, O regenerate Rishi,
did the powerful king Dhritarashtra with eyes bathed in tears do? O
illustrious one, his son (Duryodhana) wished for sovereignty after
vanquishing those mighty bowmen, viz., the sons of Panda, through Bhishma
and Drona and other great car-warriors. Tell me, O thou that hast wealth
of asceticism, all that he, of Kura's race, did after that chief of all
bowmen had been slain.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing that his sire had been slain, king
Dhritarashtra of Kura's race filled with anxiety and grief, obtained no
peace of mind. And while he, of Kura's race, was thus continually
brooding over that sorrow, Gavalgana's son of pure soul once more came to
him. Then, O monarch, Dhritarashtra, the son of Amvika, addressed
Sanjaya, who had that night come back from the camp to the city called
after the elephant. With a heart rendered exceedingly cheerless in
consequence of his having heard of Bhishma's fall, and desirous of the
victory of his sons, he indulged in these lamentations in great distress.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'After having wept for the high-souled Bhishma of
terrible prowess, what, O son, did the Kauravas, urged by fate, next do?
Indeed, when that high-souled and invincible hero was slain, what did the
Kauravas do, sunk as they were in an ocean of grief? Indeed, that
swelling and highly efficient host of the high-souled Pandavas, would, O
Sanjaya, excite the keenest fears of even the three worlds. Tell me,
therefore, O Sanjaya, what the (assembled) kings did after Devavrata,
that bull of Kura's race, had fallen.'
"Sanjaya said, 'Listen, O king, with undivided attention, to me as I
recite what thy sons did after Devavrata had been killed in battle. When
Bhishma, O monarch, of prowess incapable of being baffled, was slain, thy
warriors as also the Pandavas both reflected by themselves (on the
situation). Reflecting on the duties of the Kshatriya order, they were
filled with wonder and joy; but acting according to those duties of their
own order, they all bowed to that high-souled warrior. Then those tigers
among men contrived for Bhishma of immeasurable prowess a bed with a
pillow made of straight shafts. And having made arrangements for
Bhishma's protection, they addressed one another (in pleasant converse).
Then bidding Ganga's son their farewell and walking round him, and
looking at one another with eyes red in anger, those Kshatriyas, urged by
fate, once more went out against one another for battle. Then by the
blare of trumpets and the beat of drums, the divisions of thy army as
also those of the foe, marched out. After the fall of Ganga's son, O
king, when the best part of the day had passed away, yielding to the
influence of wrath, with hearts afflicted by fate, and disregarding the
words, worthy of acceptance, of the high-souled Bhishma, those foremost
ones of Bharata's race went out with great speed, armed with weapons. In
consequence of thy folly and of thy son's and of the slaughter of
Santanu's son, the Kauravas with all the kings seemed to be summoned by
Death himself. The Kurus, deprived of Devavrata, were filled with great
anxiety, and resembled a herd of goats and sheep without a herdsman, in a
forest abounding with beasts of prey. Indeed, after the fall of that
foremost one of Bharata's race, the Kuru host looked like the firmament
divested of stars, or like the sky without the atmosphere, or like the
earth with blasted crops, or like an oration disfigured by bad
grammar,[1] or like the Asura host of old after Vali had been smitten
down, or like a beautiful damsel deprived of husband,[2] or like a river
whose waters have been dried up, or like a roe deprived of her mate and
encompassed in the woods by wolves; or like a spacious mountain cave with
its lion killed by a Sarabha.[3] Indeed, O chief of the Bharatas, the
Bharata host, on the fall of Ganga's son, became like a frail boat on the
bosom of the ocean, tossed by a tempest blowing from every side.
Exceedingly afflicted by the mighty and heroic Pandavas of sure aim, the
Kaurava host, with its steeds, car-warriors and elephants much troubled,
became exceedingly distressed, helpless, and panic-stricken. And the
frightened kings and the common soldiers, no longer relying upon one
another, of that army, deprived of Devavrata, seemed to sink into the
nethermost region of the world. Then the Kauravas remembered Karna, who
indeed, was equal to Devavrata himself. All hearts turned to that
foremost of all wielders of arms, that one resembling a guest resplendent
(with learning and ascetic austerities). And all hearts turned to him, as
the heart of a man in distress turneth to a friend capable of relieving
that distress. And, O Bharata, the kings then cried out saying, Karna!
Karna! The son of Radha, our friend, the son of a Suta, that one who is
ever prepared to lay down his life in battle! Endued with great fame,
Karna, with his followers and friends, did not fight for these ten days.
O, summon him soon!' The mighty-armed hero, in the presence of all the
Kshatriyas, during the mention of valiant and mighty car-warriors, was by
Bhishma classed as an Ardha-ratha, although that bull among men is equal
to two Maharathas! Even thus was he classed during the counting of Rathas
and Atirathas, he that is the foremost (of all Rathas and Atirathas), he
that is respected by all heroes, he that would venture to fight even with
Yama, Kuvera, Varuna, and Indra. Through anger caused by this, O king, he
had said unto Ganga's son these words: 'As long as thou livest, O thou of
Kuru's race, I will never fight! if thou, however, succeedest in slaying
the sons of Pandu in great battle, I shall, O Kaurava, with Duryodhana's
permission, retire into the woods. If, on the other hand, thou, O
Bhishma, slain by the Pandavas, attainest to heaven, I shall then, on a
single car, slay all of them, whom thou regardest as great car-warriors.'
Having said this, mighty-armed Karna of great fame, with thy son's
approval, did not fight for the first ten days. Bhishma, of great prowess
in battle and of immeasurable might, slew, O Bharata, a very large number
of warriors belonging to Yudhishthira's army. When, however, that hero of
sure aim and great energy was slain, thy sons thought of Karna, like
persons desirous of crossing a river thinking, of a boat. Thy warriors
and thy sons, together with all the kings, cried out, saying, Karna! And
they all said, 'Even this is the time for the display of his prowess.'
Our hearts are turned to that Karna who derived his knowledge of weapons
from Jamadagni's son, and whose prowess is incapable of being resisted!
He, indeed, O king, is competent to save us from great dangers, like
Govinda always saving the celestials from great dangers.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Unto Sanjaya who was thus repeatedly applauding
Karna, Dhritarashtra sighing like a snake, said those words.'
"Dhritarashtra said, '[I understand] that the hearts of all of you are
turned towards Vikartana's son Karna, and that all of you, saw that son
of Radha, that hero of the Suta caste, ever prepared to lay down his life
in battle. I hope that hero of prowess incapable of being baffled, did
not falsify the expectations of Duryodhana and his brothers, all of whom
were then afflicted with grief and fear, and desirous of being relieved
from their danger. When Bhishma, that refuge of Kauravas, was slain,
could Karna, that foremost of bowmen, succeed in filling up the gap
caused? Filling up that gap, could Karna fill the foe with fear? Could he
also crown with fruit the hopes, entertained by my sons, of victory?'"
