SECTION XXII
"Dhritarashtra said, 'When the Pandavas were broken by Bharadwaja's son
in hat dreadful battle, and the Panchalas also, was there anybody that
approached Drona for battle? Alas, beholding Drona stationed in battle,
like a, awning tiger, or an elephant with rent temples, ready to lay down
his life in battle, well-armed, conversant with all modes of fight, that
great bowman, that tiger among men, that enhancer of the fear of foes,
grateful, devoted to truth, ever desirous of benefiting
Duryodhana,--alas, beholding him at the head of his troops, was there no
man that could approach him, with a laudable determination for battle a
determination that enhances the renown of Kshatriyas, that mean-spirited
persons can never form, and that is distinctive only of the foremost of
persons? Tell me, O Sanjaya, who were those heroes that approached the
son of Bharadwaja, beholding him at the head of his forces?'
"Sanjaya said, 'Beholding the Panchalas, the Pandavas, the Matsyas, the
Srinjayas, the Chedis, the Kalikeyas, thus routed after being broken in
battle by Drona with his shafts, beholding them thus driven from the
field by those showers of fleet arrows shot from Drona's, bow, like
vessels sent adrift by the awful waves of the tempest-tossed ocean, the
Kauravas with many leonine shouts and with the noise of diverse
instruments, began to assail the cars and elephants and foot-soldiers (of
that hostile host) from all sides. And beholding those (fleeting soldiers
of the Pandavas) king Duryodhana, stationed in the midst of his own
forces and encompassed by his own relatives and kinsmen, filled with joy,
and laughing as he spoke, said these words unto Karna.'
"Duryodhana said, 'Behold, O Radha's son, the Panchalas broken by that
firm bowman (Drona) with his shafts, like a herd of the wild deer
frightened by a lion. These, I think, will not again come to battle. They
have been broken by Drona like mighty trees by the tempest. Afflicted by
that high-souled warrior with those shafts winged with gold, they are
fleeing away, no two persons are together. Indeed, they seem to be
dragged in eddies all over the field. Checked by the Kauravas as also by
the high-souled Drona, they are huddling close to one another like (a
herd of) elephants in the midst of a conflagration. Like a blossoming
trees penetrated by flights of bees, these warriors, pierced with the
sharp shafts of Drona, are huddling close to one another, as they are
flying away from the field. There, the wrathful Bhima, abandoned by the
Pandavas and the Srinjayas, and surrounded by my warriors, delighteth me
greatly, O Karna! It is evident, that wicked wight beholdeth the world
today to be full of Drona! Without doubt, that son of Pandu hath today
become hopeless of life and kingdom.'
"Karna said, 'That mighty-armed warrior will not certainly abandon the
battle as long as he is alive. Nor will he, O tiger among men, brook
these leonine shouts (of ours). Nor will the Pandavas, I think, be
defeated in battle. They are brave, endued with great might, accomplished
in weapons, and difficult of being resisted in battle. Recollecting the
woes caused them by our attempts at poisoning and burning them, and the
woes that arose from the match at dice, bearing in mind also their exile
in, the woods, the Pandavas, I think, will not abandon the fight. The
mighty-armed Vrikodara of immeasurable energy hath already turned back
(for the fight). The son of Kunti will certainly slay many of our
foremost car-warriors. With sword and bow and dart, with steeds and
elephants and men and cars,[41] with his mace made of iron, he will slay
crowds (of our soldiers). Other car-warriors headed by Satyajit, together
with the Panchalas, the Kekayas, the Matsyas, and especially the
Pandavas, are following him. They are all brave, and possessed of great
might and prowess. Mighty car-warriors, they are again led by Bhima in
wrath. Those bulls of the race, surrounding Vrikodara on all sides, like
the clouds surrounding the Sun, begin to approach Drona from all sides.
Closely intent upon one object, these will certainly afflict unprotected
Drona, like flights of insects, on the point of death, striking a blazing
lamp. Accomplished in weapons, they are certainly competent to resist
Drona. Heavy is the burthen, I think, that now rests on Bharadwaja's son.
Let us then quickly go to the spot where Drona is. Let not those slay him
of regulated vows like wolves slaying a mighty elephant!'
"Sanjaya continued, 'Hearing these words of Radheya, king Duryodhana
then, accompanied by his brothers, O monarch, proceeded towards Drona's
car. The noise there was deafening, of Pandava warriors returned to the
fight on their cars drawn by excellent steeds of diverse hue,[42] all
actuated by the desire of slaying Drona alone.'"
