SECTION XCVII
Sanjaya said, "Hearing that his son Iravat had been slain, Dhananjaya was
filled with great grief and sighed like a snake. And addressing Vasava in
the midst of battle, he said these words, 'Without doubt, the high-souled
Vidura of great wisdom had before seen (with his mind's eye) this awful
destruction of the Kurus and the Pandavas. It was for this that he
forbade king Dhritarashtra.[456] In this battle, O slayer of Madhu, many
other heroes have been slain by the Kaurava and many amongst the Kauravas
have similarly been slain by ourselves. O best of men, for the sake of
wealth vile acts are being done. Fie upon that wealth for the sake of
which such slaughter of kinsmen is being perpetrated. For him that hath
no wealth, even death would be better than the acquisition of wealth by
the slaughter of kinsmen. What, O Krishna, shall we gain by slaying our
assembled kinsmen? Alas, for Duryodhana's, fault, and also of Sakuni the
son of Suvala, as also through the evil counsels of Karna, the Kshatriya
race is being exterminated, O slayer of Madhu, I now understand, O
mighty-armed one, that the king acted wisely by begging of Suyodhana[457]
only half the kingdom, or, instead, only five villages. Alas, even that
was not granted by that wicked-souled wight. Beholding so many brave
Kshatriyas lying (dead) on the field of battle, I censure myself,
(saying) fie upon the profession of a Kshatriya. The Kshatriyas will
regard me powerless in battle. For this alone, I am battling. Else, O
slayer of Madhu, this battle with kinsmen is distasteful to me. Urge the
steeds on with speed towards the Dhartarashtra army, I will, with my two
arms, reach the other shore of this ocean of battle that is so difficult
to cross. There is no time, O Madhava, to lose in action'. Thus addressed
by Partha, Kesava, that slayer of hostile heroes, urged those steeds of
white hue endued with the speed of the wind. Then, O Bharata, loud was
the noise that was heard among thy troops, resembling that of the ocean
itself at full tide when agitated by the tempest.[458] In the afternoon,
O king, the battle that ensued between Bhishma and the Pandavas was
marked by noise that resembled the roar of the clouds. Then, O king, thy
sons, surrounding Drona like the Vasus surrounding Vasava, rushed in the
battle against Bhimasena. Then Santanu's son, Bhishma, and that foremost
of car-warriors, viz., Kripa, and Bhagadatta, and Susarman, all went
towards Dhananjaya. And Hridika's son (Kritavarman) and Valhika rushed
towards Satyaki. And king Amvashta placed himself before Abhimanyu. And
other great car-warriors, O king, encountered other great car-warriors.
Then commenced a fierce battle that was terrible to behold. Bhimasena
then, I O king, beholding thy sons, blazed up with wrath in that battle,
like fire with (a libation of) clarified butter. Thy sons, however, O
monarch, covered that son of Kunti with their arrows like the clouds
drenching the mountain-breast in the season of rains. While being (thus)
covered in diverse ways by thy sons, O king, that hero, possessed of the
activity of the tiger, licked the corners of his mouth.[459] Then, O
Bharata, Bhima felled Vyudoroska with a sharp horse-shoe-headed arrow.
Thereupon that son of thine was deprived of life. With another
broad-headed arrow, well-tempered and sharp, he then felled Kundalin like
a lion overthrowing a smaller animal. Then, O sire, getting thy (other)
sons (within reach of his arrows), he took up a number of shafts, sharp
and well-tempered, and with careful aim speedily shot these at them.
Those shafts, sped by that strong bowman, viz., Bhimasena, felled thy
sons, those mighty car-warriors, from their vehicles. (These sons of
thine that were thus slain were) Anadhriti, and Kundabhedin, and Virata,
and Dirghalochana, and Dirghavahu, and Suvahu, and Kanykadhyaja. While
falling down (from their cars), O bull of Bharata's race, those heroes
looked resplendent like falling mango trees variegated with blossoms in
the spring. Then thy other sons, O monarch, fled away, regarding the
mighty Bhimasena as Death himself. Then like the clouds pouring torrents
of rain on the mountain breast, Drona in that battle covered with arrows
from every side that hero who was thus consuming thy sons. The prowess
that we then beheld of Kunti's son was exceedingly wonderful, for though
held in check by Drona, he still slew thy sons. Indeed, as a bull beareth
a shower of rain falling from above. Bhima cheerfully bore that shower of
arrows shot by Drona. Wonderful, O monarch, was the feat that Vrikodara
achieved there, for he slew thy sons in that battle and resisted Drona
the while. Indeed, the elder brother of Arjuna sported amongst those
heroic sons o thine, like a mighty tiger, O king, among a herd of deer.
As a wolf, staying in the midst of a herd of deer, would chase and
frighten those animals, so did Vrikodara, in that battle chase and
frighten thy sons.
"Meanwhile, Ganga's son, and Bhagadatta, and that mighty car-warrior,
viz., Gautama, began to resist Arjuna, that impetuous son of Pandu. That
Atiratha, baffling with his weapons the weapons of those adversaries of
his in that battle, despatched many prominent heroes of thy army to the
abode of Death. Abhimanyu also, with his shafts, deprived that renowned
and foremost of car-warriors, viz., king Amvashta, of his car. Deprived
of his car and about to be slain by the celebrated son of Subhadra, that
king quickly jumped down from his car in shame, and hurled his sword in
that battle at the high-souled Abhimanyu. Then, that mighty monarch got
up on the car of Hridika's son, conversant with all movements in battle,
Subhadra's son, that slayer of hostile heroes, beholding that sword
coursing towards him, baffled it by the celerity of his movements. Seeing
that sword thus baffled in that battle by Subhadra's son, loud cries of
'well done' 'well done' were, O king, heard among the troops. Other
warriors headed by Dhrishtadyumna battled with thy troops, while thy
troops, also, all battled with those of the Pandavas. Then, O Bharata,
fierce was the engagement that took place between thine and theirs, that
combatants smiting one another with great force and achieving the most
difficult feats. Brave combatants, O sire, seizing one another by the
hair, fought using their nails and teeth, and fists and knees, and palms
and swords, and their well-proportioned arms. And seizing one another's
laches, they despatched one another to the abode of Yama. Sire slew son,
and son slew sire. Indeed, the combatants fought with one another, using
every limb of theirs. Beautiful bows with golden staves, O Bharata,
loosened from the grasp of slain warriors, and costly ornaments, and
sharp shafts furnished with wings of pure gold or silver and washed with
oil, looked resplendent (as they lay scattered on the field), the latter
resembling, in particular, snakes that had cast off their slough. And
swords furnished with ivory handles decked with gold, and the shield also
of bowmen, variegated with gold, lay on the field, loosened from their
grasp. Bearded darts and axes and swords and javelins, all decked with
gold, beautiful coats of mail, and heavy and short bludgeons, and spiked
clubs, and battle-axes, and short arrows, O sire, and elephants' housings
of diverse shapes, and yak tails, and fans, lay scattered on the field.
And mighty car-warriors lay on the field with diverse kinds of weapons in
their hands or beside them, and looking alive, though the breath of life
had gone.[460] And men lay on the field with limbs shattered with maces
and heads smashed with clubs, or crushed by elephants, steeds, and cars.
And the earth, strewn in many places with the bodies of slain steeds,
men, and elephants, looked beautiful, O king, as if strewn with hills.
And the field of battle lay covered with fallen darts and swords and
arrows and lances and scimitars and axes and bearded darts and iron crows
and battle-axes, and spiked clubs and short arrows and Sataghnis[461] and
bodies mangled with weapons. And, O slayer of foes, covered with blood,
warriors lay prostrate on the field, some deprived of life and therefore,
in the silence of death, and others uttering low moans. And the earth,
strewn with those bodies, presented a variegated sight. And strewn with
the arms of strong warriors smeared with sandal paste and decked with
leathern fences and bracelets, with tapering thighs resembling the trunks
of elephants, and with fallen heads, graced with gems attached to turbans
and with earrings of large-eyed combatants, O Bharata, the earth assumed
a beautiful sight. And the field of battle, overspread with blood, dyed
coats of mail and golden ornaments of many kinds, looked exceedingly
beautiful as if with (scattered) fires of mild flames. And with ornaments
of diverse kinds fallen off from their places, with bows lying about,
with arrows of golden wings scattered around, with many broken cars
adorned with rows of bells, with many slain steeds scattered about
covered with blood and with their tongues protruding, with bottoms of
cars, standards, quivers, and banners, with gigantic conches, belonging
to great heroes, of milky whiteness lying about, and with trunkless
elephants lying prostrate, the earth looked beautiful like a damsel
adorned with diverse kinds of ornaments. And there, with other elephants
pierced with lances and in great agony, and frequently uttering low moans
with their trunks, the field of battle looked beautiful as if with moving
hills. With blankets of diverse hue, and housings of elephants, with
beautiful hooks falling about having handles decked with stones of lapis
lazuli, with bells lying about that had adorned gigantic elephants, with
clean and variegated cloths as also skins of the Ranku deer, with
beautiful neck-chains of elephants, with gold-decked girths, with broken
engines of diverse kinds, with bearded darts decked with gold, with
embroidered housings of steeds, embrowned with dust, with the lopped off
arms of cavalry soldiers, decked with bracelets and lying about, with
polished and sharp lances and bright swords, with variegated head-gears
fallen off (from heads) and scattered about, with beautiful
crescent-shaped arrows decked with gold, with housings of steeds, with
skins of the Ranku deer, torn and crushed, with beautiful and costly gems
that decked the head-gears of kings, with their umbrellas lying about and
yak tails and fans, with faces, bright as the lotus or the moon, of
heroic warriors, decked with beautiful ear-rings and graced with well-cut
beards, lying about and radiant with other ornaments of gold, the earth
looked like the firmament besmangled with planets and stars. Thus, O
Bharata, the two armies, viz., thine and theirs, encountering each other
in battle, crushed each other. And after the combatants had been
fatigued, routed, and crushed, O Bharata, dark night set in and the
battle could no longer be seen. Thereupon both the Kurus and the Pandavas
withdrew their armies, when that awful night of pitchy darkness came. And
having withdrawn their troops, both the Kurus and the Pandavas took rest
for the night, retiring to their respective tents.
