SECTION LXIX
"Narada said, 'Vena's son, king Prithu, O Srinjaya, we hear, fell a prey
to death, In the Rajasuya sacrifice he performed, the great Rishis
installed him as Emperor (of the world). He vanquished all, and his
achievements, became known (all over the world). For this he came to be
called Prithu (the celebrated). And because he protected all people from
wounds and injuries, for this he became a true Kshatriya.[115] Beholding
Vena's son, Prithu, all his subjects said, We are highly pleased with
him. In consequence of this affection that he enjoyed of his subjects he
came to be called a Raja.[116] During the time of Prithu, the earth,
without being cultivated, yielded crops in sufficiency. All the kine,
again, yielded milk whenever they were touched. Every lotus was full of
honey. The Kusa blades were all of gold, agreeable to the touch, and
otherwise delightful. And the subjects of Prithu made clothes of these
blades and the beds also on which they lay. All the fruits were soft and
sweet and like unto Amrita (in taste). And these constituted the food of
his subjects, none amongst whom had ever to starve. And all men in
Prithu's time were hale and hearty. And all their wishes were crowned
with fruition. They had nothing to fear. On trees, or in caves, they
dwelt as they liked. His dominions were not distributed into provinces
and towns. The people lived happily and in joy as each desired. When king
Prithu went to the sea, the waves became solid. The very mountains used
to yield him openings that he might pass through them. The standard of
his car never broke (obstructed by anything). Once on a time, the tall
trees of the forest, the mountains, the gods, the Asuras, men, the
snakes, the seven Rishis, the Apsaras, and the Pitris, all came to
Prithu, seated at his ease, and addressing him, said, 'Thou art our
Emperor. Thou art our king. Thou art our protector and Father. Thou art
our Lord. Therefore, O great king, give us boons after our own hearts,
through which we may, for ever, obtain gratification and joy.' Unto them
Prithu, the son of Vena, said, So be it. Then taking up his Ajagava
bow[117] and some terrible arrows the like of which existed not, he
reflected for a moment. He then addressed the Earth, saying, 'Coming
quickly, O Earth! Yield to these the milk they desire. From that, blessed
be thou, I will give them the food they solicit.' Thus addressed by him,
the Earth said, 'It behoveth thee, O hero, to regard me as thy daughter.'
Prithu answered, So be it!--And then that great ascetic, his passions
under control, made all arrangements (for milking the Earth. Then the
entire assemblage of creatures began to milk the Earth). And first of
all, the tall trees of the forest rose for milking her, The Earth then,
full of affection, stood there desiring a calf, a milker, and vessels
(wherein to hold the milk). Then the blossoming Sala became the calf, the
Banian became the milker, torn buds became the milk, and the auspicious
fig tree became the vessel. (Next, the mountains milked her). The Eastern
hill, whereon the Sun rises, became the calf; the prince of mountains,
viz., Meru, became the milker; the diverse gems and deciduous herbs
became the milk; and the stones became the vessels (for holding that
milk). Next, one of the gods became the milker, and all things capable of
bestowing energy and strength became the coveted milk. The Asuras then
milked the Earth, having wine for their milk, and using an unbaked pot
for their vessel. In that act, Dwimurddhan became the milker, and
Virochana, the calf. The human beings milked the Earth for cultivation
and crops. The self-created Manu became their calf, and Prithu himself
the milker. Next, the Snakes milked the Earth, getting poison as the
milk, and using a vessel made of a gourd, Dhritarashtra became the
milker, and Takshaka the calf. The seven Rishis, capable of producing
everything by their fiat,[118] then milked the Earth, getting the Vedas
as their milk. Vrihaspati became the milker, the Chhandas were the
vessel, and the excellent Soma, the calf. The Yakshas, milking the Earth,
got the power of disappearance at will as the milk in an unbaked pot.
Vaisravana (Kuvera) became their milker, and Vrishadhvaja their calf. The
Gandharvas and the Apsaras milked all fragrant perfumes in a vessel made
of a lotus-leaf. Chitraratha became their calf, and the puissant
Viswaruchi their milker. The Pitris milked the Earth, getting Swaha as
their milk in a vessel of silver. Yama, the son of Vivaswat, became their
calf, and (the Destroyer Antaka) their milker. Even thus was the Earth
milked by that assemblage of creatures who all got for milk what they
each desired. The very calves and vessels employed by them are existing
to this day and may always be seen. The powerful Prithu, the son of Vena,
performing various sacrifices, gratified all creatures in respect of all
their desires by gifts of articles agreeable to their hearts. And he
caused golden images to be made of every article on earth, and bestowed
them all on the Brahmanas as his great Horse-sacrifice,[119] The king
caused six and sixty thousand elephants to be made of gold, and all those
he gave away unto the Brahmanas. And this whole earth also the king
caused to be decked with jewels and gems and gold, and gave her away unto
the Brahmanas. When he died, O Srinjaya, who was superior to thee as
regards the four cardinal virtues and who, superior to thee, was,
therefore, much superior to thy son thou shouldst not, saying 'Oh,
