SECTION LXVI
"Narada said, 'Gaya, the son of Amartarayas, O Srinjaya, we hear, fell a
prey to death, That king, for a hundred years, ate nothing but what
remained of the libations of clarified butter poured into the sacrificial
fire. Agni (gratified with his proof of great devotion) offered to give
him a boon. Gaya solicited the boon (desired), saying, 'I desire to have
a thorough knowledge of the Vedas through ascetic penances, through
practice of Brahmacharya, and of vows and rules, and through the grace of
my superiors.[107] I desire also inexhaustible wealth, through practice
of the duties of my own order and without injury to others. I wish also
that I may always be able to make gifts unto the Brahmanas, with
devotion. Let me also procreate sons upon wives belonging to my own order
and not upon others. Let me be able to give away food with devotion. Let
my heart always delight in righteousness. O (Agni) thou supreme cleanser,
let no impediment overtake me while I am engaged in acts for the
attainment of religious merit.' Saying 'Be it so,' Agni disappeared then
and there. And Gaya also, acquiring all he had asked for, subjugated his
foes in fair fight. King Gaya then performed, for a full hundred years,
diverse kinds of sacrifices with profuse presents unto the Brahmanas and
the vows called Chaturmasyas and others. Every year, for a century, the
king gave (unto the Brahmanas) one hundred and sixty thousand kine, ten
thousand steeds, and one crore gold (nishkas) upon rising (on the
completion of his sacrifices). Under every constellation also he gave
away the presents ordained for each of these occasions.[108] Indeed, the
king performed various sacrifices like another Soma or another Angiras.
In his great Horse-sacrifice, king Gaya, making a golden earth, gave her
away unto the Brahmanas. In that sacrifice, the stakes of king Gaya were
exceedingly costly, being of gold, decked with gems delightful to all
creatures. Capable of killing every wish, Gaya gave those stakes unto
well-pleased Brahmanas and other people. The diverse classes of creatures
dwelling in the ocean, the woods, the islands, the rivers male and
female, the waters, the towns, the provinces, and even in heaven, were
all gratified with wealth and food distributed at Gaya's sacrifices. And
they all said, 'No other sacrifice can come up to this one of Gaya. The
sacrificial altar of Gaya was thirty Yojanas in length, six and twenty
Yojanas in width, and twenty Yojanas in height. And it was made entirely
of gold, and overspread with pearls and diamonds and gems. And he gave
away this altar unto the Brahmanas, as also robes and ornaments. And the
munificent monarch also gave unto the Brahmanas other presents of the
kind laid down (in the scriptures). Upon the completion of that sacrifice
five and twenty hills of food remained untouched, and many lakes and
several beautifully flowing rivulets of juicy drinks, and many heaps,
besides, of robes and ornaments. And in consequence of the merit of that
great sacrifice, Gaya came to be well-known in the three worlds. And due
to that sacrifice are the eternal Banian and the sacred Brahmasara. When
he died, O Srinjaya, who was superior to thee in respect of four cardinal
virtues and who superior to thee, was, therefore, much superior to thy
the latter who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial present.'"
