SECTION XLIV
"Dhritarashtra said, 'That which thou tellest me, O Suta, about the
battle, fierce and terrible, between the one and the many, and the
victory of that illustrious one, that story of the prowess of Subhadra's
son is highly wonderful and almost incredible. I do not, however, regard
it as a marvel that is absolutely beyond belief in the case of those that
have righteousness for their refuge. After Duryodhana was beaten back and
a hundred princes slain, what course was pursued by the warriors of my
army against the son of Subhadra?'
"Sanjaya said, 'Their mouths became dry, and eyes restless. Sweat covered
their bodies, and their hairs stood on their ends. Despairing of
vanquishing their foe, they became ready to leave the field. Abandoning
their wounded brothers and sires and sons and friends and relatives by
marriage and kinsmen they fled, urging their steeds and elephants to
their utmost speed. Beholding them broken and routed, Drona and Drona's
son, and Vrihadvala, and Kripa, and Duryodhana, and Karna, and
Kritavarman, and Suvala's son (Sakuni), rushed in great wrath against the
unvanquished son of Subhadra. Almost all these, O king, were beaten back
by thy grandson. Only one warrior then, viz., Lakshmana, brought up in
luxury, accomplished in arrows, endued with great energy, and fearless in
consequence of inexperience and pride, proceeded against the son of
Arjuna. Anxious about his son, his father (Duryodhana) turned back for
following him. Other mighty car warriors, turned back for following
Duryodhana. All of them then drenched Abhimanyu with showers of arrows,
like clouds pouring rain on the mountain-breast. Abhimanyu, however,
single-handed, began to crush them like the dry wind that blows in every
direction destroying gathering masses of clouds. Like one infuriated
elephant encountering another, Arjuna's son then encountered thy
invincible grandson, Lakshmana, of great personal beauty, endued with
great bravery, staying near his father with outstretched bow, brought up
in every luxury, and resembling a second prince of the Yakshas[74].
Encountering Lakshmana, that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the son of
Subhadra, had his two arms and chest struck with his sharp shafts. Thy
grandson, the mighty-armed Abhimanyu then, filled with rage like a snake
struck (with a rod), addressing, O king, thy (other) grandson, said,
'Look well on this world, for thou shalt (soon) have to go to the other.
In the very sight of all thy kinsmen, I will despatch thee to Yama's
abode.' Saying thus that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the mighty-armed
son of Subhadra, took out a broad-headed arrow that resembled a snake
just emerged from its slough. That shaft, sped by Abhimanyu's arms, cut
off the beautiful head, decked with ear-rings, of Lakshmana, that was
graced with a beautiful nose, beautiful eye-brows, and exceedingly
good-looking curls. Beholding Lakshmana slain, thy troops uttered
exclamations of Oh and, Alas. Upon the slaughter of his dear son,
Duryodhana became filled with rage. That bull among Kshatriyas then
loudly urged the Kshatriyas under him, saying, 'Slay this one!' Then
Drona, and Kripa, and Karna, and Drona's son and Vrihadvala, and
Kritavarman, the son of Hridika,--these six car-warriors,---encompassed
Abhimanyu. Piercing them with sharp arrows and beating them off from him,
the son of Arjuna fell with great speed and fury upon the vast forces of
Jayadratha. Thereupon, the Kalingas, the Nishadas, and the valiant son of
Kratha, all clad in mail, cut off his path by encompassing him with their
elephant-division. The battle then that took place between Phalguni's son
and those warriors was obstinate and fierce. Then the son of Arjuna began
to destroy that elephant-division as the wind coursing in every direction
destroys vast masses of gathering clouds in the welkin. Then Kratha
covered the son of Arjuna with showers of arrows, while many other
car-warriors headed by Drona, having returned to the field, rushed at
him, scattering sharp and mighty weapons. Checking all those weapons by
means of his own arrows, the son of Arjuna began to afflict the son of
Kratha with ceaseless showers of shafts, with great despatch and inspired
by the desire of slaying his antagonist. The latter's bow and shafts, and
bracelets, and arms, and head decked with diadem, and umbrella, and
standard, and charioteer, and steeds, were all cut off and felled by
Abhimanyu. When Kratha's son, possessed of nobility of lineage, good
behaviour, acquaintance with the scriptures, great strength, fame, and
power of arms, was slain, the other heroic combatants almost all turned
away from the fight.'"[75]
