
SECTION CI
"Vaisampayana said, 'O monarch, after the nuptials were over, king
Santanu established his beautiful bride in his household. Soon after was
born of Satyavati an intelligent and heroic son of Santanu named
Chitrangada. He was endued with great energy and became an eminent man.
The lord Santanu of great prowess also begat upon Satyavati another son
named Vichitravirya, who became a mighty bowman and who became king after
his father. And before that bull among men, viz., Vichitravirya, attained
to majority, the wise king Santanu realised the inevitable influence of
Time. And after Santanu had ascended to heaven. Bhishma, placing himself
under the command of Satyavati, installed that suppressor of foes, viz.,
Chitrangada, on the throne, who, having soon vanquished by his prowess
all monarchs, considered not any man as his equal. And beholding that he
could vanquish men, Asuras, and the very gods, his namesake, the powerful
king of the Gandharvas, approached him for an encounter. Between that
Gandharva and that foremost one of the Kurus, who were both very
powerful, there occurred on the field of Kurukshetra a fierce combat
which lasted full three years on the banks of the Saraswati. In that
terrible encounter characterised by thick showers of weapons and in which
the combatants ground each other fiercely, the Gandharva, who had greater
prowess or strategic deception, slew the Kuru prince. Having slain
Chitrangada--that first of men and oppressor of foes--the Gandharva
ascended to heaven. When that tiger among men endued with great prowess
was slain, Bhishma, the son of Santanu, performed, O king, all his
obsequies. He then installed the boy Vichitravirya of mighty arms, still
in his minority, on the throne of the Kurus. And Vichitravirya, placing
himself under the command of Bhishma, ruled the ancestral kingdom. And he
adored Santanu's son Bhishma who was conversant with all the rules of
religion and law; so, indeed, Bhishma also protected him that was so
obedient to the dictates of duty.'"
