SECTION XII
"Sanjaya said, 'Yes, as I saw everything with my own eyes, I will
describe to thee how Drona fell down, slain by the Pandavas and the
Srinjayas. Having obtained the command of the troops, that mighty
car-warrior, viz., Bharadwaja's son, said these words unto thy son in the
midst of all the troops, 'Inasmuch as, O king, thou hast honoured me with
the command of the troops immediately after that bull among the Kauravas,
viz., the son of the Ocean-going (Ganga), take thou, O Bharata, the
adequate fruit of that act of thine. What business of thine shall I now
achieve? Ask thou the boon that thou desirest.' Then king Duryodhana
having consulted with Karna and Duhsasana and others, said unto the
preceptor, that invincible warrior and foremost of all victors, these
words, 'If thou wouldst give me a boon, then, seizing that foremost of
car-warriors, viz., Yudhishthira, alive, bring him unto me here.' Then
that preceptor of the Kurus, hearing those words of thy son, returned him
the following answer, gladdening all the troops therewith, Praised be
Kunti's son (Yudhishthira) whose seizing only thou desirest. O thou that
art difficult of being vanquished, thou askest not any other boon (one
for example) for his slaughter. For what reason, O tiger among men, dost
thou not desire his death? Thou art, without doubt, O Duryodhana, not
ignorant of policy. Why, therefore, dost thou not allude to Yudhisthira's
death? It is a matter of great wonder that king Yudhisthira, the just,
hath no enemy desirous of his death. Inasmuch as thou wishest him to be
alive, thou (either) seekest to preserve thy race from extinction, or, O
chief of the Bharatas, thou, having vanquished the Pandavas in battle,
art desirous of establishing brotherly relation (with them) by giving
them their kingdom. Auspicious was the birth of that intelligent prince.
Truly is he called Ajatasatru (the foeless one), for even thou bearest
affection for him.' Thus addressed by Drona, O Bharata, the feeling that
is ever present in thy son's breast suddenly made itself known. Not even
persons like Vrihaspati can conceal the expressions of their countenance.
For this, thy son, O king, filled with joy, said these words, 'By the
slaughter of Kunti's son in battle, O preceptor, victory cannot be mine.
If Yudhishthira were slain, Partha then, without doubt, would slay all of
us. All of them, again, cannot be slain by the very gods. He amongst them
that will, in that case, survive, will exterminate us. Yudhishthira,
however, is truthful in his promises. If brought hither (alive),
vanquished once more at dice, the Pandavas will once more go to the
woods, for they are all obedient to Yudhishthira. It is evident that such
a victory will be an enduring one. It is for this that I do not, by any
means, desire the slaughter of king Yudhishthira the just.' Ascertaining
this crooked purpose of Duryodhana, Drona who was conversant with the
truths of the science of profit and gifted with great intelligence,
reflected a little and gave him the boon circumscribing it in the
following way.'
"Drona said, 'If the heroic Arjuna do not protect Yudhishthira in battle,
thou mayst think the eldest Pandava as already brought under thy control.
As regards Partha, the very gods and the Asuras together headed by Indra,
cannot advance against him in battle. It is for this that I dare not do
what thou askest me to do. Without doubt, Arjuna is disciple, and I was
his first preceptor in arms. He is, however, young, endued with great
good fortune, and excessively intent (on the achievement of his
purposes). He hath obtained, again, many weapons from Indra and Rudra. He
hath besides been provoked by thee. I dare not, therefore, do what thou
askest me. Let Arjuna be removed, by whatsoever means that can be done,
from the battle. Upon Partha being withdrawn, thou mayst regard king
Yudhishthira as already vanquished. Upon his seizure is victory and not
upon his slaughter, O bull among men! Even by stratagem, can his seizure
be accomplished. Seizing that king devoted to truth and righteousness, I
will, without doubt, O monarch, bring him to thy control this very day,
if he stays before me in battle even for a moment, of course, if
Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, that tiger among men, be withdrawn from the
field. In Phalguni's presence, however, O king, Yudhishthira is incapable
of being taken in battle even by the gods and the Asuras headed by Indra.'
"Sanjaya continued, 'After Drona had promised the king's seizure even
under these limitations, thy foolish sons regarded Yudhishthira as
already taken. Thy son (Duryodhana) knew Drona's partiality for the
Pandavas. In order to make Drona stick to his promise, therefore, he
divulged those counsels. Then, O chastiser of foes, the fact of Drona's
having promised to seize the (eldest) Pandava was proclaimed by
Duryodhana unto all his troops.'"
