SECTION LIX
"Narada said, 'Rama, the son of Dasaratha, O Srinjaya, we hear, fell a
prey to death. His subjects were as much delighted with him, as a sire is
delighted with the children of his loins. Endued with immeasurable
energy, countless virtues were there in him. Of unfading glory, Rama, the
elder brother of Lakshmana, at the command of his father, lived for
fourteen years in the woods, with his wife. That bull among men slew in
Janasthana fourteen thousand Rakshasas for the protection of the
ascetics. While dwelling there, the Rakshasa called Ravana, beguiling
both him and his companion (Lakshmana) abducted his wife, the princess of
Videha. Like the Three-eyed (Mahadeva), in days of old, slaying (the
Asura) Andhaka, Rama in wrath slew in battle that offender of Pulastya's
race who had never before been vanquished by any foe. Indeed, the
mighty-armed Rama slew in battle that descendant of Pulastya's race with
all his kinsmen and followers, that Rakshasa who was incapable of being
slain by the gods and the Asuras together, that wretch who was a thorn
unto the gods and the Brahmanas. In consequence of his affectionate
treatment of his subjects, the celestials worshipped Rama. Filling the
entire earth with his achievements, he was much applauded even by the
celestial Rishis. Compassionate unto all creatures, that king, having
acquired diverse realms and protected his subjects virtuously, performed
a great sacrifice without obstruction. And the lord, Rama, also performed
a hundred Horse-sacrifices and the great sacrifice called Jaruthya. And
with libations of clarified butter he contributed to Indra's delight.[96]
And by these acts of his, Rama conquered hunger and thirst, and all the
diseases to which living creatures are subject. Possessed of every
accomplishment, he always blazed forth with his own energy. Indeed, Rama,
the son of Dasaratha, greatly outshone all creatures. When Rama ruled his
kingdom, the Rishis, the gods, and men, all lived together on the earth.
The lives of living creatures were never otherwise. The life-breaths
also, called Prana, Apana, Samana, and the others, when Rama ruled his
kingdom, all performed their functions. All luminous bodies shone
brighter, and calamities never occurred. All his subjects were
long-lived. None died in youth. The dwellers of heaven highly gratified,
used to get, according to (the ordinances of) the four Vedas, libations
of clarified butter and other offerings of food made by men. His realms
were free from flies and gnats; and of beasts of prey and poisonous
reptiles, there were none. And none was of unrighteous tendencies, none
was covetous, and none was ignorant. The subjects, of all the (four)
orders, were engaged in righteous and desirable acts, When the Rakshasas,
about this time obstructed the offerings to the Pitris and the worship of
the gods in Janasthana, Lord Rama, slaying them, caused those offerings
and that worship to be once more given to the Pitris  and the gods. Men
were each blessed with a thousand children, and the period of their lives
was a thousand years. Seniors had never to perform Sraddhas of their
juniors.[97] Youthful in shape, of a dark-blue hue, of red eyes,
possessed of the tread of an infuriated elephant, with arms reaching down
to the knees, and beautiful and massive, of leonine shoulders, of great
strength, and beloved by all creatures, Rama ruled his kingdom for eleven
thousand years. His subjects always uttered his name. While Rama ruled
his kingdom, the world became extremely beautiful. Taking at last his
four kinds of subjects[98] with him Rama went to heaven, having
established his own line consisting of eight houses on the earth. When
even he died, O Srinjaya, who was superior to thee in respect of the four
cardinal virtues and superior to thy son, thou shouldst not lament,
saying 'Oh, Swaitya, Oh, Swaitya,' for thy son who performed no sacrifice
and made no sacrificial present.'"
and made no sacrificial present.'"
