SECTION LXVII
"Narada said, 'Rantideva, the son of Srinjaya, we hear, fell a prey to
death. That high-souled king had two hundred thousand cooks to distribute
excellent food, raw and cooked, like unto Amrita, unto the Brahmanas, by
day and by night, who might come to his house as guests.[109] The king
gave away unto the Brahmanas his wealth acquired by righteous means.
Having studied the Vedas, he subjugated his foes in fair fight. Of rigid
vows and always engaged in due performance of sacrifices, countless
animals, desirous of going to heaven, used to come to him of their own
accord.[110] So large was the number of animals sacrificed in the
Agnihotra of that king that the secretions flowing from his kitchen from
the heaps of skins deposited there caused a veritable river which from
this circumstance, came to be called the Charmanwati.[111] He,
incessantly gave away nishkas of bright gold unto the Brahmanas, 'I give
thee nishkas.' 'I give thee nishkas,' these were the words incessantly
uttered by him. 'I give thee,' 'I give thee' saying these words he gave
away thousands of nishkas. And once again, with soft words to the
Brahmanas, he gave away nishkas. Having given away, in course of a single
day, one crore of such coins, he thought that he had given away very
little. And, therefore, he would give away more. Who else is there that
would be able to give what he gave? The king gave away wealth, thinking,
If I do not give wealth in the hands of Brahmanas, great and eternal
grief, without doubt, will be mine.' For a hundred years, every
fortnight, he gave unto thousands of Brahmanas a golden bull into each,
followed by a century of kine and eight hundred pieces of nishkas. All
the articles that were needed for his Agnihotra, and all that were needed
for his other sacrifices, he gave away unto the Rishis, including
Karukas[112] and water-pots and plates and beds and carpets and vehicles,
and mansions and houses, and diverse kinds of trees, and various kinds of
viands. Whatever utensils and articles Rantideva possessed were of gold.
They that are acquainted with the history of ancient times seeing the
superhuman affluence of Rantideva, sing this song, viz., 'We have not
seen such accumulated treasures even in the abode of Kuvera; what need be
said, therefore, of human beings?' And people wonderingly said, Without
doubt, the kingdom of Rantideva is made of gold.[113] On such nights,
when guests were assembled in the abode of Rantideva, one and twenty
thousand kine were sacrificed (for feeding them). And yet the royal cook
adorned with begemmed ear-rings, had to cry out, saying, 'Eat as much
soup as you like, for, of meat, there is not as much today as in other
days. Whatever gold was left belonging to Rantideva, he gave even that
remnant away unto the Brahmanas during the progress of one of his
sacrifices. In his very sight the gods used to take the libations of
clarified butter poured into the fire for them, and the Pitris the food
that was offered to them, in Sraddhas. And all superior Brahmanas used to
obtain from him (the means of gratifying) all their desires. When he
died, O Srinjaya, who was superior to thee in respect of the four
cardinal virtues and who, superior to thee was, therefore, much superior
to thy son, thou shouldst not, saying, 'Oh, Swaitya, Oh, Swaitya,' grieve
for the latter who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial
