SECTION CLXXVI
"Sanjaya said, 'During the progress of that battle between Karna and the
Rakshasa, the valiant Alayudha, that prince of Rakshasa, appeared (on the
field). Accompanied by a large force, he approached Duryodhana. Indeed,
surrounded by many thousands of frightful Rakshasas of diverse forms and
endued with great heroism, he appeared (on the field) recollecting his
old quarrel (with the Pandavas). His kinsmen, that valiant Vaka, who ate
Brahmanas, as also Kirmira of great energy, and his friend Hidimva, had
been slain (by Bhima). He had waited for a long time, brooding over his
old quarrel. Learning now that a nocturnal battle was raging, he came,
impelled by the desire of slaying Bhima in fight, like an infuriated
elephant or an angry snake. Desirous of battle, he addressed Duryodhana
and said, 'It is known to thee, how my kinsmen, the Rakshasa Vaka and
Kirmira and Hidimva have been slain by Bhima. What shall I say more, the
virgin Hidimva was formerly deflowered by him, disregarding us and the
other Rakshasas. I am here, O king, to slay that Bhima with all his
followers, steeds, cars, and elephants, as also that son of Hidimva with
friends. Slaying today all the sons of Kunti, Vasudeva and others that
walk before them, I will devour them with all their followers. Command
all thy troops to desist from battle. We will fight with the Pandavas.'
"Hearing these words of his, Duryodhana became very glad. Surrounded by
his brothers, the king, accepting the words of the Rakshasa, said,
'Placing thee with thine in the van, we will fight the foe. My troops
will not stand as indifferent spectators since their enmity has not
cooled.' That bull amongst Rakshasa, saying, 'Let it be so,' unto the
king, speedily proceeded against Bhima, accompanied by his cannibal
force. Endued with a blazing form, Alayudha rode a car bright like the
sun. Indeed, O monarch, that car of his was similar to Ghatotkacha's car.
The rattle also of Alayudha's car was as deep as that of Ghatotkacha's,
and it was decked with many arches. That large car was covered with
bear-skins, and its measure was a nalwa. His steeds, like those of
Ghatotkacha, were endued with great speed, resembled elephants in shape,
and had the voice of asses. Subsisting on flesh and blood and gigantic in
size, a hundred of them were yoked unto his vehicle. Indeed, the rattle
of his car, like that of his rival, was loud and strong, and its string
was as hard. His shafts also, winged with gold and whetted on stone, were
as large as Ghatotkacha's, being of the measure of Akshas. The heroic
Alayudha was as mighty-armed as Ghatotkacha, and the standard of his car,
endued with the splendour of the sun or fire, was, like Ghatotkacha's,
pierced upon by vultures and ravens. In form, he was more handsome than
Ghatotkacha, and his face, agitated (with wrath) looked blazing. With
blazing Angadas and blazing diadem and garlands, decked with floral
wreaths and headgear and sword armed with mace and Bhushundis and short
clubs and ploughs and bows and arrows, and with skin black and hard as
that of the elephant, riding on that car possessed of the splendour of
fire, he looked, while employed in afflicting and routing the Pandava
host, like a roving cloud in the welkin, decked with flashes of lighting.
(As Alayudha came to battle), the principal kings of the Pandava army
endued with great might, and armed with (sword and) shield, and clad in
mail, engaged in fight, O king, with joyous hearts.'"
