SECTION LXXIV
"Sanjaya said, 'When the spies (of Duryodhana), having heard that loud
uproar made by the Pandavas desirous of victory, informed (their masters
of the cause), Jayadratha, overwhelmed with sorrow, and with heart
stupefied with grief, and like one sinking in a fathomless ocean of
distress, slowly rose up and having reflected for a long while, proceeded
to the assembly of the kings. Reflecting for a while in the presence of
those gods among men, Jayadratha, in fear of Abhimanyu's father and
covered with shame, said these words--He who in Pandu's soil was begotten
by Indra under the influence of desire, that wicked wretch is thinking of
despatching me to the abode of Yama! Blessed be ye, I shall, therefore go
back to my home from desire of life! Or, ye bulls among Kshatriyas,
protect me by the force of your weapons! Partha seeks to slay me, ye
heroes, render me fearless! Drona and Duryodhana and Kripa, and Karna,
and the ruler of the Madras, and Valhika, and Dussasana and others, are
capable of protecting a person who is afflicted by Yama himself. When
however, I am threatened by Phalguna alone, will not all these the lords
of earth, will not all of you, joined together, be able to protect me?
Having heard the shouts of joy of the Pandavas, great hath been my fear.
My limbs, ye lords of earth, have become powerless like those of a person
on the point of death? Without doubt, the wielder of Gandiva hath sworn
for my death! It is for this that the Pandavas are shouting in joy at a
time when they should weep! Let alone the rulers of men, the very gods
and Gandharvas, the Asuras, the Uragas, and the Rakshasas, cannot venture
to baffle a vow of Arjuna. Therefore, ye bulls among men, blessed be ye,
give me permission (to leave the Kuru camp). I want to make myself
scarce. The Pandavas will no longer be able to find me! While indulging
in such lamentations, with heart agitated by fear, king Duryodhana,
always looking upon the accomplishment of his own business to be
preferable to everything else, said unto him these words-Do not fear, O
tiger among men! O bull among men, who will seek to encounter thee in
battle when thou will remain in the midst of these Kshatriya heroes!
Myself, Vikartana's son, Karna, Chitrasena, Vivinsati, Bhurisravas, Sala,
Salya, the invincible Vrishasena, Purumitra, Jaya, Bhoja, Sudakshina the
ruler of the Kamvojas, Satyavrata, the mighty-armed, Vikarna, Durmukha,
Dussasana, Subahu, the ruler of the Kalingas, with his weapons upraised,
Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti, Drona, Drona's son, and Suvala's son
(Sakuni),--these and numerous other kings will, with their forces, face
the battle surrounding thee on all sides! Let the fever of thy heart,
therefore, be dispelled! Thou art thyself one of the foremost of
car-warriors! O thou of immeasurable splendour, thou thyself art a hero!
Being what thou art how canst thou then see any cause of fear, O king of
the Sindhus! The eleven Akshauhinis of troops I own will carefully fight
for protecting thee! Therefore, do not fear, O king of the Sindhus! Let
thy fears be dispelled!'
'Sanjaya continued, 'Thus comforted, O monarch, by thy son, the king of
the Sindhus then, accompanied by Duryodhana, repaired that very night to
Drona (the generalissimo of the Kuru army). Then, O king, having touched
Drona's feet with reverence, and taken his seat with humility, he asked
the preceptor these words--In hitting the aim, in hitting it from it
distance, in tightness of hand, and in the force of the stroke, O
illustrious one, tell the difference between myself and Phalguna! O
preceptor, I wish to know accurately the difference as regards
proficiency (in the science of arms) between myself and Arjuna! Say it
unto me truly'
"Drona said, 'Of tutorial instruction, both of you, i.e., thyself and
Arjuna, have had the same measure, O son! In consequence, however, of
yoga and the hard life led by Arjuna, he is superior to thee! Thou
shouldst not, however, for any reason, cherish fear of Partha! Without
doubt, I will, O son, protect thee from this fear! The very gods, cannot
prevail over him who is protected by my arms! I will form an array which
Partha will not succeed in piercing![127] Therefore contained thou in
battle, do not fear, observing the duties of thy own order! O mighty
car-warrior, tread in the track of thy sires and grandsires! Having duly
studied the Vedas, thou hast poured libations, according to the
ordinance, into fire! Thou hast also performed many sacrifices: Death
cannot, therefore, be an object of terror to thee! (For if thou diest),
attaining then to that great good fortune which is unattainable by vile
men, thou will acquire all those excellent regions in heaven that are
attainable by the might of one's arms! The Kaurvas, the Pandavas, the
Vrishnis, and other men, as also myself with my son, are all mortal and
short-lived! Think of this. One after another, all of us, slain by Time
which is all powerful, shall go to the other world, carrying with us only
our respective deeds I Those regions that ascetics acquire by undergoing
severe penances, those regions are acquired by heroic Kshatriyas that are
observant of the duties of their order. Even thus was the ruler of the
Sindhus consoled by Bharadwaja's son. Banishing his fear of Partha, he
set his heart on battle. Then, O king thy troops also felt great delight,
and the loud sounds of musical instruments were heard, mingled with
leonine shouts.'"
