SECTION CIV
"Dhritarashtra, said, 'Describe to me, O Sanjaya, the diverse kinds of
standards resplendent with great beauty, of both the Partha and our
warriors (in that battle).'
"Sanjaya said, 'Hear, O king, of the diverse kinds of standards of those
high-souled warriors. Listen to me as I describe their forms and names.
Indeed, O king, upon the cars of those foremost of car-warriors were seen
diverse kinds of standards that shone like blazing flames of fire. Made
of gold, or decked with gold, or adorned with strings of gold and each
looking like the golden mountain (Meru), diverse kinds of standards were
there that were highly beautiful. And those standards of the warriors had
attached all around them excellent banners. Indeed, having banners of
diverse hues attached to them all around, those standards looked
exceedingly beautiful. Those banners, again, moved by the wind, looked
like fair ladies dancing in the midst of a sporting arena. Endued with
the splendour of the rainbow, those banners, O bull of Bharata's race, of
those car-warriors, floating in the breeze, highly adorned their cars.
The standard, bearing the sign of the ape of fierce face and tail, like
that of the lion, belonging to Dhananjaya, seemed to inspire fear in that
battle. That standard, O king of the wielder of Gandiva, bearing that
foremost of apes, and adorned with many banners, frightened the Kuru
host. Similarly, the lion-tail standard-top of Drona's son, O Bharata, we
saw, was endued with the effulgence of the rising sun Decked with gold,
floating in the breeze, possessed of the splendour of the rainbow, the
standard mark of Drona's son appeared on high, inspiring the foremost of
Kuru warriors with joy. The standard of Adhiratha's son bore the mark of
an elephant-rope made of gold. It seemed, O king, in battle to fill the
whole welkin. The banner, adorned with gold and garlands, attached to the
standard of Karna in battle, shaken by the wind, seemed to dance upon his
car. The preceptor of the Pandavas, that Brahmana, given to ascetic
penances, viz., Kripa the son of Gotama, had for his mark an excellent
bovine bull. That high-souled one, O king, with that bovine bull, looked
as resplendent, as the Destroyer of the three cities[147] looks
resplendent with his bull. Vrishasena has a peacock made of gold and
adorned with jewels and gems. And it stood on his standard, as if in the
act of crowing, and always adorned the wan of the army. With that
peacock, the car of the high-souled Vrishasena shone, like the car, O
king, of Skanda (the celestial generalissimo) shining 'with his peacock
unrivalled and beautiful ploughshare made of gold and looking like flame
of fire. That ploughshare, O sire, looked resplendent on his car. Salya,
the ruler of the Madras, we saw, had on his standard-top an image like
the presiding goddess of corn, endued with beauty and producing every
seed. A silver boar adorned the standard-top of the ruler of the Sindhus.
Decked with golden chains, it was of the splendour of a white
crystal.[148] With that silver mark on his barrier, the ruler of the
Sindhus looked as resplendent, as Surya in days of yore in the battle
between the celestials and the Asuras. The standard of Somadatta's son,
devoted to sacrifices, bore the sign of the sacrificial stake. It was
seen to shine like the sun or the moon. That sacrificial stake made of
gold, O king of Somadatta's son, looked resplendent like the tall stake
erected in the foremost of sacrifices called the Rajasuya. The standard
of Salya, O monarch, bearing a huge silver-elephant was adorned, on all
sides, with peacocks made of gold. The standard, O bull of Bharata's
race, adorned thy troops like the huge white elephant adorning the host
of the celestial king. On the standard decked with gold, of king
Duryodhana, was an elephant adorned with gems. Tinkling with the sound of
a hundred bells, O king, that standard stood upon the excellent car of
that hero. And, O king, thy son, that bull among the Kurus, looked
resplendent, O monarch, with that tall standard in battle. These nine
excellent standards stood erect among thy divisions. The tenth standard
seen there was of Arjuna, decked with that huge ape. And with that
standard Arjuna looked highly resplendent, like Himavat with a blazing
fire (on its top). Then many mighty car-warriors, all chastisers of foes,
quickly took up their beautiful, bright and large bows for the sake of
(resisting) Arjuna. Similarly, Partha also, that achiever of celestial
feats, took up his foe-destroying bow Gandiva, in consequence, O king, of
thy evil policy. Many royal warriors, O king, were then slain in that
battle owing to thy fault. Rulers of men came from different realms
invited (by thy sons). And with them perished many steeds and many
elephants. Then those mighty car-warriors headed by Duryodhana (on one
side) and that bull amongst the Pandavas on the other, uttered loud roars
and began the encounter. And the feat that Kunti's son, having Krishna
for his charioteer, achieved there, was highly wonderful, inasmuch as,
alone, he encountered fearlessly all those warriors united together. And
that mighty-armed hero looked resplendent as he stretched his bow
Gandiva, desirous of vanquishing all those tigers among men for slaying
the ruler of the Sindhus. With his shafts shot in thousands, that tiger
among men, viz., Arjuna, that scorcher of foes, made all those warriors
invisible (by means of his arrowy showers). On their side, those tigers
among men, those mighty car-warriors, also made Partha invisible by means
of their clouds of shafts shot from all sides. Beholding Arjuna, that
bull of Kuru's race covered by those lions among men with their shafts,
loud was the uproar made by thy troops.'
 SECTION CV
"Dhritarashtra said, 'After Arjuna had got the ruler of the Sindhus
within sight, what, O Sanjaya, did the Panchalas, attacked by
Bharadwaja's son, do, encountering the Kurus?'
"Sanjaya said, In the afternoon of that day, O monarch, in the battle
that took place between the Panchalas and the Kurus, Drona became, as it
were, the stake (for which each fought on to win or lose). The Panchalas,
O sire, desirous of slaying Drona, cheerfully uttered loud roars and shot
dense showers of arrows. Indeed, that encounter between the Panchalas and
the Kurus, fierce, awful, and highly wonderful as it was, resembled that
in days of yore between the gods and the Asuras. Indeed, all the
Panchalas with the Pandavas, obtaining Drona's car (within reach) used
many mighty weapons, desirous of piercing through his array. Car-warriors
stationed on their cars, causing the earth to shake under them, and
showering their arrowy downpours, rushed towards Drona's car, without
much speed. Then that mighty car-warrior among the Kaikeyas, viz.,
Vrihatkshatra, incessantly scattering keen shafts that resembled the
thunder in force, proceeded towards Drona. Then Kshemadhurti of great
fame quickly rushed against Vrihatkshatra, shooting keen arrows by
thousands. Beholding this, that bull among the Chedis, viz.,
Dhrishtaketu, endued with great might, quickly proceeded against
Kshemadhurti, like Mahendra proceeding against the Asura Samvara. Seeing
him rush with great impetuosity, like the Destroyer himself with
wide-open mouth, that mighty bowman viz., Viradhanwan, proceeded against
him with great speed. King Yudhishthira staying there at the head of his
division from desire of victory, was resisted by valiant Drona himself.
Thy son Vikarna, O lord, endued with great prowess, proceeded against the
rushing Nakula of great prowess, that warrior accomplished in battle.
That scorcher of foes, viz., Durmukha, covered the advancing Sahadeva
with many thousands of swiftly-coursing shafts. The heroic Vyughradatta
resisted that tiger among men, viz., Satyaki making him repeatedly
tremble by means of his sharp and keen-pointed shafts. The son of
Somadatta resisted the (five) sons of Draupadi, those tigers among men,
those great car-warriors, wrathfully shooting mighty shafts. That mighty
car-warrior, viz., Rishyasringa's fierce son (the Rakshasa Alamvusha), of
awful mien, resisted the advancing Bhimasena filled with wrath. The
encounter that then took place between that man and Rakshasa resembled, O
king, the battle in days of yore between Rama, and Ravana. Then, O
Bharata, Yudhishthira, that chief of the Bharatas, struck Drona with
ninety straight shafts in all his vital parts. Enraged by the famous son
of Kunti, Drona struck him in return, O chief of the Bharatas, in the
centre of the chest with five and twenty shafts. And once more, in the
very sight of all the bowmen, Drona struck him, with his steeds,
charioteer, and standard, with twenty shafts. Pandu's son, of virtuous
soul, displaying great lightness of hand, baffled with his own arrowy
showers those arrows shot by Drona, Then that great bowman Drona, filled
with rage, cut off the bow of the high souled king Yudhishthira the just.
Then that great car-warrior (viz., the son of Bharadwaja) speedily
covered the bowless Yudhishthira with many thousands of shafts. Beholding
the king made invisible by the shafts of Bharadwaja's son, all thought
that Yudhishthira was dead, and some thought that the king had fled
before Drona. And many cried out, O king, saying, 'Alas the king hath
been slain by the high-souled Brahmana.' Then, king Yudhishthira the
just, fallen into great distress, having laid aside that bow cut off by
Bharadwaja's son in battle took up another excellent, bright and tougher
bow. And that hero then cut off in that encounter all those shafts shot
in thousands by Drona. All this seemed exceedingly wonderful. Having cut
off those shafts, O king, Yudhishthira, with eyes red in wrath, took up
in that battle a dart, capable of riving even a mountain. Equipped with a
golden staff, of awful mien, having eight bells attached to it, and
exceedingly terrible, the mighty Yudhishthira, taking it up, uttered a
loud roar. And with that roar, O Bharata, the son of Pandu inspired all
creatures with fear. Beholding that dart upraised by king Yudhishthira
the just, all creatures, as if with one accord, said, 'Good be to Drona!'
Hurled from the king's arms, that dart resembling a snake just freed from
its slough, coursed towards Drona, illumining the welkin and all the
directions cardinal and subsidiary, like a she-snake with fiery mouth,
Beholding it coursing towards him impetuously, O king, Drona, that
foremost of all persons acquainted with weapons invoked into existence
the weapon called Brahma. That weapon, reducing that dart of terrible
mien into dust, coursed towards the car of the illustrious son of Pandu.
Then, O sire, king Yudhishthira of' great wisdom baffled that weapon of
Drona, thus coursing towards him by himself invoking the Brahma weapon.
And then piercing Drona himself in that battle with five straight shafts,
he cut off, with a sharp razor-faced shaft, the large bow of Drona. Then
Drona, that grinder of Kshatriyas, throwing aside that broken bow, hurled
with great force, O sire, a mace at the son of Dharma. Beholding that
mace impetuously coursing towards him, Yudhishthira, O chastiser of foes,
filled with rage, took up a mace. Then those two maces, both hurled with
great force, encountering each other in mid-air, produced by their
collision sparks of fire and then fell down on the earth. Then Drona,
filled with fury, slew, O sire, the steeds of Yudhishthira, with four
excellent shafts of keen points. And with another broad-headed shaft he
cut off he king's bow resembling a pole erected to the honour of Indra.
And with another shaft he cut off the standard of Yudhishthira, and with
three he afflicted the Pandava himself. Then king Yudhishthira, speedily
jumping down from that steedless car, stood weaponless and with arms
upraised, O bull of Bharata's race! Beholding him carless, and especially
weaponless, Drona, O lord, stupefied his foes, rather the whole army.
Firmly adhering to his vow, and endued with great lightness of hands,
Drona shot showers of sharp shafts and rushed towards the king, like a
furious lion towards a deer. Beholding Drona, that slayer of foes, rush
towards him, cries of Oh and Alas suddenly rose from the Pandava army.'
And many cried out, saying, 'The king is slain by Bharadwaja's son.' Loud
wails of this kind were heard, O Bharata, among the Pandava troops.
Meanwhile, king Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, getting up on the car of
Sahadeva, retreated from the field, borne away by swift steeds.'"
