SECTION LXXII
"Bhishma said, 'That person, O king, who would protect the good and
punish the wicked, should be appointed as his priest by the king. In this
connection is cited the old story about the discourse between Pururavas,
the son of Aila and Matariswan.'
"Pururavas said, 'Whence has the Brahmana sprung and whence the three
other orders? For what reason also has the Brahmana become the foremost?
It behoveth thee to tell me all this.'
"Matariswan answered, 'The Brahmana, O best of kings, has sprung from the
mouth of Brahman. The Kshatriya has sprung from his two arms, and the
Vaisya from his two thighs. For waiting upon these three orders, O ruler
of men, a fourth order, viz., the Sudra, sprung into life, being created
from the feet (of Brahman). Originally created thus, the Brahmana takes
birth on earth as the lord of all creatures, his duty being the keep of
the Vedas and the other scriptures.[230] Then, for ruling the earth and
wielding the rod of chastisement and protecting all creatures, the second
order, viz., the Kshatriya was created. The Vaisya was created for
supporting the two other orders and himself by cultivation and trade, and
finally, it was ordained by Brahman that the Sudra should serve the three
orders as a menial.'
"Pururavas said, 'Tell me truly, O god of Winds, to whom, this earth
righteously belong. Does it belong to the Brahmana or to the Kshatriya?'
"The god of Winds said, 'Everything that exists in the universe belongs
to the Brahmana in consequence of his birth and precedence. Persons
conversant with morality say this. What the Brahmana eats is his own. The
place he inhabits is his own. What he gives away is his own. He deserves
the veneration of all the (other) orders. He is the first-born and the
foremost. As a woman, in the absence of her husband, accepts his younger
brother for him, even so the earth, in consequence of the refusal of the
Brahmana, has accepted his next-born, viz., the Kshatriya, for her lord.
This is the first rule. In times, however, of distress, there is an
exception of this. If thou seekest to discharge the duties of the order
and wishest to obtain the highest place in heaven, then give unto the
Brahmana all the land thou mayst succeed in conquering, unto him that is
possessed of learning and virtuous conduct, that is conversant with
duties and observant of penances, that is satisfied with the duties of
his order and not covetous of wealth. The well-born Brahmana, possessed
of wisdom and humility, guides the king in every matter by his own great
intelligence. By means of sound counsels he causes the king to earn
prosperity. The Brahmana points out to the king the duties the latter is
to observe. As long as a wise king, observant of the duties of his order,
and bereft of pride, is desirous of listening to the instructions of the
Brahmana, so long is he honoured and so long does he enjoy fame. The
priest of the king, therefore, has a share in the merit that the king
acquires. When the king behaves himself thus, all his subjects, relying
upon him, become virtuous in their behaviour, attentive to their duties,
and freed from every fear. The king obtains a fourth part of those
righteous acts which his subjects, properly protected by him, perform in
his kingdom. The gods, men, Pitris, Gandharvas, Uragas, and Rakshasas,
all depend upon sacrifices for their support. In a country destitute of a
king, there can be no sacrifice. The gods and the Pitris subsist on the
offerings made in sacrifices. Sacrifice, however, depends upon the king.
In the season of summer, men desire comfort from the shade of trees, cool
water, and cool breezes. In the season of winter they derive comfort from
fire, warm clothes, and the sun. The heart of man may find pleasure in
sound, touch, taste, vision, and scent. The man, however, who is inspired
with fear, finds no pleasure in all these things. That person who dispels
the fears of men obtains great merit. There is no gift so valuable in the
three worlds as the gift of life. The king is Indra. The king is Yama.
The king is Dharma. The king assumes different forms. The king sustains
and supports everything.'"
