SECTION LIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'The slayer of Madhu, retiring to his bed, slept
happily. Awaking when half a Yama was wanting to usher in the day, he
addressed himself to contemplation. Fixing all his senses, he meditated
on the eternal Brahma. Then a batch of well-trained and sweet-voiced
persons, conversant with hymns and the Puranas, began to utter the
praises of Vasudeva, that lord of all creatures and creator of the
universe. Others, marking time by clapping of hands, began to recite
sweet hymns, and vocalists began to sing. Conch-shells and drums were
blown and beaten by thousands. The delightful sound of Vinas, Panavas,
and bamboo flutes was heard. The spacious mansion of Krishna, in
consequence thereof, seemed to laugh with music. In the palace of king
Yudhishthira also sweet voices were heard, uttering auspicious wishes,
and the sound of songs too and musical instruments. Then he of Dasarha's
race performed his ablutions. Joining his hands, the mighty-armed hero of
unfading glory silently recited his secret mantras, and kindling a fire
poured libations of clarified butter upon it. Giving away a thousand kine
unto a thousand Brahmanas all of whom were fully conversant with the four
Vedas, he caused them to utter benedictions upon him. Touching next
diverse kinds of auspicious articles and beholding himself in a clear
mirror, Krishna addressed Satyaki, saying, 'Go, O descendant of Sini, and
repairing to Yudhishthira's abode, ascertain whether that king of great
energy is dressed for visiting Bhishma.' At these words of Krishna,
Satyaki, proceeding quickly to the royal son of Pandu, said unto him,
'The foremost of cars, belonging to Vasudeva of great intelligence,
stands ready, O king, for Janardana will go to see Ganga's son. O
righteous king of great splendour, he is waiting for thee. It behoveth
thee now to do what should be done next.' Thus addressed, Dharma's son
Yudhishthira answered as follows.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'O Phalguna of unrivalled splendour, let my foremost
of cars be made ready. We should not be accompanied (today) by the
soldiers, but we shall proceed ourselves. That foremost of righteous
persons, Bhishma, should not be vexed. Let the guards, therefore, O
Dhananjaya, stop today. From this day Ganga's son will speak of things
that are great mysteries. I do not therefore, O son of Kunti, wish that
there should be a miscellaneous gathering (in Bhishma's presence).'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of the king, Kunti's son
Dhananjaya, that foremost of men (went out and coming back) represented
unto him that his best of cars stood harnessed for him. King
Yudhishthira, and the twins, and Bhima and Arjuna, the five resembling
the five elements, then proceeded towards Krishna's abode. While the
high-souled Pandavas were coming, Krishna of great intelligence,
accompanied by the grandson of Sini, mounted on his car. Saluting one
another from their cars and each enquiring of the other whether the night
had been passed happily by him, those bulls among men proceeded, without
stopping on those foremost of cars whose rattle resembled the roar of the
clouds. Krishna's steeds, viz., Valahaka and Meghapushpa and Saivya and
Sugriva were urged by Daruka. The animals, urged by him, O king,
proceeded, indenting the earth with their hoofs. Endued with great
strength and great speed, they flew onwards, devouring the very skies.
Traversing the sacred field of Kuru, the princes proceeded to that spot
where the puissant Bhishma on his bed of arrows was lying, surrounded by
those great Rishis, like Brahman himself in the midst of the gods. Then
Govinda and Yudhishthira and Bhima and the wielder of Gandiva and the
twins and Satyaki, alighting from their vehicles, saluted the Rishis by
raising their right hands. Surrounded by them, king Yudhishthira like the
moon in the midst of the stars approached Ganga's son like Vasava
proceeding towards Brahman. Overcome with fear, the king timidly cast his
eyes on the mighty-armed hero lying on his bed of arrows like the Sun
himself dropped from the firmament.'"
