SECTION XLVIII
"Janamejaya said, 'How did the grandsire of the Bharatas, who lay on a
bed of arrows, cast off his body and what kind of Yoga did he adopt?'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Listen, O king, with pure heart and concentrated
attention, as to how, O tiger among the Kurus, the high-souled Bhishma
cast off his body. As soon as the Sun, passing the solstitial point,
entered in his northerly course, Bhishma, with concentrated attention,
caused his soul (as connected with and independent of the body) to enter
his soul (in its independent and absolute state). Surrounded by many
foremost of Brahmanas, that hero, his body pierced with innumerable
arrows, blazed forth in great beauty like Surya himself with his
innumerable rays. Surrounded by Vyasa conversant with the Vedas by the
celestial Rishi Narada, by Devasthana, by Asmaka Sumantu, by Jaimini, by
the high-souled Paila, by Sandilya, by Devarata, by Maitreya of great
intelligence, by Asita and Vasishtha and the high-souled Kausika, by
Harita and Lomasa and Atri's son of great intelligence, by Vrihaspati and
Sukra and the great sage Chyavana, by Sanatkumara and Kapila and Valmiki
and Tumvuru and Kuru, by Maudgalya and Rama of Bhrigu's race, and the
great sage Trinavindu, by Pippalada and Vayu and Samvarta and Pulaha and
Katha, by Kasyapa and Pulastya and Kratu and Daksha and Parasara, by
Marichi and Angiras and Kasmya and Gautama and the sage Galava, by
Dhaumya and Vibhanda and Mandavya and Dhaumra and Krishnanubhautika, by
Uluka, that foremost of Brahmanas and the great sage Markandeya, by
Bhaskari and Purana and Krishna and Suta,--that foremost of virtuous
persons, surrounded by these and many other highly-blessed sages of great
souls and possessed of faith and self-restraint and tranquillity of mind,
the Kuru hero looked like the Moon in the midst of the planets and the
stars. Stretched on his bed of arrows, that tiger among men, Bhishma,
with pure heart and joined palms, thought of Krishna in mind, word, and
act. With a cheerful and strong voice he hymned the praise of the slayer
of Madhu, that master of yoga, with the lotus in his navel, that lord of
the universe, called Vishnu and Jishnu. With joined hands, that foremost
of eloquent men, that puissant one, viz., Bhishma of highly virtuous
soul, thus praised Vasudeva.
"Bhishma said, 'O Krishna, O foremost of Beings, be thou pleased with
these words which I utter, in brief and in detail, from desire of hymning
thy praises. Thou art pure and purity's self. Thou transcendest all. Thou
art what people say to be THAT. Thou art the Supreme Lord. With my whole
heart I seek thy refuge, O universal Soul and Lord of all creatures![137]
Thou art without beginning and without end. Thou art the highest of the
high and Brahma. Neither the gods nor the Rishis know thee. The divine
Creator, called Narayana or Hari, alone knows thee. Through Narayana, the
Rishis, the Siddhas, the great Nagas, the gods, and the celestial Rishis
know a little of thee. Thou art the highest of the high and knowest no
deterioration. The gods, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the
Pannagas, do not know who thou art and whence art thou. All the worlds
and all created things live in thee, and enter thee (when the dissolution
comes). Like gems strung together in a thread, all things that have
attributes reside in thee, the Supreme Lord.'[138] Having the universe
for thy work and the universe for thy limbs, this universe consisting of
mind and matter resides in thy eternal and all-pervading soul like a
number of flowers strung together in a strong thread. Thou art called
Hari, of a thousand heads, a thousand feet, a thousand eyes, a thousand
arms, a thousand crowns, and a thousand faces of great splendour. Thou
art called Narayana, divinity, and the refuge of the universe. Thou art
the subtlest of the subtle, grossest of the gross, the heaviest of the
heavy and the highest of the high. In the Vaks, the Anuvaks, the Nishads,
and Upanishads, thou art regarded as the Supreme Being of irresistible
force. In the Samans also, whose declarations are always true, thou art
regarded as Truth's self![139] Thou art of quadruple soul. Thou art
displayed in only the understanding (of all creatures). Thou art the Lord
of those that are bound to thee in faith. O God, thou art adored (by the
faithful) under four excellent, high, and secret names.[140] Penances are
ever present in thee. Performed (by other creatures for gratifying thee),
penances live in thy form. Thou art the Universal Soul. Thou art of
universal knowledge. Thou art the universe. Thou art omniscient. Thou art
the creator of everything in the universe.[141] Like a couple of sticks
generating a blazing fire, thou hast been born of the divine Devaki and
Vasudeva for the protection of Brahma on earth.[142] For this eternal
salvation, the devout worshipper, with mind withdrawn from everything
else and casting off all desires, beholds thee, O Govinda, that art the
pure Soul, in his own soul. Thou transcendest Surya in glory. Thou art
beyond the ken of the senses and the understanding. O Lord of all
creatures, I place myself in thy hands. In the Puranas thou hast been
spoken as Purusha (all-pervading spirit). On occasions of the
commencement of the Yugas, thou art said to be Brahma, while on occasions
of universal dissolution thou art spoken of as Sankarshana. Adorable thou
art, and therefore I adore thee. Though one, thou hast yet been born in
innumerable forms. Thou hast thy passions under complete control. Thy
devout worshippers, faithfully performing the rites laid down in the
scriptures, sacrifice to thee, O giver of every wish! Thou art called the
sheath within which the universe lies. All created things live in thee.
Like swans and ducks swimming on the water, all the worlds that we see
float in thee. Thou art Truth. Thou art One and undeteriorating. Thou art
Brahma, Thou art That which is beyond Mind and Matter. Thou art without
beginning, middle, and end. Neither the gods nor the Rishis know thee.
The gods, the Asuras, the Gandharvas, the Siddhas, the Rishis, and the
great Uragas with concentrated souls, always adore thee. Thou art the
great panacea for all sorrow. Thou art without birth and death. Thou art
Divine. Thou art self-created. Thou art eternal. Thou art invisible and
beyond ken. Thou art called Hari and Narayana, O puissant one. The Vedas
declare thee to be the Creator of the universe and the Lord of everything
existing in the universe. Thou art the Supreme protector of the universe.
Thou knowest no deterioration and thou art that which is called the
highest. Thou art of the complexion of gold. Thou art the slayer of
Asuras. Though One, Aditi brought thee forth in twelve forms.[143]
Salutations to thee that art the soul of the Sun. Salutations to thee in
thy form of Soma that is spoken of as the chief of all the regenerate
ones and that gratifies with nectar the gods in the lighted fortnight and
the Pitris in the dark fortnight. Thou art the One Being of transcendent
effulgence dwelling on the other side of thick darkness. Knowing thee one
ceases to have any fear of death. Salutations to thee in that form which
is an object of knowledge.[144] In the grand Uktha sacrifice, the
Brahmanas adore thee as the great Rich. In the great fire-sacrifice, they
sing thee as the chief Adhyaryu (priest). Thou art the soul of the Vedas.
Salutations to thee. The Richs, the Yajus, and the Samans are thy abode.
Thou art the five kinds of sanctified libations (used in sacrifices).
Thou art the seven woofs used in the Vedas. Salutations to thee in thy
form of Sacrifice.[145] Libations are poured on the Homa fire in
accompaniment with the seventeen monosyllabic sounds. Thou art the soul
of the Homa. Salutations to thee! Thou art that Purusha whom the Vedas
sing. Thy name is Yajus. The Vedic metres are thy limbs. The sacrifices
laid down in the three Vedas are thy three heads. The great sacrifice
called Rathantara is thy voice expressive of gratification. Salutation to
thee in thy form of sacred hymns! Thou art the Rishi that hadst appeared
in the great sacrifice extending for a thousand years performed by the
creators of the universe. Thou art the great swan with wings of gold.
Salutations to thee in thy form of a swan.[146] Roots with all kinds of
affixes and suffixes are thy limbs. The Sandhis are thy joints. The
consonants and the vowels are thy ornaments. The Vedas have declared thee
to be the divine word. Salutations to thee in thy form as the word![147]
Assuming the form of a boar whose limbs were constituted by sacrifice,
thou hadst raised the submerged earth for the benefit of the three
worlds. Salutations to thee in thy form of infinite prowess! Thou
sleepest in Yoga on thy snake-decked sofa constituted by the thousand
hoods (of the Naga). Salutations to thee in thy form of sleep! Thou
buildest the bridge for the good (to cross the sea of life) with Truth,
with those means by which emancipation may be obtained, and with the
means by which the senses may be controlled. Salutations to thee in thy
form of Truth! Men practising diverse creeds, actuated by desire of
diverse fruits worship thee with diverse rites. Salutations to thee in
thy form of Creed! From thee have all things sprung. It is thou that
excitest all creatures having physical frames containing the principle of
desire. Salutations to thee in thy form of Excitement. The great Rishis
seek thy unmanifest self within the manifest. Called Kshetrajna, thou
sittest in Kshetra. Salutations to thee in thy form of Kshetra![148] Thou
always conscious and present in self, the Sankhyas still describe thee as
existing in the three states of wakefulness, dream, and sound sleep. They
further speak of thee as possessed of sixteen attributes and representing
the number seventeen. Salutations to thy form as conceived by the
Sankhyas![149] Casting off sleep, restraining breath, withdrawn into
their own selves, Yogins of restrained senses behold thee as eternal
light. Salutations to thee in thy Yoga form! Peaceful Sannyasins, freed
from fear of rebirth in consequence of the destruction of all their sins
and merits, obtain thee. Salutations to thee in thy form of
emancipation![150] At the end of a thousand Yugas, thou assumest the form
of a fire with blazing flames and consumest all creatures. Salutations to
thee in thy form of fierceness! Having consumed all creatures and making
the universe one vast expanse of water, thou sleepest on the waters in
the form of a child. Salutations to thee in thy form as Maya (illusion)!
From the navel of the Self-born of eyes like lotus leaves, sprang a
lotus. On that lotus is established this universe. Salutations to thee in
thy form as lotus! Thou hast a thousand heads. Thou pervadest everything.
Thou art of immeasurable soul. Thou hast subjugated the four kinds of
desire that are as vast as the four oceans. Salutations to thee in thy
form of Yoga-sleep! The clouds are in the hair of thy head. The rivers
are in the several joints of thy limbs. The four oceans are in thy
stomach. Salutations to thee in thy form as water! Birth and the change
represented by death spring from thee. All things, again, at the
universal dissolution dissolve away in thee. Salutations to thy form as
cause! Thou sleepest not in the night. Thou art occupied in day time
also. Thou observest the good and the bad actions (of all). Salutations
to thee in thy form of (universal) observer! There is no act which thou
canst not do. Thou art, again, ever ready to accomplish acts that are
righteous. Salutations to thee in thy form of Work, the form, viz., which
is called Vaikuntha! In wrath thou hadst, in battle, exterminated thrice
seven times the Kshatriyas who had trampled virtue and authority under
their feet. Salutations to thee in thy form of Cruelty! Dividing thyself
into five portions thou hast become the five vital breaths that act
within everybody and cause every living creature to move. Salutations to
thee in thy form of air! Thou appearest in every Yuga in the form called
month and season and half-year and year, and art the cause of both
creation and dissolution. Salutations to thee in thy form of Time!
Brahmanas are thy mouth, Kshatriyas are thy two arms, Vaisyas are thy
stomach and thighs, and Sudras live in thy feet. Salutations to thee in
thy form of caste! Fire constitute thy mouth. The heavens are the crown
of thy head. The sky is thy navel. The earth is thy feet. The Sun is thy
eye. The points of the compass are thy ears. Salutations to thee in thy
form as the (three) worlds! Thou art superior to Time. Thou art superior
to Sacrifice. Thou art higher than the highest. Thyself without origin,
thou art the origin of the universe. Salutations to thee in thy form as
Universe! Men of the world, according to the attributes ascribed to thee
by the Vaiseshika theory, regard thee as the Protector of the world.
Salutations to thee in thy form of Protector! Assuming the forms of food,
drink, and fuel, thou increasest the humours and the life-breaths of
creatures and upholdest their existence. Salutations to thee in thy form
of life! For supporting the life-breaths thou eatest the four kinds of
food.[151] Assuming also the form of Agni within the stomach, thou
digestest that food. Salutations to thee in the form of digesting heat!
Assuming the form of half-man and half-lion, with tawny eyes and tawny
manes, with teeth and claws for thy weapons, thou hadst taken the life of
the chief of the Asuras. Salutations to thee in thy form of swelling
might! Neither the gods, nor the Gandharvas, nor the Daityas, nor the
Danavas, know thee truly. Salutations to thy form of exceeding subtility!
Assuming the form of the handsome, illustrious, and puissant Ananta in
the nether region, thou upholdest the world. Salutations to thy form of
Might! Thou stupefiest all creatures by the bonds of affection and love
for the continuance of the creation. Salutations to thee in thy form of
stupefaction.[152] Regarding that knowledge which is conversant with the
five elements to be the true Self-knowledge (for which yogins strive),
people approach thee by knowledge! Salutations to thee in thy form of
Knowledge! Thy body is immeasurable. Thy understanding and eyes are
devoted to everything. Thou art infinite, being beyond all measures.
Salutations to thee in thy form of vastness! Thou hadst assumed the form
of a recluse with matted locks on head, staff in hand, a long stomach,
and having thy begging bowl for thy quiver. Salutations to thee in thy
form of Brahma.[153] Thou bearest the trident, thou art the lord of the
celestials, thou hast three eyes, and thou art high-souled. Thy body is
always besmeared with ashes, and thy phallic emblem is always turned
upwards. Salutations to thee in thy form of Rudra! The half-moon forms
the ornament of thy forehead. Thou hast snakes for the holy thread
circling thy neck. Thou art armed with Pinaka and trident. Salutations to
thy form of Fierceness! Thou art the soul of all creatures. Thou art the
Creator and the Destroyer of all creatures. Thou art without wrath,
without enmity, without affection. Salutations to thee in thy form of
Peace! Everything is in thee. Everything is from thee. Thyself art
Everything. Everywhere art thou. Thou art always the All. Salutations to
thee in thy form as Everything! Salutations to thee whose work is the
universe, to thee that art the soul of the universe, to thee from whom
hath sprung the universe, to thee that art the dissolution of all things,
to thee that are beyond the five (elements that constitute all things)!
Salutations to thee that art the three worlds, to thee that art above the
three worlds! Salutations to thee that art all the directions! Thou art
all and thou art the one receptacle of All. Salutations to thee, O divine
Lord, O Vishnu, and O eternal origin of all the worlds! Thou, O
Hrishikesa, art the Creator, thou art the Destroyer, and thou art
invincible. I cannot behold that heavenly form in which thou art
displayed in the Past, Present, and the Future. I can, however, behold
truly thy eternal form (as manifest in thy works). Thou hast filled
heaven with thy head, and the earth with thy feet: with thy prowess thou
hast filled the three worlds. Thou art Eternal and thou pervadest
everything in the universe. The directions are thy arms, the Sun is thy
eye, and prowess is thy vital fluid. Thou art the lord of all creatures.
Thou standest, shutting up the seven paths of the Wind whose energy is
immeasurable. They are freed from all feats that worship thee, O Govinda
of unfading prowess, thee that art attired in yellow robes of the colour
of the Atasi flower.[154] Even one bending of the head unto thee, O
Krishna, is equal to the completion of ten Horse-sacrifices. The man that
has performed ten Horse-sacrifices is not freed from the obligation of
rebirth. The man, however, that bows to Krishna escapes rebirth. They
that have Krishna for their vow, they that think of Krishna in the night,
and upon rising from sleep, may be said to have Krishna for their body.
Those people (after death) enter Krishna's self even as libations of
clarified butter sanctified with mantras enter the blazing fire.
Salutations to thee that dispellest the fear of hell, to thee, O Vishnu,
that art a boat unto them that are plunged amid the eddies of the ocean
represented by worldly life! Salutations to thee, O God, that art the
Brahmana's self, to thee that art the benefactor of Brahmanas and kine,
to thee that art the benefactor of the universe, to thee that art Krishna
and Govinda! The two syllables Hari constitute the pecuniary stock of
those that sojourn through the wilderness of life and the medicine that
effectually cures all worldly, predilections, besides being the means
that alleviate sorrow and grief.[155] As truth is full of Vishnu, as the
universe is full of Vishnu, as everything is full of Vishnu, so let my
soul be full of Vishnu and my sins be destroyed! I seek thy protection
and am devoted to thee, desirous of obtaining a happy end O thou of eyes
like lotus petals, O best of gods, do thou think of what will be for my
good! Thyself without origin, O Vishnu, thou art the origin of Knowledge
and Penances. Thus art thou praised! O Janardana, thus worshipped by me
in the Sacrifice constituted by speech (alone), be, O god, gratified with
me! The Vedas are devoted to Narayana. Penances are devoted to Narayana.
The gods are devoted to Narayana. Everything is always Narayana!'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Having uttered these words, Bhishma, with mind
concentrated upon Krishna, said, 'Salutations to Krishna!' and bowed unto
him. Learning by his Yoga prowess of the devotion of Bhishma, Madhava,
otherwise called Hari, (entering his body) bestowed upon him heavenly
knowledge compassing the Past, the Present, and the Future, and went
away. When Bhishma became silent, those utterers of Brahma (that sat
around him), with voices choked in tears, adored that high-souled chief
of the Kurus in excellent words. Those foremost of Brahmanas uttered the
praises of Krishna also, that first of Beings, and then continued in soft
voices to commend Bhishma repeatedly. Learning (by his Yoga powers) of
the devotion of Bhishma towards him, that foremost of Beings, viz.,
Madhava, suddenly rose from his seat and ascended on his car, Kesava and
Satyaki proceeded on one car. On another proceeded those two illustrious
princes, viz., Yudhishthira and Dhananjaya. Bhimasena and the twins rode
on a third; while those bulls among men, Kripa and Yuyutsu, and that
scorcher of foes, Sanjaya of the Suta caste, proceeded on their
respective cars, each of which looked like a town. And all of them
proceeded, causing the earth to tremble with the rattle of their
chariot-wheels. That foremost of men, as he proceeded, cheerfully
listened to the speeches, fraught with his praise, that were uttered by
the Brahmanas. The slayer of Kesi, with gladdened heart, saluted the
people that waited (along the streets) with joined hands and bent heads."
