SECTION XIII
"Sahadeva said, 'By casting off all external objects only, O Bharata, one
does not attain to success. By casting off even mental attachments, the
attainment of success is doubtful.[29] Let that religious merit and that
happiness which are his who has cast off external objects but whose mind
still internally covets them, be the portion of our foes! On the other
hand, let that religious merit and that happiness which are his who
governs the earth, having cast off all internal attachments also, be the
portion of our friends. The word mama (mine), consisting of two letters,
is Death's self; white the opposite word na-mama (not mine), consisting
of three letters, is eternal Brahma.[30] Brahma and death, O king,
entering invisibly into every soul, without doubt, cause all creatures to
act. If this being, O Bharata, that is called Soul, be not ever subject
to destruction, then by destroying the bodies of creatures one cannot be
guilty of slaughter. If, on the other hand, the soul and the body of a
being are born or destroyed together, so that when the body is destroyed
the soul also is destroyed, then the way (prescribed in the scriptures)
of rites and acts would be futile. Therefore, driving away all doubts
about the immortality of the soul, the man of intelligence should adopt
that path which has been trodden by the righteous of old and older times.
The life of that king is certainly fruitless who having acquired the
entire earth with her mobile and immobile creatures, does not enjoy her.
As regards the man again who lives in the forest upon wild fruits and
roots, but whose attachment to things of the earth has not ceased, such a
one, O king, lives within the jaws of Death. Behold, O Bharata, the
hearts and the outward forms of all creatures to be but manifestations of
thy own. They that look upon all creatures as their own selves escape
from the great fear (of destruction).[31] Thou art my sire, thou art my
protector, thou art my brother, and thou art my senior and preceptor. It
behoveth thee, therefore, to forgive these incoherent utterances in
sorrow of a woe-stricken person. True or false, this that has been
uttered by are, O lord of earth, has been uttered from a due regard for
thee, O best of Bharatas, that I entertain!"
