SECTION CLXXXI
"Arjuna said, 'How, O Janardana, for our good, and by what means, were
those lords of the earth, viz., Jarasandha and the others, slain?'
"Vasudeva said, If Jarasandha, and the ruler of the Chedis, and the
mighty son of the Nishada king, had not been slain, they would have
become terrible. Without doubt, Duryodhana would have chosen those
foremost of car-warriors (for embracing his side). They had always been
hostile to us, and, accordingly, they would all have adopted the side of
the Kauravas. All of them were heroes and mighty bowmen accomplished in
weapons and firm in battle. Like the celestials (in prowess), they would
have protected Dhritarashtra's sons. Indeed, the Suta's son, and
Jarasandha, and the ruler of the Chedis, and the son of the Nishada
adopting the son of Suyodhana, would have succeeded in conquering the
whole earth. Listen, O Dhananjaya, by what means they were slain. Indeed,
without the employment of means, the very gods could not have conquered
them in battle. Each of them, O Partha, could fight in battle with the
whole celestial host protected by the Regents of the world. (On one
occasion), assailed by Valadeva, Jarasandha, excited with wrath, hurled
for our destruction a mace capable of slaying all creatures. Endued with
the splendour of fire, that mace coursed towards us dividing the welkin
like the line on the head that parts the tresses of a woman, and with the
impetuosity of the thunder hurled by Sakra. Beholding that mace thus
coursing towards us the son of Rohini hurled the weapon called
Sthunakarna for baffling it. Its force destroyed by the energy of
Valadeva's weapon, that mace fell down on the earth, splitting her (with
its might) and making the very mountains tremble. There was a terrible
Rakshasa of the name Jara, endued with great prowess. She, O prince, had
united that slayer of foes, and, therefore, was the latter called
Jarasandha. Jarasandha had been made up of two halves of one child. And
because it was Jara that had united those two halves, it was for this
that he came to be called Jarasandha.[237] That Rakshasa woman, O Partha,
who was there within the earth, was slain with her son and kinsmen by
means-of that mace and the weapon of Sthunakarna. Deprived of his mace in
that great battle, Jarasandha was afterwards slain by Bhimasena in thy
presence, O Dhananjaya.[238] If the valiant Jarasandha had stood armed
with his mace, the very gods with Indra at their head could not have
slain him in battle. O best of men! for thy good, the Nishada's son also,
of prowess incapable of being baffled, was, by an act of guile, deprived
of his thumb by Drona, assuming the position of his preceptor. Proud and
endued with steady prowess, the Nishada's son, with fingers cased in
leathern gloves, looked resplendent like a second Rama. Undeprived of
thumb, Ekalavya, O Partha, was incapable of being vanquished in battle by
the gods, the Danavas, the Rakshasas, and the Uragas (together). Of firm
grasp, accomplished in weapons, and capable of shooting incessantly day
and night, he was incapable of being looked at by mere men. For thy good,
he was slain by me on the field of battle. Endued with great prowess, the
ruler of the Chedis was slain by me before thy eyes. He also was
incapable of being vanquished in battle by the gods and the Asuras
together. I was born to slay him as also the other enemies of the gods,
with thy assistance, O tiger among men, from desire of benefiting the
world. Hidimva and Vaka and Kirmira have all been slain by Bhimasena. All
those Rakshasas were endued with might equal to that Ravana and all of
them were destroyers of Brahmanas and sacrifices. Similarly, Alayudha,
possessed of large powers of illusion, had been slain by Hidimva's son.
Hidimva's son also, I have slain by the employment of means, viz.,
through Karna with his dart. If Karna had not slain him with his dart in
great battle, I myself would have had to slay Bhima's son Ghatotkacha.
From desire of benefiting you, I did not slay him before. That Rakshasa
was inimical to Brahmanas and sacrifices. Because he was a destroyer of
sacrifices and of a sinful soul, therefore hath he been thus slain. O
sinless one, by that act as a means, the dart given by Sakra, hath also
been rendered futile. O son of Pandu, they that are destroyers of
righteousness are all slayable by me. Even that is the vow made by me,
for establishing righteousness. Whither the Vedas and truth and
self-restraint and purity and righteousness and modesty and prosperity
and wisdom and forgiveness are always to be met with, thither I myself
always remain. Thou needst not be at all anxious about Karna's slaughter.
I will tell you the means by which you will slay him. Vrikodara also will
succeed in slaying Suyodhana. I will tell thee, O son of Pandu, the means
by which that will have to be compassed. Meanwhile, the uproar made by
the hostile army is increasing. Thy troops also are flying away on all
sides. Having achieved their objects, the Kauravas are destroying thy
host. Indeed, Drona, that foremost of all smiters, is scorching us in
 SECTION CLXXXII
"Dhritarashtra said, 'When the Suta's son had such a dart as was sure to
slay one person, why did he not hurt it at Partha, to the exclusion of
all others? Upon Partha's slaughter by means of that dart, all the
Srinjayas and the Pandavas would have been slain. Indeed, upon Phalguna's
death, why should not the victory have been ours? Arjuna has made a vow
to the effect that summoned to battle he would never refuse to accept the
challenge. The Suta's son should have, therefore, summoned Phalguna to
battle. Tell me, O Sanjaya, why did not Vrisha then engaging Phalguna in
single combat, slay the latter with that dart given him by Sakra? Without
doubt, my son is destitute of both intelligence and counsellors? That
sinful wretch is constantly baffled by the foe. How should he then
succeed in vanquishing his enemies? Indeed, that dart which was such a
mighty weapon and upon which rested his victory, alas, that dart, hath,
by Vasudeva, been made fruitless through Ghatotkacha. Indeed, it hath
been snatched from Karna, like a fruit from the hand of a cripple, with a
withered arm, by a strong person. Even so hath that fatal dart been
rendered fruitless through Ghatotkacha. As in a fight between a boar and
a dog, upon the death of either, the hunter is the party profited, I
think, O learned one, that even so was Vasudeva the party to profit by
the battle between Karna and Hidimva's son. If Ghatotkacha had slain
Karna in battle, that would have been a great gain for the Pandavas. If,
on the other hand, Karna had slain Ghatotkacha, that too would have been
a great gain to them in consequence of the loss of Karna's dart. Endued
with great wisdom, that lion among men, viz., Vasudeva, reflecting in
this way, and for doing what was agreeable to and good for the Pandavas,
caused Ghatotkacha to be slain by Karna in battle.'
"Sanjaya said, 'Knowing the feat that Karna desired to achieve, the
slayer of Madhu, the mighty-armed Janardana, O king, commanded the prince
of the Rakshasas, Ghatotkacha of mighty energy, to engage in single
combat with Karna for rendering, O monarch, the latter's fatal dart
fruitless. All this, O king, is the result of thy evil policy! We would
certainly have achieved success, O perpetuator of Kuru's race, if Krishna
had not (thus) rescued the mighty car-warrior Partha from Karna's hands.
Indeed, Partha would have been destroyed with his steeds, standard, and
car, in battle, Oh Dhritarashtra, if that master, that lord of Yogins,
viz., Janardana had not saved him. Protected by diverse means, O king,
and well-aided by Krishna, Partha approaching his foes, vanquished that
fatal dart, otherwise that weapon would have quickly destroyed the son of
Kunti like the lightning destroying a tree.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'My son is fond of quarrel. His advisers are
foolish. He is vain of his wisdom. It is for that, that this certain
means of Arjuna's death hath been baffled. Why, O Suta, did not
Duryodhana, or that foremost of all wielders, viz., Karna, possessed of
great intelligence, hurl that fatal dart at Dhananjaya? Why, O son of
Gavalgana, didst thou too forget this great object, possessed as thou art
of great wisdom, or why didst not thou remind Karna of it?'
"Sanjaya said, 'Indeed, O king, every night this formed the subject of
deliberation with Duryodhana and Sakuni and myself and Duhsasana. And we
said unto Karna, 'Excluding all other warriors, O Karna, slay Dhananjaya.
We would then lord it over the Pandu's and the Panchalas as if these were
our slaves. Or, if upon Partha's fall, he of Vrishni's race appoints
another amongst the sons of Pandu (in this place for carrying on the
fight), let Krishna himself be slain. Krishna is the root of the
Pandavas, and Partha is like their risen trunk. The other sons of Pritha
are like their branches, while the Panchalas may be called their leaves.
The Pandavas have Krishna for their refuge, Krishna for their might,
Krishna for their leader. Indeed, Krishna is their central support even
as the moon is of the constellations. Therefore, O Suta's son, avoiding
the leaves and branches and trunk, slay that Krishna who is everywhere
and always the root of the Pandavas. Indeed, if Karna had slain him of
Dasarha's race, viz., that delighter of the Yadavas, the whole earth, O
king, would, without doubt, have come under thy control. Truly, O
monarch, if that illustrious one, that delighter of both the Yadavas and
the Pandavas, could be made to lie down on the earth, deprived of life,
then certainly, O monarch, the entire earth with the mountains and
forests would have owned thy supremacy. We rose every morning, having
formed such a resolution in respect of that Lord of the very gods, viz.,
Hrishikesa of immeasurable energy. At the time of battle, however, we
forget our resolution. Kesava always protected Arjuna, the son of Kunti.
He never placed Arjuna before the Suta's son in battle. Indeed, Achyuta
always placed other foremost of car-warriors before Karna, thinking how
that fatal dart of ours might be made fruitless by ourselves. O lord!
When, again, the high-souled Krishna protected Partha in this manner from
Karna, why, O monarch, would not that foremost of beings protect his own
self? Reflecting well, I see that there is no person in the three worlds
who is able to vanquish that chastiser of foes, viz., Janardana, that
hero bearing the discus in hand.'
"Sanjaya continued, 'That tiger among car-warriors, viz., Satyaki of
prowess incapable of being baffled, asked the mighty-armed Krishna about
the great car-warrior, Karna, saving, 'O Janardana, even this had been
Karna's firm resolution, viz., that he would hurl that dart of
immeasurable energy at Phalguna. Why, however, did not the Suta's son
actually hurt it then at him?'
"Vasudeva said, 'Duhsasana and Karna and Sakuni and the ruler of the
Sindhus, with Duryodhana at their head, had frequently debated on this
subject. Addressing Karna, they used to say, 'O Karna. O great bowman, O
thou of immeasurable prowess in battle, O foremost of all victors, this
dart should not be hurled at any one else than that great car-warrior,
viz., Kunti's son, Partha or Dhananjaya. He is the most celebrated
amongst them, like Vasava amongst the gods. He being slain, all the other
Pandavas with the Srinjayas will be heartless like fireless
celestials![239]' Karna having assented to this, saying 'So be it' (the
desire of) slaughtering the wielder of Gandiva, O bull amongst the Sinis,
was ever present in Karna's heart. I, however, O foremost of warriors,
always used to stupefy the son of Radha. It was for this that he did not
hurl the dart at Pandu's son, owning white steeds. As long as I could not
baffle that means of Phalguna's death, I had neither sleep, nor joy in my
heart, O foremost of warriors! Beholding that dart, therefore, rendered
futile through Ghatotkacha, O bull amongst the Sinis, I regarded
Dhananjaya today to have been rescued from within the jaws of Death. I do
not regard my sire, my mother, yourselves, my brothers, ay, my very life,
so worthy of protection as Vibhatsu in battle. If there be anything more
precious than the sovereignty of the three worlds, I do not, O Satwata,
desire (to enjoy) it without Pritha's son, Dhananjaya (to share it with
me). Beholding Dhananjaya, therefore, like one returned from the dead,
these transports of delight, O Yuyudhana, have been mine. It was for this
that I had despatched the Rakshasa unto Karna for battle. None else was
capable of withstanding, in the night, Karna in battle.'
"Sanjaya continued, 'Even thus did Devaki's son who is ever devoted to
Dhananjaya's good and to what is agreeable to him, speak unto Satyaki on
that occasion.'"
