SECTION XLV
"Vaisampayana said, 'The king dismissed all his subjects, who, commanded
by the monarch, returned to their respective homes. Comforting his
brothers, Yudhishthira, blazing with beauty, then addressed his brothers
Bhima of terrible prowess and Arjuna and the twins, saying, 'Your bodies
have, in the great battle, been mangled with diverse kinds of weapons by
the foe. Ye are greatly fatigued, grief and anger have scorched your
hearts. Through my fault, ye bulls of Bharata's race, ye have suffered
the miseries of an exile in the forests like vulgar men. In delight and
in happy ease enjoy this victory (that ye have won). After resting
yourselves and regaining the full use of your faculties, meet me again in
the morning.' After this, the mighty-armed Vrikodara like Maghavat
entering his own beautiful fane, entered the palace of Duryodhana, that
was adorned with many excellent buildings and rooms, that adorned with
gems of diverse kinds, that teemed with servants, male and female, and
that Yudhishthira assigned to him with the approval of Dhritarashtra. The
mighty-armed Arjuna also, at the command of the king, obtained the palace
of Dussasana which was not inferior to Duryodhana's and which consisted
of many excellent structures and was adorned with a gate-way of gold, and
which abounded in wealth and was full of attendants of both sexes. The
palace of Durmarshana was even superior to that of Dussasana. Looking
like the mansion of Kuvera himself, it was adorned with gold and every
kind of gem. King Yudhishthira gladly gave it to Nakula who deserved it
best and who had been emaciated (with the miseries of a life) in the
great forest. The foremost of palaces belonging to Durmukha was
exceedingly beautiful and adorned with gold. It abounded in beds and
beautiful women, with eyes like lotus-petals. The king gave it unto
Sahadeva who was ever employed in doing what was agreeable to him.
Obtaining it, Sahadeva became delighted as the Lord of treasures upon
obtaining Kailasa. Yuyutsu and Vidura and Sanjaya, O monarch, and
Sudharman and Dhaumya, proceeded to the abodes they had owned
before.[133] Like a tiger entering his cave in the hills, that tiger
among men, viz., Saurin, accompanied by Satyaki, entered the palace of
Arjuna. Feasting on the viands and drinks (that had been kept ready for
them), the princes passed the night happily. Awaking in the morning with
well pleased hearts, they presented themselves before king Yudhishthira.'"
