SECTION I
(Rajadharmanusasana Parva)
OM! HAVING BOWED down to Narayana, and Nara, the foremost of male beings,
and unto the goddess Saraswati, must the word Jaya be uttered.
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having offered oblations, of water unto all their
friends and kinsmen, the sons of Pandu, and Vidura, and Dhritarashtra,
and all the Bharata ladies, continued to dwell there (on the banks of the
sacred stream). The high-souled sons of Pandu desired to pass the period
of mourning,[1] which extended for a month, outside the Kuru city. After
king Yudhishthira the just had performed the water-rites, many
high-souled sages crowned with ascetic success and many foremost of
regenerate Rishis came there to see the monarch. Among them were the
Island-born (Vyasa), and Narada, and the great Rishi Devala, and
Devasthana, and Kanwa. They were all accompanied by best of their pupils.
Many other members of the regenerate order, possessed of wisdom and
accomplished in the Vedas, leading lives of domesticity or belonging to
the Snataka class, came to behold the Kuru king. Those high-souled ones,
as they came, were duly worshipped by Yudhishthira. The great Rishis then
took their seats on costly carpets. Accepting the worship suited to that
period (of mourning and impurity) that was offered them, they sat in due
order around the king. Thousands of Brahmanas offered consolation and
comfort to that king of kings residing on the sacred banks of the
Bhagirathi with heart exceedingly agitated by grief. Then Narada, after
having accosted the Rishis with the Island-born for their first, in due
time, addressed Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, saying, 'Through the
might of thy arms and the grace of Madhava, the whole Earth, O
Yudhishthira, hath been righteously won by thee. By good luck, thou hast
escaped with life from this dreadful battle. Observant as thou art o f
the duties of a Kshatriya, dost thou not rejoice, O son of Pandu? Having
slain all thy foes, shalt thou not gratify thy friends, O king? Having
obtained this prosperity, I hope, grief doth not afflict thee still.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Indeed the whole Earth hath been subjugated by me
through my reliance on the might of Krishna's arms, through the grace of
the Brahmanas, and through the strength of Bhima and Arjuna. This heavy
grief, however, is always sitting in my heart, viz., that through
covetousness I have caused this dreadful carnage of kinsmen. Having
caused the death of the dear son of Subhadra, and of the sons of
Draupadi, this victory, O holy one, appears to me in the light of a
defeat. What wilt Subhadra of Vrishni's race, that sister-in-law of mine,
say unto me? What also will the people residing in Dwaraka say unto the
slayer of Madhu when he goes thither from this place? This Draupadi,
again, who is ever engaged in doing what is agreeable to us, bereaved of
sons and kinsmen, is paining me exceedingly. This is another topic, O
holy Narada, about which I will speak to thee. In consequence of Kunti
having kept her counsels close in respect of a very important matter,
great has been my grief. That hero who had the strength of ten thousand
elephants, who in this world was an unrivalled car-warrior, who was
possessed of leonine pride and gait, who was endued with great
intelligence and compassion, whose liberality was very great, who
practised many high vows, who was the refuge of the Dhartarashtras, who
was sensitive about his honour, whose prowess was irresistible, who was
ready to pay off all injuries and was always wrathful (in battle), who
overthrew us in repeated encounters, who was quick in the use of weapons,
conversant with every mode of warfare, possessed of great skill, and
endued with wonderful valour (that Karna) was a son of Kunti, born
secretly of her, and therefore, a uterine brother of ours. Whilst we were
offering oblations of water unto the dead, Kunti spoke of him as the son
of Surya. Possessed of every virtue, that child had been cast into the
water. Having placed him in a basket made of light materials, Kunti
committed him to the current of Ganga. He who was regarded by the world
as a Suta's child born of Radha, was really the eldest son of Kunti and,
therefore, our uterine brother. Covetous of kingdom, alas, I have
unwittingly caused that brother of mine to be slain. It is this that is
burning my limbs like a fire burning a heap of cotton. The white-steeded
Arjuna knew him not for a brother. Neither I, nor Bhima, nor the twins,
knew him for such. He, however, of excellent bow, knew us (for his
brothers). We have heard that on one occasion Pritha went to him for
seeking our good and addressed him, saying, 'Thou art my son!' That
illustrious hero, however, refused to obey Pritha's wishes. Subsequently,
we are informed, he said unto his mother these words, 'I am unable to
desert Duryodhana in battle! If I do so, it would be a dishonourable,
cruel, and ungrateful act. If, yielding to thy wishes, I make peace with
Yudhishthira, people will say that I am afraid of the white-steeded
Arjuna. Having vanquished Arjuna with Kesava, therefore, in battle, I
will subsequently make peace with Dharma's son.' Even these were his
words as we have heard. Thus answered, Pritha once more addressed her son
of broad chest and said, 'Fight Phalguna then, but spare my four other
sons.' The intelligent Karna, with joined hands, then replied unto his
trembling mother, saying, 'If I get thy four other sons even under my
power, I will not slay them. Without doubt, O goddess, thou shalt
continue to have five sons. If Karna be slain with Arjuna, thou shalt
have five! If, on the other hand, Arjuna be slain, thou shalt have five,
numbering me.' Desirous of the good of her children, his mother once more
said unto him, 'Go, O Karna, do good unto those brothers of thine whose
good thou always seekest.' Having said these words, Pritha took his leave
and came back to her abode. That hero has been slain by Arjuna,--the
uterine brother by the brother! Neither Pritha, nor he, had ever
disclosed the secret, O lord! That hero and great bowman was therefore
slain by Arjuna in battle. Subsequently I have come to know, O best of
regenerate ones, that he was my uterine brother. Indeed, at Pritha's
words I have come to know that Karna was the eldest born! Having caused
my brother to be slain, my heart is burning exceedingly. If I had both
Karna and Arjuna for aiding me, I could have vanquished Vasudeva himself.
Whilst I was tortured in the midst of the assembly by the wicked-souled
sons of Dhritarashtra, my wrath, suddenly provoked, became cooled at
sight of Karna. Even while listening to the harsh and bitter words of
Karna himself on that occasion of our match at dice, to the words, that
Karna uttered from desire of doing what was agreeable to Duryodhana, my
wrath became cooled at sight of Karna's feet. It seemed to me that
Karna's feet resembled the feet of our mother Kunti. Desirous of finding
out the reason of that resemblance between him and our mother, I
reflected for a long time. With even my best exertions I failed to find
the cause. Why, indeed, did the earth swallow up the wheels of his car at
the time of battle? Why was my brother cursed? It behoveth thee to recite
all this to me. I desire to hear everything from thee, O holy one! Thou
art acquainted with everything in this world and thou knowest both the
past and the future!'
