SECTION XXI
"Devasthana said, 'In this connection is cited an old history, viz., the
discourse that Vrihaspati, asked by Indra, delivered unto him. Vrihaspati
said, 'Contentment is the highest heaven, contentment is the highest
bliss. There is nothing higher than contentment. Contentment stands as
the highest. When one draws away all his desires like a tortoise drawing
in all it limbs, then the natural resplendence of his soul soon manifests
itself. When one does not fear any creature, nor any creature is
frightened at one, when one conquers one's desire and aversion, then is
one said to behold one's soul. When one, indeed, in word and thought,
seeks to injure nobody and cherishes no desire, one is said to attain to
Brahma. Thus, O son of Kunti, whatever religion is followed by creatures,
they obtain corresponding fruits. Awaken thyself by this consideration, O
Bharata![67] Some praise Peacefulness, some praise Exertion; some there
are that praise Contemplation; and some praise both Peacefulness and
Exertion.[68] Some praise sacrifice; others, renunciation. Some praise
gifts; others, acceptance. Some, abandoning everything, live in silent
meditation. Some praise sovereignty and the cherishing, of subjects,
after slaving, cutting and piercing (foes). Some are for passing their
days in retirement. Observing all this, the conclusion of the learned is
that that religion which consists in not injuring any creature is worthy
of the approbation of the righteous. Abstention from injury, truthfulness
of speech, justice, compassion, self-restraint, procreation (of
offspring) upon one's own wives, amiability, modesty, patience,--the
practice of these is the best of a religions as said by the self-create
Manu himself. Therefore, O son of Kunti, do thou observe this religion
with care. That Kshatriya, who, conversant with the truths or royal
duties, takes sovereignty upon himself, restraining his soul at all
times, equally regarding that which is dear and that which is not, and
subsisting upon the remains of sacrificial feasts, who is engaged in
restraining the wicked and cherishing the righteous, who obliges his
subjects to tread in the path of virtue and who himself treads in that
path, who at last transmits his crown to his son and betakes himself to
the woods, there to live on the products of the wilderness and act
according to the ordinances or the Vedas after having cast off all
idleness, that Kshatriya who conducts himself thus, conforming in
everything to the well-known duties of kings, is sure to obtain excellent
fruits in both this world and the next. That final emancipation, of which
thou speakest, is exceedingly difficult to obtain, and its pursuit is
attended with many impediments. They that adopt such duties and practise
charity and ascetic penances, that are possessed of the quality of
compassion and are freed from desire and wrath, that are engaged in
ruling their subjects with righteousness and fighting for the sake of
kine and Brahmanas, attain hereafter to a high end. For the Rudras with
the Vasus and the Adityas, O scorcher of foes, and the Sadhyas and hosts
of kings adopt this religion. Practising without heedlessness the duties
inculcated by that religion, they attain to heaven through those acts of
theirs.'"
