SECTION XXII
Vaisampayana said, "After this, Arjuna once more addressed his eldest
brother of unfading glory, viz., king Yudhishthira of cheerless heart,
and said these words: 'O thou that art conversant with every kind of
duty, having by the practice of Kshatriya duties obtained sovereignty
that is so very difficult of acquisition, and having conquered all thy
foes, why dost thou burn in grief? O king, as regards Kshatriyas, death
in battle is regarded more meritorious for them than the performance of
diverse sacrifices. It is so declared in the ordinance that lays down the
duties of Kshatriyas. Penances and Renunciation are the duties of
Brahmanas. Even this is the ordinance (affecting the two orders) about
the next world. Indeed, O puissant one, death in battle is laid down for
Kshatriyas. The duties of Kshatriyas are exceedingly fierce and are
always connected with the use of weapons, and it has been laid down, O
chief of the Bharatas, that they should, when the time comes, perish by
weapons on the field of battle. The life of even a Brahmana, O king, that
lives in the observance of Kshatriya duties, is not censurable, for
Kshatriyas also have sprung from Brahmana. Neither Renunciation, nor
Sacrifice, nor Penances, nor dependence on the wealth of others, O ruler
of men, has been ordained for Kshatriyas. Thou art acquainted with all
duties, and thou art of righteous soul, O bull of Bharata's race! Thou
art a wise king, skilled in all acts. Thou canst distinguish what is
right in this world from what is wrong. Casting off this cheerlessness by
repentance, address thyself with a strong will to action. The heart of a
Kshatriya especially is hard as thunder. Having by the exercise of
Kshatriya duties vanquished thy foes and acquired empire without a thorn
in its side, conquer thy soul, O ruler of men, and be engaged in the
performance of sacrifices and the practice of charity. Indra himself,
though a Brahmana, became a Kshatriya in his acts, and battled with his
sinful kinsfolk for eight hundred and ten times. Those acts of his, O
monarch, are adorable and worthy of praise. Through them he obtained, as
we have heard, the chiefship of the gods. Do thou, therefore, O monarch,
perform sacrifices with profuse presents even as Indra did, O ruler of
men, and thereby free thyself from thy fever. Do not, O bull among
Kshatriyas, grieve thus for what is past. They that have been slain have
attained to the highest end, sanctified by weapons and agreeably to the
ordinances of the Kshatriya religion. That which has happened was
ordained to happen. Destiny, O tiger among kings, is incapable of being
resisted.'"
