SECTION LXI
"Bhishma said, 'O mighty-armed one, listen now to me, O thou of prowess
incapable of being baffled, as I mention the names of the four modes of
life and the duties in respect of each. The four modes are Vanaprastha,
Bhaikshya, Garhasthya of great merit, and Brahmacharya which is adopted
by Brahmanas. Undergoing the purificatory rite in respect of bearing
matted locks, after having gone through the rite of regeneration and
performed for some time the rites in respect of the sacred fire and
studied the Vedas, one should, with cleansed soul and senses under
restraint, having first carefully performed all the duties of the mode
called Garhasthya, proceed, with or without his wife, to the woods for
adoption of the mode called Vanaprastha. Having studied the scriptures
called Aranyakas, having drawn up his vital fluid and having retired from
all worldly affairs, the virtuous recluse may then attain to an
absorption with the eternal Soul knowing no decay. These are the
indications of Munis that have drawn up their vital fluid. A learned
Brahmana, O king, should first practise and perform them. The Brahmana, O
king, that is desirous of emancipation, it is well known, is competent to
adopt the Bhaikshya mode after having gone through the mode called
Brahmacharya. Sleeping at that place (in the course of the wanderings)
where evening overtakes him, without desire of bettering his situation,
without a home, subsisting on whatever food is obtained (in charity),
given to contemplation, practising self-restraint, with the senses under
control, without desire, regarding all creatures equally, without
enjoyments, without dislike to anything, the Brahmana possessed of
learning, by adopting this mode of life, attains to absorption with the
eternal Soul that knows no decay. The person leading the Garhasthya mode
of life should, after studying the Vedas, accomplish all the religious
acts laid down for him. He should beget children and enjoy pleasures and
comforts. With careful attention he should accomplish all the duties of
this mode of life that is applauded by ascetics and that is extremely
difficult to go through (without transgressions). He should be satisfied
with his own wedded wife and should never approach her except her season.
He should observe the ordinances of the scriptures, should not be cunning
and deceitful. He should be abstemious in diet, devoted to the gods,
grateful, mild, destitute of cruelty, and forgiving. He should be of a
tranquil heart, tractable and attentive in making offerings to the gods
and the Pitris. He should always be hospitable to the Brahmanas. He
should be without pride, and his charity should not be confined to any
one sect. He should also be always devoted to the performance of the
Vedic rites. In this connection, the illustrious and great Rishis cite a
verse sung by Narayana himself, of grave import and endued with high
ascetic merit. Listen to me as I repeat it.--'By truth, simplicity,
worship of guests, acquisition of morality and profit, and enjoyment of
one's own wedded wives, one should enjoy diverse kinds of happiness both
here and hereafter.' The great Rishis have said that support of sons and
wives, and study of the Vedas, form the duties of those that lead this
high mode of life. That Brahmana who, always engaged in the performance
of sacrifices, duly goes through this mode of life and properly
discharges all its duties, obtains blessed rewards in heaven. Upon his
death, the rewards desired by him became deathless. Indeed, these wait
upon him for eternity like menials ever on the alert to execute the
commands of their master.[194] Always attending to the Vedas, silently
reciting the mantras obtained from his preceptor, worshipping all the
deities, O Yudhishthira, dutifully waiting upon and serving his preceptor
with his own body smeared with clay and filth, the person leading the
Brahmacharya mode of life should always observe rigid vows and, with
senses under control, should always pay attention to the instructions he
has received. Reflecting on the Vedas and discharging all the duties (in
respect of contemplation and overt acts), he should live, dutifully
waiting upon his preceptor and always bowing unto him. Unengaged in the
six kinds of work (such as officiating in the sacrifices of others), and
never engaged with attachment to any kind of acts, never showing favour
or disfavour to any one, doing good even unto his enemies, these, O sire,
are the duties laid down for a Brahmacharin!'
