SECTION XII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Arjuna, O chastiser of foes,
Nakula of mighty arms and a broad chest, temperate in speech and
possessed of great wisdom, with face whose colour then resembled that of
copper, looked at the king, that foremost of all righteous persons, and
spoke these words, besieging his brother's heart (with reason).'
"Nakula said, 'The very gods had established their fires in the region
called Visakha-yupa. Know, therefore, O king, that the gods themselves
depend upon the fruits of action.[20] The Pitris, that support (by rain)
the lives of even all disbelievers, observing the ordinances (of the
Creator as declared in the Vedas), are, O king, engaged in action.[21]
Know them for downright atheists that reject the declaration of the Vedas
(which inculcate action). The person that is learned in the Vedas, by
following their declarations in all his acts, attains, O Bharata, to the
highest region of heaven by the way of the deities.[22]
This (domestic mode of life again) has been said by all persons
acquainted with Vedic truths to be superior to all the (other) modes of
life. Knowing this, O king, that the person who in sacrifices gives away
his righteously acquired wealth unto those Brahmanas that are well
conversant with the Vedas, and restrains his soul, is, O monarch,
regarded as the true renouncer. He, however, who, disregarding (a life of
domesticity, that is) the source of much happiness, jumps to the next
mode of life,--that renouncer of his own self,[23] O monarch, is a
renouncer labouring under the quality of darkness. That man who is
homeless, who roves over the world (in his mendicant rounds), who has the
foot of a tree for his shelter, who observes the vow of taciturnity,
never cooks for himself, and seeks to restrain all the functions of his
senses, is, O Partha, a renouncer in the observance of the vow of
mendicancy.[24] That Brahmana who, disregarding wrath and joy, and
especially deceitfulness, always employs his time in the study of the
Vedas, is a renouncer in the observance of the vow of mendicancy.[25] The
four different modes of life were at one time weighed in the balance. The
wise have said, O king, that when domesticity was placed on one scale, it
required the three others to be placed on the other for balancing it.
Beholding the result of this examination by scales, O Partha, and seeing
further, O Bharata, that domesticity alone contained both heaven and
pleasure, that became the way of the great Rishis and the refuge of all
persons conversant with the ways of the world. He, therefore, O bull of
Bharata's race, who betakes himself to this mode of life, thinking it to
be his duty and abandoning all desire for fruit, is a real renouncer, and
not that man of clouded understanding who goes to the woods, abandoning
home and its surroundings. A person, again, who under the hypocritical
garb of righteousness, fails to forget his desires (even while living in
the woods), is bound by the grim King of death with his deadly fetters
round the neck. Those acts that are done from vanity, are said to be
unproductive of fruit. Those acts, on the other hand, O monarch I that
are done from a spirit of renunciation, always bear abundant fruits.[26]
Tranquillity, self-restraint, fortitude, truth, purity, simplicity,
sacrifices, perseverance, and righteousness,--these are always regarded
as virtues recommended by the Rishis. In domesticity, it is said, are
acts intended for Pitris, gods, guests. In this mode of life alone, O
monarch, are the threefold aims to be attained.[27] The renouncer that
rigidly adheres to this mode of life, in which one is free to do all
acts, has not to encounter ruin either here or hereafter. The sinless
Lord of all creatures, of righteous soul, created creatures, with the
intention that they would adore him by sacrifices with profuse presents.
Creepers and trees and deciduous herbs, and animals that are clean, and
clarified butter, were created as ingredients of sacrifice. For one in
the observance of domesticity the performance of sacrifice is fraught
with impediments. For this, that mode of life has been said to be
exceedingly difficult and unattainable. Those persons, therefore, in the
observance of the domestic mode of life, who, possessed of wealth and
corn and animals, do not perform sacrifices, earn, O monarch, eternal
sin. Amongst Rishis, there are some that regard the study of the Vedas to
be a sacrifice: and some that regard contemplation to be a great
sacrifice which they perform in their minds. The very gods, O monarch,
covet the companionship of a regenerate person like this, who in
consequence of his treading along such a way which consists in the
concentration of the mind, has become equal to Brahma. By refusing to
spend in sacrifice the diverse kinds of wealth that thou hast taken from
thy foes, thou art only displaying thy want of faith. I have never seen,
O monarch, a king in the observance of a life of domesticity renouncing
his wealth in any other way except in the Rajasuya, the Astwamedha, and
other kinds of sacrifice. Like Sakra, the chief of the celestial, O sire,
perform those other sacrifices that are praised by the Brahmanas. That
king, through whose heedlessness the subjects are plunged by robbers, and
who does not offer protection to those whom he is called upon to govern,
is said to be the very embodiment of Kati. If, without giving away
steeds, and kine, and female slaves, and elephants adorned with
trappings, and villages, and populous regions, and fields, and houses,
unto Brahmanas, we retire into the woods with hearts not harbouring
friendly feeling towards kinsmen, even we shall be, O monarch, such Kalis
of the kingly order. Those members of the kingly order that do not
practise charity and give protection (to others), incur sin. Woe is their
portion hereafter and not bliss. If, O lord, without performing great
sacrifices and the rites in honour of thy deceased ancestors, and it,
without bathing in sacred waters, thou betakest thyself to a wandering
life, thou shalt then meet with destruction like a small cloud separated
from a mass and dashed by the winds. Thou shalt then fall off from both
worlds and have to take thy birth in the Pisacha order.[28] A person
becomes a true renouncer by casting off every internal and external
attachment, and not simply by abandoning home for dwelling in the woods.
A Brahmana that lives in the observance of these ordinances in which
there are no impediments, does not fall off from this or the other world.
Observant of the duties of one's own order,--duties respected by the
ancients and practised by the best of men, who is there, O Partha, that
would grieve, O king, for having in a trice stain in battle his foes that
swelled with prosperity, like Sakra slaying the forces of the Daityas?
Having in the observance of Kshatriya duties subjugated the world by the
aid of thy prowess, and having made presents unto persons conversant with
the Vedas, thou canst, O monarch, go to regions higher than heaven. It
behoves thee not, O Partha, to indulge in grief."
