SECTION III
"Narada said, 'That tiger of Bhrigu's race (viz., Rama), was well-pleased
with the might of Karna's arms, his affection (for him), his
self-restraint, and the services he did unto his preceptor. Observant of
ascetic penances, Rama cheerfully communicated, with due forms, unto his
penance-observing disciple, everything about the Brahma weapon with the
mantras for withdrawing it. Having acquired a knowledge of that weapon,
Karna began to pass his days happily in Bhrigu's retreat, and endued with
wonderful prowess, he devoted himself with great ardour to the science of
weapons. One day Rama of great intelligence, while roving with Karna in
the vicinity or his retreat, felt very weak in consequence of the fasts
he had undergone. From affection begotten by confidence, the tired son of
Jamadagni placing his head on Karna's lap, slept soundly, White his
preceptor was thus sleeping (with head) on his lap, a frightful worm,
whose bite was very painful and which subsisted on phlegm and fat and
flesh and blood, approached the presence of Karna. That blood-sucking
worm, approaching Karna's thigh, began to pierce it. Through fear of
(awaking) his preceptor, Karna became unable to either throw away or kill
that worm. Though his limb was bored through by that worm, O Bharata, the
son of Surya, lest his preceptor should awake, suffered it to do its
pleasure. Though the pain was intolerable, Karna bore it with heroic
patience, and continued to hold Bhrigu's son on his lap, without
quivering in the least and without manifesting any sign of pain. When at
last Karna's blood touched the body of Rama of great energy, the latter
awoke and said these words in fear, 'Alas, I have been made impure! What
is this that thou art doing, Tell me, casting off all fear, what is the
truth of this matter!' Then Karna informed him of that worm's bite. Rama
saw that worm which resembled a hog in shape. It had eight feet and very
keen teeth, and it was covered with bristles that were all pointed like
needles. Called by the name of Alarka, its limbs were then shrunk (with
fear). As soon as Rama cast his, eyes on it, the worm gave up its
life-breath, melting in that blood which it had drawn. All this seemed
wonderful. Then in the welkin was seen a Rakshasa of terrible form, dark
in hue, of a red neck, capable of assuming any form at wilt, and staying
on the clouds,--his object fulfilled, the Rakshasa, with joined hands,
addressed Rama, saying, 'O best of ascetics, thou hast rescued me from
this hell! Blessed be thou, I adore thee, thou hast done me good!'
Possessed of great energy, the mighty-armed son of Jamadagni said unto
him, 'Who art thou? And why also didst thou fall into hell? Tell me all
about it.' He answered, 'Formerly I was a great Asura of the name of
Dansa. In the Krita period, O sire, I was of the same age with Bhrigu. I
ravished the dearly-loved spouse of that sage. Through his curse I felt
down on the earth in the form of a worm. In anger thy ancestors said unto
me, 'Subsisting on urine and phlegm, O wretch, thou shalt lead a life of
hell.' I then besought him, saying, 'When, O Brahmana, shall this curse
end?' Bhrigu replied unto me, saying. 'This curse shall end through Rama
of my race. It was for this that I had obtained such a course of life
like one of uncleansed soul. O righteous one, by thee, however, I have
been rescued from that sinful life.' Having said these words, the great
Asura, bending his head unto Rama went away. Then Rama wrathfully
addressed Karna, saying, 'O fool, no Brahmana could endure such agony.
Thy patience is like that of a Kshatriya. Tell me the truth, without
fear.' Thus asked, Karna, fearing to be cursed, and seeking to gratify
him, said these words, 'O thou of Bhrigu's race, know me for a Suta, a
race that has sprung from the intermixture of Brahmanas with Kshatriyas.
People call me Karna the son of Radha. O thou of Bhrigu's race, be
gratified with my poor self that has acted from the desire of obtaining
weapons. There is no doubt in this that a reverend preceptor in the Vedas
and other branches of knowledge is one's father. It was for this that I
introduced myself to thee as a person of thy own race.' Unto the
cheerless and trembling Karna, prostrated with joined hands upon earth,
that foremost one of Bhrigu's race, smiling though filled with wrath,
answered, 'Since thou hast, from avarice of weapons, behaved here with
falsehood, therefore, O wretch, this Brahma weapon shalt not dwell in thy
remembrance[2]. Since thou art not a Brahmana, truly this Brahma weapon
shall not, up to the time of thy death, dwell in thee when thou shalt be
engaged with a warrior equal to thyself![3] Go hence, this is no place
for a person of such false behaviour as thou! On earth, no Kshatriya will
be thy equal in battle.' Thus addressed by Rama, Karna came away, having
duty taken his leave. Arriving then before Duryodhana, he informed him,
saying, 'I have mastered all weapons!'"
