SECTION LXXIV
"Bhishma said, 'It is said that the preservation and growth of the
kingdom rest upon the king. The preservation and growth of the king rest
upon the king's priest. That kingdom enjoys true felicity where the
invisible fears of the subjects are dispelled by the Brahmana and all
visible fears are dispelled by the king with the might of his arms. In
this connection is cited the old narrative of the discourse between king
Muchukunda and Vaisravana. King Muchukunda, having subjugated the whole
earth, repaired to the lord of Alaka for testing his strength. King
Vaisravana created (by ascetic power) a large force of Rakshasas. These
ground the forces led by Muchukunda. Beholding the slaughter of his army,
king Muchukunda, O chastiser of foes, began to rebuke his own learned
priest (Vasishtha). Thereupon that foremost of righteous persons viz.,
Vasishtha, underwent very severe penances and, causing those Rakshasas to
be slain, ascertained the true course upon which Muchukunda was bent.
When king Vaisravana's troops were being slaughtered, he showed himself
unto Muchukunda and said these words.'
"The Lord of treasures said, 'Many kings of old, more powerful than thou
art, aided by their priests, had never approached me thus? All of them
were skilled in weapons and all of them were possessed of might.
Regarding me as the grantor of weal and woe, they approached me for
offering worship. In truth, if thou hast might of arms, it behoves thee
to display it. Why dost thou act so proudly, aided by Brahmana might?'
Enraged at these words, Muchukunda, without pride and fear, said unto the
lord of treasures these words fraught with reason and justice, 'The
self-born Brahman created the Brahmana and the Kshatriya. They have a
common origin. If they apply their forces separately, they would never be
able to uphold the world. The power of penances and mantras was bestowed
upon Brahmanas; the might of arms and of weapons was bestowed upon
Kshatriyas. Aggrandised by both kinds of might, kings should protect
their subjects. I am acting in that way. Why dost thou, O lord of Alaka,
rebuke me then?' Thus addressed, Vaisravana said unto Muchukunda and his
priest, 'I never, without being ordered by the (self-created) bestow
sovereignty upon any one. Nor do I ever, without being ordered, take it
away from any one. Know this, O king! Do thou rule then the whole earth
without bounds.' Thus addressed, king Muchukunda replied, saying, 'I do
not, O king, desire to enjoy sovereignty obtained as gift from thee! I
desire to enjoy sovereignty obtained by the might of my own arms.'
"Bhishma continued, 'At these words of Muchukunda, Vaisravana, seeing the
king fearless in the observance of Kshatriya duties, became filled with
surprise. King Muchukunda, devoted to Kshatriya duties, continued to rule
the entire earth obtained by the might of his own arms. That virtuous
king who rules his kingdom, aided by and yielding precedence to the
Brahmana, succeeds in subjugating the whole earth and achieving great
fame. The Brahmana should every day perform his religious rites and the
Kshatriya should always be armed with weapons. Between them they are the
rightful owners of everything in the universe.'"
