SECTION VII
Vaisampayana said, "The righteous-souled Yudhishthira, with an agitated
heart and burning with sorrow, began to grieve for that mighty
car-warrior Karna. Sighing repeatedly, he addressed Arjuna, saying, 'If,
O Arjuna, we had led a life of mendicancy in the cities of the Vrishnis
and the Andhakas, then this miserable end would not have been ours in
consequence of having exterminated our kinsmen. Our foes, the Kurus, have
gained in prosperity, while we have become divested of all the objects of
life, for what fruits of righteousness can be ours when we have been
guilty of self-slaughter?[4] Fie on the usages of Kshatriyas, fie on
might and valour, and fie on wrath, since through these such a calamity
hath overtaken us. Blessed are forgiveness, and self-restraint, and
purity, with renunciation and humility, and abstention from injury, and
truthfulness of speech on all occasions, which are all practised by
forest-recluses. Full of pride and arrogance, ourselves, however, through
covetousness and folly and from desire of enjoying the sweets of
sovereignty, have fallen into this plight. Beholding those kinsmen of
ours that were bent on acquiring the sovereignty of the world slain on
the field of battle, such grief hath been ours that one cannot gladden us
by giving the sovereignty of even the three worlds. Alas, having slain,
for the sake of the earth, such lords of earth as deserved not to be
slain by us, we are bearing the weight of existence, deprived of friends
and reft of the very objects of life. Like a pack of dogs fighting one
another for a piece of meat, a great disaster has overtaken us! That
piece of meat is no longer dear to us. On the other hand, it shall be
thrown aside. They that have been slain should not have been slain for
the sake of even the whole earth or mountains of gold, or all the horses
and kine in this world. Filled with envy and a hankering for all earthly
objects, and influenced by wrath and pleasure, all of them, betaking
themselves to the highway of Death, have repaired to the regions of Yama.
Practising asceticism and Brahmacharya and truth and renunciation, sires
wish for sons endued with every kind of prosperity. Similarly, by fasts
and sacrifices and vows and sacred rites and auspicious ceremonies
mothers conceive. They then hold the foetus for ten months. Passing their
time in misery and in expectation of fruit, they always ask themselves in
anxiety, 'Shall these come out of the womb safely? Shall these live after
birth? Shall they grow in might and be objects of regard on earth? Shall
they be able to give us happiness in this and the other world?' Alas,
since their sons, youthful in years and resplendent with ear-rings, have
been slain, therefore, those expectations of theirs rendered fruitless,
have been abandoned by them. Without having enjoyed the pleasure of this
world, and without having paid off the debts they owed to their sires and
the gods, they have repaired to Yama's abode. Alas, O mother, those kings
have been slain just at that time when their parents expected to reap the
fruits of their might and wealth.[5] They were always fitted with envy
and a hankering after earthly objects, and were exceedingly subject to
anger and joy. For this, they could not be expected to enjoy at any time
or any place the fruits of victory.[6] I think that they among the
Panchalas and the Kurus that have fallen (in this battle) have been lost,
otherwise he that has slain would, by that act of his, obtain all regions
of bliss.[7] We are regarded as the cause of the destruction that has
overtaken the world. The fault, however, is really ascribable to the sons
of Dhritarashtra. Duryodhana's heart was always set upon guile. Always
cherishing malice, he was addicted to deception. Although we never
offended him, yet he always behaved falsely towards us. We have not
gained our object, nor have they gained theirs. We have not vanquished
them, nor have they vanquished us. The Dhartarashtras could not enjoy
this earth, nor could they enjoy women and music. They did not listen to
the counsels of ministers and friends and men learned in the scriptures.
They could not, indeed, enjoy their costly gems and well-filled treasury
and vast territories. Burning with the hate they bore us, they could not
obtain happiness and peace. Beholding our aggrandisement, Duryodhana
became colourless, pale and emaciated. Suvala's son informed king
Dhritarashtra of this. As a father full of affection for his son,
Dhritarashtra tolerated the evil policy his son pursued. Without doubt,
by disregarding Vidura and the high-souled son of Ganga, and in
consequence of his neglect in restraining his wicked and covetous son,
entirely governed by his passions, the king has met with destruction like
my poor self. Without doubt, Suyodhana, having caused his uterine
brothers to be slain and having east this couple into burning grief, hath
fallen off from his blazing fame. Burning with the hate he bore to us
Duryodhana was always of a sinful heart. What other kinsman of high birth
could use such language towards kinsmen as he, from desire of battle,
actually used in the presence of Krishna? We also have, through
Duryodhana's fault, been lost for eternity, like suns burning everything
around them with their own energy. That wicked-souled wight, that
embodiment of hostility, was our evil star. Alas, for Duryodhana's acts
alone, this race of ours has been exterminated. Having slain those whom
we should never have slain, we have incurred the censures of the world.
King Dhritarashtra, having installed that wicked-souled prince of sinful
deeds, that exterminator of his race, in the sovereignty, is obliged to
grieve today. Our heroic foes have been slain. We have committed sin. His
possessions and kingdom are gone. Having slain them, our wrath has been
pacified. But grief is stupefying me. O Dhananjaya, a perpetrated sin is
expiated by auspicious acts, by publishing it wildly, by repentance, by
alms-giving, by penances, by trips to tirthas after renunciation of
everything, by constant meditation on the scriptures. Of all these, he
that has practised renunciation is believed to be incapable of committing
sins anew. The Srutis declare that he that practises renunciation escapes
from birth and death, and obtaining the right rood, that person of fixed
soul attains to Brahma. I shall, therefore, O Dhananjaya, go to the
woods, with your leave, O scorcher of foes, disregarding all the pairs of
opposites, adopting the vow of taciturnity, and walking in the way
pointed out by knowledge.[8] O slayer of foes, the Srutis declare it and
I myself have seen it with my eyes, that one who is wedded to this earth
can never obtain every kind Of religious merit. Desirous of obtaining the
things of this earth, I have committed sin, through which, as the Srutis
declare, birth and death are brought about. Abandoning the whole of my
kingdom, therefore, and the things of this earth, I shall go to the
woods, escaping from the ties of the world, freed from grief, and without
affection for anything. Do thou govern this earth, on which peace has
been restored, and which has been divested of all its thorns. O best of
Kuru's race, I have no need for kingdom or for pleasure.' Having said
these words, king Yudhishthira the just stopped. His younger brother
Arjuna then addressed him in the following words.
