SECTION XXIX
Vaisampayana said, "The foremost of kings, viz., Yudhishthira the son of
Dharma, still remaining speechless, Pandu's son Arjuna addressed Krishna
and spoke as follows:
"Arjuna said, 'This scorcher of foes, viz., Dharma's son, is burning with
grief on account of his (slaughtered) kinsfolk. Comfort him, O Madhava I
Once more, O Janardana, all of us have fallen into great danger. It
behoveth thee! O mighty-armed one, to dispel his grief.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by the high-souled Arjuna, the
lotus-eyed Govinda of unfading glory turned his face towards the king.
Kesava could not by any means be disregarded by Yudhishthira. From the
earliest years Govinda was dearer to Yudhishthira than Arjuna himself.
Taking up the king's hand adorned with sandal-paste and looking like a
column of marble, the mighty-armed Saurin began to speak, gladdening (the
hearts of all who listened to him). His face, adorned with teeth and eyes
that were very beautiful, shone brightly like a full-blown lotus at
sunrise.
"Vasudeva said, "Do not, O tiger among men, indulge in such grief that
emaciates thy body. They who have been slain in this battle will on no
account be got back. Those Kshatriyas, O king, that have fallen in this
great battle, are even, like objects that one acquires in one's dreams
and that vanish when one awakes. All of them were heroes and ornaments of
battle. They were vanquished while rushing with faces towards their foes.
No one amongst them was slain with wounds on the back or while flying
away. All of them, having contended with heroes in great battle and
having cast off their life-breaths then, have, sanctified by weapons,
proceeded to heaven. It behoveth thee not to grieve for them. Devoted to
the duties of Kshatriyas, possessed of courage, perfectly conversant with
the Vedas and their branches, all of them have attained to that blissful
end which is obtainable by heroes. It behoveth thee not to grieve for
them after hearing of those high-souled lords of the earth, of ancient
days, that departed from this world. In this connection is cited the old
discourse of Narada before Srinjaya when the latter was deeply afflicted
with grief on account of the death of his son. (Narada said),--Subject to
happiness and misery, myself, thyself and all creatures, O Srinjaya,
shall have to die. What cause then is there for sorrow. Listen to me as I
recite the great blessedness of (some) ancient king. Hear me with
concentrated attention. Thou shalt then, O king, cast off thy grief.
Listening to the story of those high-souled lords of the earth, abate thy
sorrow. O, hear me as I recite their stories to thee in detail. By
listening to the charming and delightful history of those kings of
ancient times, malignant stars may be propitiated and the period of one's
life be increased. We hear, O Srinjaya, that there was a king of the name
of Marutta who was the son of Avikshit. Even he fell a prey to death. The
gods with Indra and Varuna and Vrihaspati at their head came to
sacrifice, called Viswasrij, performed by that high-souled monarch.[86]
Challenging Sakra, the chief of the gods, that king vanquished him in
battle. The learned Vrihaspati, from desire of doing good unto Indra, had
refused to officiate at Marutta's sacrifice. Thereupon Samvarta, the
younger brother of Vrihaspati, acceded to the king's request. During the
rule of that king, O best of monarchs, the earth yielded crops without
being tilled and was adorned with diverse kinds of ornaments. In the
sacrifice of that king, the Viswedevas sat as courtiers, the Maruts acted
as distributors (of food and presents) and the high-souled Sadhyas were
also present. In that sacrifice of Marutta, the Maruts drank Soma. The
sacrificial presents the king made surpassed (in value) those ever made
by the gods, the Gandharvas, and men. When even that king, O Srinjaya,
who transcended thee in religious merit, knowledge, renunciation, and
affluence, and who was purer than thy son, felt a prey to death, do not
grieve for thy son. There was another king of the name of Suhotra the son
of Atithi. We hear, O Srinjaya, that even he fell a prey to death. During
his rule, Maghavat showered gold for one whole year upon his kingdom.
Obtaining that king for her lord, the earth became in reality (and not in
name only as before) Vasumati.[87] The rivers, during the sway of that
king, bore golden tortoises, crabs, alligators, sharks, and porpoises,
for the adorable Indra, O king, had showered these upon them. Beholding
those golden fishes and sharks and tortoises in hundreds and thousands,
Atithi's son became filled with wonder. Collecting that vast wealth of
gold that covered the earth, Suhotra performed a sacrifice at Kurujangala
and gave it away unto the Brahmanas, When that king, O Srinjaya, who
transcended thee in the four attributes of religious merit, knowledge,
renunciation, and affluence, and who was purer than thy son, felt a prey
to death, do not grieve for thy son (that is dead). Thy son never
performed a sacrifice and never made gifts. Knowing this, pacify thy mind
and do not give away to grief.[88] We hear also, O Srinjaya, that
Vrihadratha the king of the Angas, fell a prey to death. He gave away I
hundred thousand steeds. A hundred thousand maidens also, adorned with
golden ornaments, he gave away as presents in a sacrifice he performed. A
hundred thousand elephants also of the best breed, he gave away as
presents in another sacrifice performed by him. A hundred millions also
of bulls, adorned with golden chains, with thousands of kine accompanying
them, he gave away as sacrificial presents. While the king of Anga
performed his sacrifice by the hill called Vishnupada, Indra became
intoxicated with the Soma he drank, and the Brahmanas with the presents
they received. In the sacrifices, O monarch, numbering by hundreds, that
this king performed of old, the presents he made far surpassed those ever
made by the gods, the Gandharvas, and men. No other man was born, or will
ever be born, that gave or will give away so much wealth as was given
away by the king of the Angas in the seven sacrifices he performed, each
of which was characterised by the consecration of the Soma.[89] When, O
Srinjaya, this Vrihadratha even, who was thy superior in the four
attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not
grieve for thy son that is dead. We hear also, O Srinjaya, that Sivi, the
son of Usinara, fell a prey to death. That king swayed the whole earth as
one sways the leathern shield in his hand. Riding on a single car that
proved victorious in every battle, king Sivi caused the whole earth to
resound with the rattle of his wheels and subjugated all monarchs.[90]
Usinara's son Sivi gave away, in a sacrifice, all the kine and horses he
had, both domestic and wild. The Creator himself thought that no one
amongst the kings of the past or the future had or would have the ability
to bear the burthen, O Srinjaya, that Usinara's son Sivi, that foremost
of kings, that hero who was possessed of prowess equal to that of Indra
himself, bore. Do not, therefore, grieve or thy son who never performed
any sacrifice nor made any gift. Indeed, O Srinjaya, when Sivi, who was
far superior to thee in the four attributes and who was purer than thy
son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy son that is dead. We
hear, O Srinjaya, that the high-souled Bharata also, the son of Dushmanta
and Sakuntala, who had a vast and well-filled treasury, fell a prey to
death. Devoting three hundred horses unto the gods on the banks of the
Yamuna, twenty on the banks of the Saraswati, and fourteen on the banks
of Ganga, that king of great energy, in days of old, performed (in this
order) a thousand Horse-sacrifices and a hundred Rajasuyas. No one
amongst the kings of the earth can imitate the great deeds of Bharata,
even as no man can, by the might of his arms, soar into the welkin.
Erecting numerous sacrificial altars, he gave away innumerable horses and
untold wealth unto the sage Kanwa.[91] When even he, O Srinjaya, who was
far superior to thee in the four attributes and who was purer than thy
son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy son that is dead. We
hear, O Srinjaya, that Rama also, the son of Dasaratha, fell a prey to
death. He always cherished his subjects as if they were the sons of his
own loins. In his dominions there were no widows and none that was
helpless. Indeed, Rama in governing his kingdom always acted like his
father Dasaratha. The clouds, yielding showers season ably, caused the
crops to grow abundantly. During the period of his rule, food was always
abundant in his kingdom. No death occurred by drowning or by fire. As
long as Rama governed it, there was no fear in his kingdom of any
disease. Every man lived for a thousand years, and every man was blessed
with a thousand children. During the period of Rama's sway, all men were
whole and all men attained the fruition of their wishes. The very women
did not quarrel with one another, what need then be said of the men?
During his rule his subjects were always devoted to virtue. Contented,
crowned with fruition in respect of all the objects of their desire,
fearless, free, and wedded to the vow of truth, were all the people when
Rama governed the kingdom. The trees always bore flowers and fruit and
were subject to no accidents. Every cow yielded milk filling a drona to
the brim. Having dwelt, in the observance of severe penances, for four
and ten years in the woods, Rama performed ten Horse-sacrifices of great
splendour[92] and to them the freest access was given to all. Possessed
of youth, of a dark complexion, with red eyes, he looked like the leader
of an elephantine herd. With aims stretching down to his knees and of
handsome face, his shoulders were like those of a lion and the might of
his arms great. Ascending upon the throne of Ayodhya, he ruled for ten
thousand and ten hundred years. When, he O Srinjaya, who transcended thee
in the four principal attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a
prey to death, do not grieve for thy son that is dead. We hear, O
Srinjaya, that king Bhagiratha also died. In one of the sacrifices of
that king, intoxicated with the Soma he had drunk, Indra, the adorable
chastiser of Paka and the chief of the gods, vanquished, by putting forth
the might of his arms, many thousands of Asuras. King Bhagiratha, in one
of the sacrifices he performed, gave away a million of maidens adorned
with ornaments of gold. Each of those maidens sat upon a car and unto
each car were attached four steeds. With each car were a hundred
elephants, all of the foremost breed and decked with chains of gold.
Behind each elephant were a thousand steeds, and behind each steed a
thousand kine, and behind each cow a thousand goats and sheep. (The
river-goddess) Ganga, named (from before) Bhagirathi, sat upon the lap of
this king dwelling near (her stream), and from this incident she came to
be called Urvasi.[93] The triple-coursed Ganga had agreed to be the
daughter of Bhagiratha of Ikshvaku's race, that monarch ever engaged in
the performance of sacrifices with presents in profusion unto the
Brahmanas.[94] When he, O Srinjaya, who transcended thee in respect of
the four principal attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey
to death, do not grieve for thy son. We hear, O Srinjaya, that the
high-souled Dilipa also fell a prey to death. The Brahmanas love to
recite his innumerable deeds. In one of his great sacrifices that king,
with heart fully assenting, gave away the entire earth, abounding with
wealth, unto the Brahmanas. In each sacrifice performed by him, the chief
priest received as sacrificial fee a thousand elephants made of gold. In
one of his sacrifices, the stake (set up for slaughtering the victims)
was made of gold and looked exceedingly beautiful. Discharging the duties
assigned to them, the gods having Sakra for their chief, used to seek the
protection of that king. Upon that golden stake possessed of great
effulgence and decked with a ring, six thousand Gods and Gandharvas
danced in joy, and Viswavasu himself, in their midst played on his Vina
the seven notes according to the rules that regulate their combinations.
Such was the character of Viswavasu's music that every creature (whatever
he might be) thought that the great Gandharva was playing to him alone.
No other monarch could imitate this achievement of king Dilipa. The
elephants of that king, intoxicated and adorned with housings of gold,
used to lie down on the roads.[95] Those men proceeded to heaven that
succeeded in obtaining a sight even of the high-souled king Dilipa who
was ever truthful in speech and whose bow could bear a hundred foes equal
in energy to a hundred Anantas.[96] These three sounds never ceased in
Dilipa's abode, viz., the voice of Vedic recitations, the twang of bows,
and cries of Let it be given. When he, O Srinjaya, who transcended thee
in the four principal attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a
prey to death, do not grieve for thy son that is dead. Yuvanaswa's son
Mandhatri also, O Sanjaya, we have heard, fell a prey to death. The
deities named Maruts extracted that child from his sire's stomach through
one of its sides. Sprung from a quantity of clarified butter that had
been sanctified by mantras (and that had by mistake been quaffed by his
sire instead of his sire's spouse) Mandhatri was born in the stomach of
the high-souled Yuvanaswa. Possessed of great prosperity, king Mandhatri
conquered the three worlds. Beholding that child of celestial beauty
lying on the lap of his sire, the God asked one another, 'From whom shall
this child obtain suck?' Then Indra approached him, saying, 'He shall
obtain stick even from me!' From this circumstance, the chief of the
deities came to call the child by the name of Mandhatri.[97] From the
nourishment of that high-souled child of Yuvanaswa, the finger of Indra,
placed in his mouth, began to yield a jet of milk. Sucking Indra's
finger, he grew up into a stout youth in a hundred days, In twelve days
he looked like one of twelve years. The whole earth in one day came under
the sway of that high-souled and virtuous and brave king who resembled
Indra himself for prowess in battle. He vanquished king Angada, Marutta,
Asita, Gaya, and Vrihadratha the king of the Angas.[98] When Yuvanaswa's
son fought in battle with Angada, the Gods thought that the firmament was
breaking with the twang of his how. The whole earth from where the Sun
rises to where he sets is said to be the field of Mandhatri. Having
performed Horse-sacrifices and a hundred Rajasuyas, he gave unto the
Brahmanas many Rohita fishes. Those fishes were each ten Yojanas in
length and one in breadth. Those that remained after gratifying the
Brahmanas were divided amongst themselves by the other classes. When he,
O Srinjaya, who transcended thee in respect of the four principal
attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not
grieve for thy son that is dead. We hear, O Sanjaya, that Yayati, the son
of Nahusha, also fell a prey to death. Having subjugated the whole world
with its seas, he journeyed through it, decking it with successive
sacrificial altars the intervals between which were measured by throws of
a heavy piece of wood. Indeed, he reached the very shores of the sea as
he proceeded performing great sacrifices (on those altars along his
way).[99] Having performed a thousand sacrifices and a hundred Vajapeyas,
he gratified the foremost of Brahmanas with three mountains of gold.
Having slain many Daityas and Danavas duly arrayed in battle, Nahusha's
son, Yayati, divided the whole earth (among his children). At last
discarding his other sons headed by Yadu and Drahyu, he installed (his
youngest son) Puru on his throne and then entered the woods accompanied
by his wife, When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed thee in the four
principal attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to
death, do not grieve for thy son that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that
Amvarisha also, the son of Nabhaga, fell a prey to death. That protector
(of the world) and foremost of kings was regarded by his subjects as the
embodiment of virtue. That monarch, in one of his sacrifices, assigned to
the Brahmanas, for waiting upon them, a million of kings who had
themselves performed thousands of sacrifices each. Men of piety praised
Amvarisha, the son of Nabhaga, saying that such feats had never been
achieved before nor would their like be achieved in the future.[100]
Those hundreds upon hundreds and thousands upon thousands of kings (that
had at the command of Amvarisha waited at his sacrifices upon the
Brahmanas that came there) became (through Amvarisha's merits) crowned
with the fruits of the Horse-sacrifice, and followed their lord by the
Southern-path (to regions or brightness and bliss). When he, O Srinjaya,
who far surpassed thee in the four principal attributes and who was purer
than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy child that is
dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that Sasavindu also, the son of Chitrasena,
felt a prey to death. That high-souled king had a hundred thousand wives,
and million of sorts. All of them used to wear golden armour and all of
them were excellent bowmen. Each of those princes married a hundred
princesses, and each princess brought a hundred elephants. With each of
those elephants were a hundred cars. With each car were a hundred steeds,
all of good breed and all decked with trappings of gold. With each steed
were a hundred kine, and with each cow were a hundred sheep and goats.
This countless wealth, O monarch, Sasavindu gave away, in a
Horse-sacrifice, unto the Brahmanas. When he, O Srinjaya, who far
surpassed thee in the four principal attributes and who was purer than
thy son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy child that is dead.
We hear, O Srinjaya, that Gaya also, the son of Amurtarayas, fell a prey
to death. For a hundred years, that king subsisted upon the remains of
sacrificial food. (Pleased with such devotion) Agni desired to give him
boons. The boons solicited by Gaya were, 'Let my wealth be inexhaustible
even if I give ceaselessly. Let my regard for virtue exist for ever. Let
my heart ever take pleasure in Truth, through thy grace, O cater of
sacrificial libations.' It hath been heard by us that king Gaya obtained
all those wishes from Agni. On days of the new moon, on those of the full
moon, and on every fourth month, for a thousand years, Gaya repeatedly
performed the Horse-sacrifice. Rising (at the completion of every
sacrifice) he gave away a hundred thousand kine and hundreds of mules
(unto the Brahmanas) during this period. That bull among men gratified
the gods with Soma, the Brahmanas with wealth, the Pitris with Swadha,
and the women with the accomplishment of all their wishes. In his great
Horse-sacrifice, king Gaya caused a golden ground to be made, measuring a
hundred cubits in length and fifty in breadth, and gave it away as the
sacrificial fee. That foremost of men, viz., Gaya, the son of
Amurtarayas, gave away as many kine as there are sand grains, O king, in
the river Ganga. When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed thee in the four
principal attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to
death, do not grieve for thy son that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that
Sankriti's son Rantideva also fell a prey to death. Having undergone the
austerest of penances and adored him with great reverence, he obtained
these boons from Sakra, having solicited them, saying 'Let us have
abundant food and numerous guests. Let not my faith sustain any
diminution, and let us not have to ask anything of any person.' The
animals, both domestic and wild, slaughtered in his sacrifice, used to
come to him, viz., the high-souled Rantideva of rigid vows and great
fame, of their own accord. The secretions that flowed from the skins of
the animals (slaughtered in his sacrifices), produced a mighty and
celebrated river which to this day is known by the name of Charmanwati.
King Rantideva used to make gifts unto the Brahmanas in an extensive
enclosure. When the king said, 'Unto thee I give a hundred nishkas! Unto
thee I give a hundred,' the Brahmanas (without accepting what was
offered) made a noise (expressive of refusal). When, however, the king
would say, 'I give a thousand nishkas,' the gifts were all accepted. All
the vessels and plates, in Rantideva's palace, for holding food and other
articles, all the jugs and pots, the pans and plates and cups, were of
gold. On those nights during which the guests used to live in Rantideva's
abode, twenty thousand and one hundred kine had to be slaughtered. Yet
even on such occasions, the cooks, decked in ear-rings, used to proclaim
(amongst those that sat down to supper): 'There is abundant soup, take as
much as ye wish; but of flesh we have not as much today as on former
occasions.' When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed thee in the four
principal attributes and who was purer than thy son, fell a prey to
death, do not grieve for thy son that is dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that
the high-souled Sagara also fell a prey to death. He was of Ikshvaku's
race, a tiger among men, and of superhuman prowess. Sixty thousand sons
used to walk behind him, like myriads upon myriads of stars waiting upon
the Moon in the cloudless firmament of autumn. His sway extended over the
whole of this earth.[101] He gratified the gods by performing a thousand
Horse-sacrifices. He gave away unto deserving Brahmanas palatial mansions
with columns of gold and (other parts) made entirely of that precious
metal, containing costly beds and bevies of beautiful ladies with eyes
resembling petals of the lotus, and diverse other kinds of valuable
objects. At his command, the Brahmanas divided those gifts among
themselves. Through anger that king caused the earth to be excavated
whereupon she came to have the ocean on her bosom, and for this, the
ocean has come to be called Sagara after his name. When he, O Srinjaya,
who far surpassed thee in the four principal attributes and who was purer
than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy son that is
dead. We hear, O Srinjaya, that king Prithu also, the son of Vena, fell a
prey to death. The great Rishis, assembling together in the great forest,
installed him in the sovereignty of the earth. And because it was thought
that he would advance all mankind, he was, for that reason, called Prithu
(the advancer). And because also he protected people from injuries
(Kshata), he was, for that reason, called a Kshatriya (protector from
injuries). Beholding Prithu the son of Vena, all the creatures of the
earth exclaimed, 'We have been lovingly attached to him.' From this
circumstance of the loving attachment (to him of all creatures), he came
to be called a Raja (one that can inspire attachment). The earth, during
his sway, yielded crops without being tilled, every leaf that the trees
had bore honey; and every cow yielded a jugful of milk. All men were hale
and all their wishes used to be crowned with fruition. They had no fear
of any kind. They used to live, as they pleased, in fields or in
(sheltered) houses. When Prithu desired to go over the sea, the waters
became solidified. The rivers also never swelled up when he had to cross
them but remained perfectly calm. The standard on his car moved freely
everywhere (without being obstructed by any impediment). King Prithu, in
one of his grand Horse-sacrifices, gave away unto the Brahman as one and
twenty mountains of gold, each measuring three nalwas.[102] When he, O
Srinjaya, who far surpassed thee in the four principal attributes and who
was purer than thy son, fell a prey to death, do not grieve for thy son
that is dead. Upon what, O Srinjaya, dost thou reflect in silence? It
seems, O king, that thou hearest not these words of mine. If thou hast
not heard them, then this discourse of mine has been a fruitless
rhapsody, like medicine or diet, to a person on the point of death.'
"Srinjaya said, 'I am attending, O Narada, to this discourse of thine, of
excellent import and perfumed like a garland of flowers,--this discourse
upon the conduct of high-souled royal sages of meritorious deeds and
great fame, that can certainly dispel grief. Thy discourse, O great sage,
has not been a fruitless rhapsody. I have been freed from grief at thy
very sight. Like one never satiated with drinking nectar, I am not
satiated with thy words. O thou of true sight, if thou, O lord, be
inclined to show thy grace towards this person burning on account of the
death of his son, then that son, through that grace of thine, is sure to
be revived and to mingle once more with me (in this life).
"Narada said, 'I will give back to thee that son of thine, named
Suvarnashthivin, whom Parvata gave thee and who has been bereft of life.
Of the splendour of gold, that child shall have a thousand years.'"
