SECTION XI
"Arjuna said, 'In this connection an old history is cited, viz., the
discourse between certain ascetics and Sakra, O bull of Bharata's race! A
number of well-born Brahmana youth of little understanding, without the
hirsute honours of manhood, abandoning their homes, came to the woods for
leading a forest life. Regarding that to be virtue, those youths of
abundant resources became desirous of living as Brahmacharins, having
abandoned their brothers and sires. It so happened that Indra became
compassionate towards them. Assuming the form of a golden bird, the holy
Sakra addressed them, saying, 'That which is done by persons that eat the
remnants of a sacrifice is the most difficult of acts that men can
achieve.[16] Such an act is highly meritorious. The lives of such men are
worthy of every praise. Having attained the object of life, those men,
devoted to virtue obtain the highest end.' Hearing these words, the
Rishis said, 'Lo, this bird applauds those that subsist upon the remnants
of sacrifices. He informs us of it, for we live upon such remnants.' The
bird then said, 'I do not applaud you.' Ye are stationed with mire and
very impure. Living upon offals, ye are wicked. Ye are not persons
subsisting upon the remnants of sacrifice.'
"The Rishis said, 'We regard this our course of life to be highly
blessed. Tell us, O bird, what is for our good. Thy words inspire us with
great faith.'
"The bird said, 'If you do not refuse me your faith by arraying
yourselves against your better selves, then I shall tell you words that
are true and beneficial.'
"The Rishis said, 'We shall listen to thy words, O sire, for the
different paths are all known to thee. O thou of righteous soul, we
desire also to obey thy commands. Instruct us now.'
"The bird said, 'Among quadrupeds the cow is the foremost. Of metals,
gold is the foremost. Of words, mantras, and of bipeds, the Brahmanas,
are the foremost. These mantras regulate all the rites of a Brahmana's
life beginning with those appertaining to birth and the period after it,
and ending with those appertaining to death and the crematorium. These
Vedic rites are his heaven, path, and foremost of sacrifices. If it were
otherwise, how could I find the acts (of persons in quest of heaven)
become successful through mantras? He who, in this world, adores his
soul, firmly regarding it to be a deity of a particular kind, obtains
success consistent with the nature of that particular deity.[17] The
seasons measured by half the months lead to the Sun, the Moon, or the
Stars.[18] These three kinds of success, depending upon action are
desired by every creature. The domestic mode of life is very superior and
sacred and is called the field (for the cultivation) of success. By what
path do those men go that censure action? Of little understanding and
deprived of wealth, they incur sin. And since those men of little
understanding live by abandoning the eternal paths of the gods, the paths
of the Rishis, and the paths of Brahma, therefore, they attain to paths
disapproved of by the Srutis.[19] There is an ordinance in the mantras
which says, 'Ye sacrificer, perform the sacrifice represented by gifts of
valuable things. I wilt give thee happiness represented by sons, animals,
and heaven!'--To live, therefore, in accordance with ordinance is said to
be the highest asceticism of the ascetics. Therefore, ye should perform
such sacrifices and such penances in the shape of gifts. The due
performance of these eternal duties, viz., the worship of the gods, the
study of the Vedas, and the gratification of the Pitris, as also
regardful services unto the preceptors--these are called the austerest of
penances. The gods, by performing such exceedingly difficult penances,
have obtained the highest glory and power. I, therefore, tell you to bear
the very heavy burthen of the duties of domesticity. Without doubt,
penances are the foremost of all things and are the root of all
creatures. Asceticism, however, is to be obtained by leading a life of
domesticity, upon which depends everything. They that eat the remnants of
feasts, after duly apportioning the food morning and evening among
kinsmen, attain to ends that are exceedingly difficult of attainment.
They are called eater of the remnants of feasts who eat after having
served guests and gods and Rishis and kinsmen. Therefore, those persons
that are observant of their own duties, that practise excellent vows and
are truthful in speech, become objects of great respect in the world,
with their own faith exceedingly strengthened. Free from pride, those
achievers of the most difficult feats attain to heaven and live for
unending time in the regions of Sakra.'
"Arjuna continued, 'Those ascetics then, hearing these words that were
beneficial and fraught with righteousness, abandoned the religion of
renunciation, saying, 'There is nothing in it,' and betook themselves to
a life of domesticity. Therefore, O thou that are conversant with
righteousness, calling to thy aid that eternal wisdom, rule the wide
world, O monarch that is now destitute of foes.'
