SECTION IX
"Yudhishthira said, 'For a little while, O Arjuna, concentrate thy
attention and fix thy mind and hearing on thy inner soul. If thou
listenest to my words in such a frame of mind, they will meet with thy
approbation. Abandoning all worldly pleasures, I shall betake myself to
that path which is trod by the righteous. I shall not, for thy sake,
tread along the path thou recommendest. If thou askest me what path is
auspicious that one should tread alone, I shall tell thee. If thou dost
not desire to ask me, I shall yet, unasked by thee, tell thee of it.
Abandoning the pleasures and observance of men of the world, engaged in
performing the austerest of penances, I shall wander in the forest, with
the animals that have their home there, living on fruit and roots.
Pouring libations on the: fire at due hours, and performing ablutions at
morn and eve, I shall thin myself by reduced diet, and covering myself
with skins, bear matted locks on my head. Enduring cold, wind, and heat
as also hunger and thirst and toil, I shall emaciate my body by penances
as laid down in the ordinance. Charming to the heart and the ear, I shall
daily listen to the clear strains of, cheerful birds and animals residing
in the woods. I shall enjoy the fragrance of flower-burthened trees and
creepers, and see diverse kinds of charming products that grow in the
forest. I shall also see many excellent recluses of the forest. I shall
not do the slightest injury to any creature, what need be said then of
those that dwell in villages and towns?[10] Leading a retired life and
devoting myself to contemplation, I shall live upon ripe and unripe
fruits and gratify the Pitris and the deities with offerings of wild
fruits and spring water and grateful hymns. Observing in this way the
austere regulations of a forest life, I shall pass my days, calmly
awaiting the dissolution of my body. Or, living alone and observing the
vow of taciturnity, with my head shaved clean, I shall derive my
sustenance by begging each day of only one tree.[11] Smearing my body
with ashes, and availing of the shelter of abandoned houses, or lying at
the foot of trees, I shall live, casting off all things dear or hateful.
Without indulging in grief or joy, and regarding censure and applause,
hope and affliction, equally, and prevailing over every couple of
opposites, I shall live casting off all the things of the world. Without
conversing with anybody, I shall assume the outward form of a blind and
deaf idiot, while living in contentment and deriving happiness from my
own soul. Without doing the least injury to the four kinds of movable and
immovable creatures, I shall behave equally towards all creatures whether
mindful of their duties or following only the dictates of the senses. I
shall not jeer at any one, nor shall I frown at anybody. Restraining all
my senses, I shall always be of a cheerful face. Without asking anybody
about the way, proceeding along any route that I may happen to meet with,
I shall go on, without taking note of the country or the point of the
compass to which or towards which I may go. Regardless of whither I may
proceed, I shall not look behind. Divesting myself of desire and wrath,
and turning my gaze inwards, I shall go on, casting off pride of soul and
body. Nature always walks ahead; hence, food and drink will somehow be
accomplished. I shall not think of those pairs of opposites that stand in
the way of such a life. If pure food in even a small measure be not
obtainable in the first house (to which I may go), I shalt get it by
going to other houses. If I fail to procure it by even such a round, I
shall proceed to seven houses in succession and fill my craving. When the
smoke of houses will cease, their hearth-fires having been extinguished,
when husking-rods will be kept aside, and all the inmates will have taken
their food, when mendicants and guests Will cease to wander, I shall
select a moment for my round of mendicancy and solicit alms at two,
three, or five houses at the most. I shall wander over the earth, after
breaking the bonds of desire. Preserving equability in success and
failure, I shall earn great ascetic merit. I shall behave neither like
one that is fond of life nor like one that is about to die. I shall not
manifest any liking for life or dislike for death. If one strikes off one
arm of mine and another smears the other arm with sandal-paste, I shall
not wish evil to the one or good to the other. Discarding all those acts
conducive to prosperity that one can do in life, the only acts I shall
perform will be to open and shut my eyes and take as much food and drink
as will barely keep up life. Without ever being attached to action, and
always restraining the functions of the senses, I shall give up all
desires and purify the soul of all impurities. Freed from all attachments
and tearing off all bonds and ties, I shall live free as the wind. Living
in such freedom from affections, everlasting contentment will be mine.
Through desire, I have, from ignorance, committed great sins. A certain
class of men, doing both auspicious and inauspicious acts here, maintain
their wives, children, and kinsmen, all bound to them in relations of
cause and effect.[12] When the period of their life runs out, casting off
their weakened bodies, they take upon themselves all the effects of their
sinful acts, for none but the actor is burdened with the consequences of
his acts.[13] Even thus, endued with actions, creatures come into this
wheel of life that is continually turning like the wheel of a car, and
even thus, coming thither, they meet with their fellow-creatures. He,
however, who abandons the worldly course of life, which is really a
fleeting illusion although it looks eternal, and which is afflicted by
birth, death, decrepitude, disease, and pain, is sure to obtain
happiness. When again, the very gods fall down from heaven and great
Rishis from their respective positions of eminence who, that is
acquainted with truths of causes (and effects) would wish to have even
heavenly prosperity?[14] Insignificant kings, having performed diverse
acts relating to the diverse means of kingcraft (known by the means of
conciliation, gift, &c.) often slay a king through some contrivance.
Reflecting on these circumstances, this nectar of wisdom hath come to me.
Having attained it, I desire to get a permanent, eternal, and
unchangeable place (for myself). Always (conducting myself) with such
wisdom and acting in this way, I shall, by betaking myself to that
fearless path of life, terminate this physical frame that is subject to
birth, death, decrepitude, disease, and pain.'"
