SECTION XIX
"Yudhishthira said, 'I am conversant with both the Vedas and the
scriptures that lead to the attainment of Brahma. In the Vedas there are
precepts of both kinds, viz., those that inculcate action and those that
inculcate renouncement of action. The scriptures are confounding and
their conclusions are based upon reasons. The truth, however, that is in
the Mantras, is duly known to me. Thou art conversant only with weapons
and observant of the practices of heroes. Thou art unable to understand
truly the sense of the scriptures. If thou wert really acquainted with
duty, then thou couldst have understood that words such as these ought
not to have been addressed to me by even one possessed of the clearest
insight into the meaning of the scriptures and acquainted with the truths
of religion. That, however, which thou hast said unto me, induced by
fraternal affection, has been fit and proper, O son of Kunti! I am, for
that, pleased with thee, O Arjuna! There is no one equal to thee in the
three worlds in all duties connected with battle and in skill in respect
of diverse kinds of acts. Thou mayst, therefore, speak of the subtleties
connected with those subjects,--subtleties, that is, that are
impenetrable by others. It behoveth thee not, however, O Dhananjaya, to
doubt my intelligence. Thou art conversant with the science of battle,
but thou hast never waited upon the aged. Thou knowest not the
conclusions arrived at by those that have studied the subject in brief
and detail. Even this is the conclusion of intelligent men whose
understanding are bent on achieving salvation, viz., that amongst ascetic
penances, renunciation, and knowledge of Brahma, the second is superior
to the first, and the third is superior to the second. This, however,
that thou thinkest, viz., that there is nothing superior to wealth, is an
error. I will convince thee of it, so that wealth may not again appear to
thee in that light. All men that are righteous are seen to be devoted to
ascetic penances and the study of the Vedas. The Rishis also, that have
many eternal regions for them, have the merit of penances. Others
possessed of tranquillity of soul, having no enemies, and dwelling in the
woods, have, through penances and study of the Vedas, proceeded to
heaven. Pious men, by restraining desire for worldly possessions, and
casting off that darkness which is born of folly, proceed northward
(i.e., by luminous paths) to the regions reserved for practisers of
renunciation. The path that lies to the south and that leads to regions
of light (i.e., lunar regions), are reserved for men devoted to action.
These are attained by persons subject to birth and death. That end,
however, which persons desirous of salvation have before their eyes, is
indescribable. Yoga is the best means for attaining to it. It is not easy
to explain it (to thee). Those that are learned live, reflecting on the
scriptures from desire of finding what is unreal. They are, however,
often led away to this and to that in the belief that the object of their
search exists in this and that. Having mastered, however, the Vedas, the
Aranyakas, and the other scriptures, they miss the real, like men failing
to find solid timber in an uprooted banana plant. Some there are who.,
disbelieving in its unity, regard the Soul, that dwells in this physical
frame consisting of the five elements, to be possessed of the attributes
of desire and aversion (and others).[62] Incapable of being seen by the
eye, exceedingly subtle, and inexpressible by words, it revolves in a
round (of re-births) among the creatures of the earth, keeping before it
that which is the root of action.[63] Having made the Soul advance
towards itself which is the spring of every kind of blessedness, having
restrained all desires of the mind, and having cast off all kinds of
action, one may become perfectly independent and happy. When there is
such a path that is trod by the righteous and that is attainable by
Knowledge, why, O Arjuna, dost thou applaud wealth which is full of every
kind of calamity? Men of olden times that were conversant with the
scriptures, O Bharata,--men that were always engaged in gifts and
sacrifice and action, were of this opinion. O Bharata! There are some
fools who, accomplished in the science of argumentation, deny the
existence of the Soul, in consequence of the strength of their
convictions of a previous life. It is very difficult to make them accept
this truth about final emancipation.[64] Those wicked men, though
possessed of great learning, travel all over the earth, making speeches
in assemblies, and deprecating the true doctrine about emancipation. O
Partha, who else will succeed in understanding that which we do not
understand?' Indeed, (as those men cannot understand the true meaning of
the scriptures), similarly they cannot succeed in knowing those wise and
pious persons that are truly great and that have deep acquaintance with
the scriptures. O son of Kunti, men acquainted with truth obtain Brahma
by asceticism and intelligence, and great happiness by renunciation.'
