
SECTION CXXII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed by his loving wife, king Pandu,
well-acquainted with all rules of morality, replied in these words of
virtuous import, 'O Kunti, what thou hast said is quite true. Vyushitaswa
of old did even as thou hast said. Indeed he was equal unto the
celestials themselves. But I shall now tell thee about the practices of
old indicated by illustrious Rishis, fully acquainted with every rule of
morality. O thou of handsome face and sweet smiles, women formerly were
not immured within houses and dependent on husbands and other relatives.
They used to go about freely, enjoying themselves as best as they liked.
O thou of excellent qualities, they did not then adhere to their husbands
faithfully, and yet, O handsome one, they were not regarded sinful, for
that was the sanctioned usage of the times. That very usage is followed
to this day by birds and beasts without any (exhibition of) jealousy.
That practice, sanctioned by precedent, is applauded by great Rishis. O
thou of taper thighs, the practice is yet regarded with respect amongst
the Northern Kurus. Indeed, that usage, so lenient to women, hath the
sanction of antiquity. The present practice, however (of women's being
confined to one husband for life) hath been established but lately. I
shall tell thee in detail who established it and why.
"It hath been heard by us that there was a great Rishi of the name of
Uddalaka, who had a son named Swetaketu who also was an ascetic of merit.
O thou of eyes like lotus-petals, the present virtuous practice hath been
established by that Swetaketu from anger. Hear thou the reason. One day,
in the presence of Swetaketu's father a Brahmana came and catching
Swetaketu's mother by the hand, told her, 'Let us go.' Beholding his
mother seized by the hand and taken away apparently by force, the son was
greatly moved by wrath. Seeing his son indignant, Uddalaka addressed him
and said, 'Be not angry. O son! This is the practice sanctioned by
antiquity. The women of all orders in this world are free, O son; men in
this matter, as regards their respective orders, act as kine.' The
Rishi's son, Swetaketu, however, disapproved of the usage and established
in the world the present practice as regards men and women. It hath been
heard by us, O thou of great virtue, that the existing practice dates
from that period among human beings but not among beings of other
classes. Accordingly, since the establishment of the present usage, it is
sinful for women not to adhere to their husbands. Women transgressing the
limits assigned by the Rishi became guilty of slaying the embryo. And,
men, too, viol ting a chaste and loving wife who hath from her maidenhood
observed the vow of purity, became guilty of the same sin. The woman also
who, being commanded by her husband to raise offspring, refuses to do his
bidding, becometh equally sinful.
"Thus, O timid one, was the existing usage established of old by
Swetaketu, the son of Uddalaka, in defiance of antiquity. O thou of taper
thighs, it hath also been heard by us that Madayanti, the wife of
Saudasa, commanded by her husband to raise offspring went unto Rishi
Vasishtha. And on going in unto him, the handsome Madayanti obtained a
son named Asmaka. She did this, moved by the desire of doing good to her
husband. O thou of lotus-eyes, thou knowest, O timid girl, how we
ourselves, for the perpetuation of the Kuru race, were begotten by
Krishna-Dwaipayana. O faultless one, beholding all these precedents it
behoveth thee to do my bidding, which is not inconsistent with virtue, O
princess, who is devoted to her husband, it hath also been said by those
acquainted with the rules of morality that a wife, when her monthly
season cometh, must ever seek her husband, though at other times she
deserveth liberty. The wise have declared this to be the ancient
practice. But, be the act sinful or sinless, those acquainted with the
Vedas have declared that it is the duty of wives to do what their
husbands bid them do. Especially, O thou of faultless features, I, who am
deprived of the power of procreation, having yet become desirous of
beholding offspring, deserve the more to be obeyed by thee. O amiable
one, joining my palms furnished with rosy fingers, and making of them a
cup as of lotus leaves, I place them on my head to propitiate thee. O
thou of lair looks, it behoveth thee to raise offspring, at my command,
through some Brahmana possessed of high ascetic merit. For then, owing to
thee, O thou of fair hips, I may go the way that is reserved for those
that are blessed with children.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Pandu, that subjugator of
hostile cities, the handsome Kunti, ever attentive to what was agreeable
and beneficial to her lord, then replied unto him, saying, 'In my
girlhood, O lord, I was in my father's house engaged in attending upon
all guests. I used to wait respectfully upon Brahmanas of rigid vows and
great ascetic merit. One day I gratified with my attentions that Brahmana
whom people call Durvasa, of mind under full control and possessing
knowledge of all the mysteries of religion. Pleased with my services,
that Brahmana gave me a boon in the form of a mantra (formula of
invocation) for calling into my presence any one of the celestials I
liked. And the Rishi, addressing me, said, 'Anyone among the celestials
whom thou callest by this shall, O girl, approach thee and be obedient to
thy will, whether he liketh it or not. And, O princess, thou shall also
have offspring through his grace.' O Bharata, that Brahmana told me this
when I lived in my father's house. The words uttered by the Brahmana can
never be false. The time also hath come when they may yield fruit.
Commanded by thee, O royal sage, I can by that mantra summon any of the
celestials, so that we may have good children. O foremost of all truthful
men, tell me which of the celestials I shall summon. Know that, as
regards this matter, I await your commands.'
"Hearing this, Pandu replied, 'O handsome one, strive duly this very day
to gratify our wishes. Fortunate one, summon thou the god of justice. He
is the most virtuous of the celestials. The god of justice and virtue
will never be able to pollute us with sin. The world also, O beautiful
princess, will then think that what we do can never be unholy. The son
also that we shall obtain from him shall in virtue be certainly the
foremost among the Kurus. Begotten by the god of justice and morality, he
would never set his heart upon anything that is sinful or unholy.
Therefore, O thou of sweet smiles, steadily keeping virtue before thy
eyes, and duly observing holy vows, summon thou the god of justice and
virtue by the help of thy solicitations and incantations.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Kunti, that best of women, thus addressed
by her lord, said, 'So be it.' And bowing down to him and reverently
circumambulating his person, she resolved to do his bidding.'"
