SECTION LXXIX
"Yudhishthira said, 'What, O grandsire, should be the acts and what the
behaviour of persons employed as priests in our sacrifices? What sort of
persons should they be, O king? Tell me all this, O foremost of speakers.'
"Bhishma said, 'It is laid down from those Brahmanas that are eligible as
priests that they should be conversant with the Chhandas including the
Samans, and all the rites inculcated in the Srutis, and that they should
be able to perform all such religious acts as lead to the prosperity of
the king. They should be devotedly loyal and utter agreeable speeches in
addressing kings. They should also be friendly towards one another, and
cast equal eyes on all. They should be devoid of cruelty, and truthful in
speech. They should never be usurers, and should always be simple and
sincere. One that is peaceful in temper, destitute of vanity, modest,
charitable, self-restrained, and contented, possessed of intelligence,
truthful, observant of vows, and harmless to all creatures, without lust
and malice, and endued with the three excellent qualities, devoid of envy
and possessed of knowledge, deserves the seat of Brahman himself. Persons
with such qualities, O sire, are the best of priests and deserve every
respect.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'There are Vedic texts about the gift of Dakshina in
sacrifices. There is no ordinance, however, which lays down that so much
should be given. This ordinance (about the gift of Dakshina) has not
proceeded from motives connected with the distribution of wealth. The
command of the ordinance, in consequence of the provision in cases of
incapacity, is terrible. That command is blind to the competence of the
sacrificer.[237] The audition occurs in the Vedas that a person should,
with devotion, perform a sacrifice. But what can devotion do when the
sacrificer is stained by falsehood?[238]
"Bhishma said, 'No man acquires blessedness or merit by disregarding the
Vedas or by deceit or falsehood. Never think that it is otherwise.
Dakshina constitutes one of the limbs of sacrifice and conduces to the
nourishment of the Vedas. A sacrifice without Dakshina can never lead to
salvation. The efficacy, however, of a single Purnapatra is equal to that
of any Dakshina, however rich. Therefore, O sire, everyone belonging to
the three orders should perform sacrifices.[239] The Vedas have settled
that Soma is as the king himself to the Brahmanas. Yet they desire to
sell it for the sake of performing sacrifices, though they never wish to
sell it for gaining a livelihood. Rishis of righteous behaviour have
declared, agreeably to the dictates of morality, that a sacrifice
performed with the proceeds of the sale of Soma serves to extend
sacrifices.[240] These three, viz., a person, a sacrifice and Soma, must
be of good character. A person that is of bad character is neither for
this nor for the other world. This audition has been heard by us that the
sacrifice which high-souled Brahmanas perform by wealth earned by
excessive physical labour, is not productive of great merit. There is a
declaration in the Vedas that penances are higher than sacrifices. I
shall now speak to thee of penances. O learned prince, listen to me.
Abstention from injury, truthfulness of speech, benevolence,
compassion,--these are regarded as penances by the wise and not the
emaciation of the body. Disregard of the Vedas, disobedience to the
dictates of the scriptures, and violation of all wholesome restraints,
are productive of self-destruction. Listen, O son of Pritha, to what has
been laid down by those that pour ten libations upon the fire at ten
times of the day.--For them that perform the sacrifice of penance, the
Yoga they endeavour to effect with Brahma is their ladle; the heart is
their clarified butter; and high knowledge constitutes their
Pavitra.[241] All kinds of crookedness mean death, and all kinds of
sincerity are called Brahma. This constitutes the subject of knowledge.
The rhapsodies of system-builders cannot affect this.--'"
