SECTION CLXXVIII
"Bhishma continued, 'In this connection is also cited the old narrative
of the verses sung by Janaka the ruler of the Videhas, who had attained
to tranquillity of soul. What the monarch said was, 'Unlimited is my
wealth. At the same time I have nothing, if the whole of (my kingdom)
Mithila be consumed in a conflagration, I shall incur no loss.' In the
connection is also cited the speech of Vodhya uttered in respect of this
very topic, viz., freedom from attachments. Listen to it O Yudhishthira!
Once on a time the royal son of Nahusha (Yayati) questioned the Rishi
Vodhya who had, in consequence of the abandonment of desire, attained to
tranquillity of soul and who had an intimate acquaintance with the
scriptures. The monarch said, 'O thou of great wisdom, give me
instructions about tranquillity. What is that under standing relying upon
which thou succeedest in wandering over the world in tranquillity of soul
and disengaged from all acts?'
"Vodhya said, 'I conduct myself according to the instructions of others
but never instruct others myself. I shall, however, mention the
indications of those instructions (according to which my conduct is
framed). Thou mayst catch their spirit by reflection. My six preceptors
are Pingala, the osprey, the snake, the bee in the forest, the maker of
shafts (in the story), and the maiden (in the story)!'[533]
"Bhishma continued, 'Hope is very powerful (in agitating the heart), O
King! Freedom from hope is high felicity. Reducing hope to an absence of
expectation, Pingala sleeps in peace.[534] Beholding an osprey with meat
in his beaks, others, that have not found any meat, assail and destroy
him. A certain osprey, by altogether abstaining from meat obtained
felicity. To build a house for one's own self is productive of sorrow and
not of happiness. The snake, taking up his residence in another
creature's abode, lives in felicity. The ascetics live happily, betaking
themselves to mendicancy, without being injured by any creature, like
bees in the forest. A certain maker of shafts, while employed at his
work, was so deeply attentive to it that he did not notice the king who
passed by his side. When many are together, dispute ensues. Even when two
reside together, they are sure to converse. I, however, wander alone like
the anklet made of sea-shells in the wrist of the maiden in the
story.'"[535]
