SECTION CLXXIII
"Bhishma said, 'The Rakshasa king then caused a funeral pyre to be made
for that prince of cranes and adorned it with jewels and gems, and
perfumes, and costly robes. Setting fire to it with the body of that
prince of birds, the mighty chief of the Rakshasas caused the obsequial
rites of his friend to be performed according to the ordinance. At that
time, the auspicious goddess Surabhi, the daughter of Daksha, appeared in
the sky above the place where the pyre had been set up. Her breasts were
full of milk.[497] From her mouth, O sinless monarch, froth mixed with
milk fell upon the funeral pyre of Rajadharman. At this, the prince of
cranes became revived. Rising up, he approached his friend Virupaksha,
the king of the Rakshasas. At this time, the chief of the celestials
himself came to the city of Virupaksha. Addressing the Rakshasa king,
Indra said, 'By good luck, thou hast revived the prince of cranes.' The
chief of the deities further recited to Virupaksha the old story of the
curse denounced by the Grandsire upon that best of birds named
Rajadharman. Addressing; the king he said, 'Once on a time, O monarch,
this prince of cranes absented himself from the region of Brahman (when
his presence was expected). In wrath the Grandsire said unto this prince
of birds, 'Since this vile crane hath not presented himself today in my
assembly, therefore, that wicked-souled one shall not soon die (so as to
be able to leave the earth).' In consequence of these words of the
Grandsire, the prince of cranes, though slain by Gautama, has come back
to life, through the virtue of the nectar with which his body was
drenched.' After Indra had become silent, Rajadharman, having bowed unto
the chief of the celestials, said 'O first of gods, if thy heart be
inclined towards me for grace, then let my dear friend Gautama be
restored to life!' Hearing these words of his, Vasava, O foremost of men,
sprinkled nectar over the Brahmana Gautama and restored him to life. The
prince of cranes, approaching his friend Gautama, who still bore on his
shoulders the load of gold (that he had got from the king of the
Rakshasas) embraced him and felt great joy. Rajadharman, that prince of
cranes, dismissing Gautama of sinful deeds, together with his wealth,
returned to his own abode. At the due hour he repaired (the next day) to
the Grandsire's region. The latter honoured the high-souled bird with
such attentions as are shown to a guest. Gautama also, returning to his
home in the village of the hunters, begot many sinful children upon his
Sudra wife. A heavy curse was denounced upon him by the gods to the
effect that having begotten, within a few years,[498] upon the body of
his remarried wife many children that ungrateful sinner should sink into
a terrible hell for many years. All this, O Bharata, was recited to me
formerly by Narada. Recollecting the incidents of this grave story, O
bull of Bharata's race, I have recited to thee all its details duly.
Whence can an ungrateful person derive fame? Where is his place? Whence
can he have happiness? An ungrateful person does not deserve to be
trusted. One that is ungrateful can never escape. No person should injure
a friend. He that injures a friend sinks into terrible and everlasting
hell. Every one should be grateful and every one should seek to benefit
his friends. Everything may be obtained from a friend. Honours may be
obtained from friends.[499] In consequence of friends one may enjoy
various objects of enjoyment. Through the exertions of friends, one may
escape from various kinds of danger and distress. He that is wise would
honour his friend with his best attentions. An ungrateful, shameless, and
sinful wight should be shunned by those that are wise. One that injures
his friends is a wretch of his race. Such a sinful wight is the vilest of
men. I have thus told thee, O foremost of all virtuous men, what the
characteristics are of that sinful wretch who is stained by ingratitude
and who injures his friend. What else dost thou wish to hear?'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words spoken by the high-souled
Bhishma, Yudhishthira, O Janamejaya, became highly gratified.'
 SECTION CLXXIV
(Mokshadharma Parva)
"YUDHISHTHIRA SAID, 'THOU hast, O grandsire, discoursed upon the
auspicious duties (of person in distress) connected with the duties of
kings. It behoveth thee now, O king, to tell me those foremost of duties
which belong to those who lead the (four) modes of life.'
"Bhishma said, 'Religion hath many doors. The observance of (the duties
prescribed by) religion can never be futile. Duties have been laid down
with respect to every mode of life. (The fruits of those duties are
invisible, being attainable in the next world.) The fruits, however, of
Penance directed towards the soul are obtainable in this world.[500]
Whatever be the object to which one devotes oneself, that object, O
Bharata, and nothing else, appears to one as the highest of acquisitions
fraught with the greatest of blessings. When one reflects properly (one's
heart being purified by such reflection), one comes to know that the
things of this world are as valueless as straw. Without doubt, one is
then freed from attachment in respect of those things. When the world, O
Yudhishthira, which is full of defects, is so constituted, every man of
intelligence should strive for the attainment of the emancipation of his
soul.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, by what frame of soul should
one kill one's grief when one loses one's wealth, or when one's wife, or
son, or sire, dies.'
"Bhishma said, 'When one's wealth is lost, or one's wife or son or sire
is dead, one certainly says to oneself 'Alas, this is a great sorrow!'
But then one should, by the aid of reflection, seek to kill that sorrow.
In this connection is cited the old story of the speech that a regenerate
friend of his, coming to Senajit's court, made to that king. Beholding
the monarch agitated with grief and burning with sorrow on account of the
death of his son, the Brahmana addressed that ruler of very cheerless
heart and said these words, 'Why art thou stupefied? Thou art without any
intelligence. Thyself an object of grief, why dost thou grieve (for
others)? A few days hence others will grieve for thee, and in their turn
they will be grieved for by others. Thyself, myself, and others who wait
upon thee, O king, shall all go to that place whence all of us have come.'
"Senajit said, 'What is that intelligence, what is that penance, O
learned Brahmana, what is that concentration of mind, O thou that hast
wealth of asceticism, what is that knowledge, and what is that learning,
by acquiring which thou dost not yield to sorrow?'
"The Brahmana said, 'Behold, all creatures,--the superior, the middling,
and the inferior,--in consequence of their respective acts, are entangled
in grief. I do not regard even my own self to be mine. On the other hand,
I regard the whole world to be mine. I again think that all this (which I
see) is as much mine as it belongs to others. Grief cannot approach me in
consequence of this thought. Having acquired such an understanding, I do
not yield either to joy or to grief. As two pieces of wood floating on
the ocean come together at one time and are again separated, even such is
the union of (living) creatures in this world. Sons, grandsons, kinsmen,
relatives are all of this kind. One should never feel affection for them,
for separation with them is certain. Thy son came from an invisible
region. He has departed and become invisible. He did not know thee. Thou
didst not know him. Who art thou and for whom dost thou grieve? Grieve
arises from the disease constituted by desire. Happiness again results
from the disease of desire being cured. From joy also springs sorrow, and
hence sorrow arises repeatedly. Sorrow comes after joy, and joy after
sorrow. The joys and sorrows of human beings are revolving on a wheel.
After happiness sorrow has come to thee. Thou shalt again have happiness.
No one suffers sorrow for ever, and no one enjoys happiness for ever. The
body is the refuge of both sorrow and happiness.[501] Whatever acts an
embodied creature does with the aid of his body, the consequence thereof
he has to suffer in that body. Life springs with the springing of the
body into existence. The two exist together, and the two perish
together.[502] Men of uncleansed souls, wedded to worldly things by
various bonds, meet with destruction like embankments of sand in water.
Woes of diverse kinds, born of ignorance, act like pressers of oil-seeds,
for assailing all creatures in consequence of their attachments. These
press them like oil-seeds in the oil-making machine represented by the
round of rebirths (to which they are subject). Man, for the sake of his
wife (and others), commits numerous evil acts, but suffers singly diverse
kinds of misery both in this and the next world. All men, attached to
children and wives and kinsmen and relatives, sink in the miry sea of
grief like wild elephants, when destitute of strength, sinking in a miry
slough. Indeed. O lord, upon loss of wealth or son or kinsmen or
relatives, man suffers great distress, which resembles as regards its
power of burning, a forest conflagration. All this, viz., joy and grief,
existence and non-existence, is dependent upon destiny. One having
friends as one destitute of friends, one having foes as one destitute of
foes, one having wisdom as one destitute of wisdom, each and every one
amongst these, obtains happiness through destiny. Friends are not the
cause of one's happiness. Foes are not the cause of one's misery. Wisdom
is not competent to bring an accession of wealth; nor is wealth competent
to bring an accession of happiness. Intelligence is not the cause of
wealth, nor is stupidity the cause of penury. He only that is possessed
of wisdom, and none else, understands the order of the world. Amongst the
intelligent, the heroic, the foolish, the cowardly, the idiotic, the
learned, the weak, or the strong, happiness comes to him for whom it is
ordained. Among the calf, the cowherd that owns her, and the thief, the
cow indeed belongs to him who drinks her milk.[503] They whose
understanding is absolutely dormant, and they who have attained to that
state of the mind which lies beyond the sphere of the intellect, succeed
in enjoying happiness. Only they that are between the two classes, suffer
misery.[504] They that are possessed of wisdom delight in the two
extremes but not in the states that are intermediate. The sages have said
that the attainment of any of these two extremes constitutes happiness.
Misery consists in the states that are intermediate between the two.[505]
They who have succeeded in attaining to real felicity (which samadhi can
bring), and who have become free from the pleasures and pains of this
world, and who are destitute of envy, are never agitated by either the
accession of wealth or its loss. They who have not succeeded in acquiring
that intelligence which leads to real felicity, but who have transcended
folly and ignorance (by the help of a knowledge of the scriptures), give
way to excessive joy and excessive misery. Men destitute of all notions
of right or wrong, insensate with pride and with success over others,
yield to transports of delight like the gods in heaven.[506] Happiness
must end in misery. Idleness is misery; while cleverness (in action) is
the cause of happiness. Affluence and prosperity dwell in one possessed
of cleverness, but not in one that is idle. Be it happiness or be it
misery, be it agreeable or be it disagreeable, what comes to one should
be enjoyed or endured with an unconquered heart. Every day a thousand
occasions for sorrow, and hundred occasions for fear assail the man of
ignorance and folly but not the man that is possessed of wisdom. Sorrow
can never touch the man that is possessed of intelligence, that has
acquired wisdom, that is mindful of listening to the instructions of his
betters, that is destitute of envy, and that is self-restrained. Relying
upon such an understanding, and protecting his heart (from the influences
of desire and the passions), the man of wisdom should conduct himself
here. Indeed, sorrow is unable to touch him who is conversant with that
Supreme Self from which everything springs and unto which everything
disappears.[507] The very root of that for which grief, or heartburning,
or sorrow is felt or for which one is impelled to exertion, should, even
if it be a part of one's body, be cast off. That object, whatever it may
be in respect of which the idea of meum is cherished, becomes a source of
grief and heart-burning. Whatever objects, amongst things that are
desired, are cast off become sources of happiness. The man that pursues
objects of desire meets with destruction in course of the pursuit.
Neither the happiness that is derived from a gratification of the senses
nor that great felicity which one may enjoy in heaven, approaches to even
a sixteenth part of the felicity which arises from the destruction of all
desires. The acts of a former life, right or wrong, visit, in their
consequences, the wise and the foolish, the brave and the timid. It is
even thus that joy and sorrow, the agreeable and the disagreeable,
continually revolve (as on a wheel) among living creatures. Relying upon
such an understanding, the man of intelligence and wisdom lives at ease.
A person should disregard all his desires, and never allow his wrath to
get the better of him. This wrath springs in the heart and grows there
into vigour and luxuriance. This wrath that dwells in the bodies of men
and is born in their minds, is spoken of by the wise as Death. When a
person succeeds in withdrawing all his desires like a tortoise
withdrawing all its limbs, then his soul, which is self-luminous,
succeeds in looking into itself.[508] That object, whatever it may be, in
respect of which the idea of meum is cherished, becomes a source of grief
and heart-burning.[509] When a person himself feels no fear, and is
feared by no one, when he cherishes no desire and no aversion, he is then
said to attain to the state of Brahma. Casting off both truth and
falsehood, grief and joy, fear and courage, the agreeable and the
disagreeable, thou mayst become of tranquil soul. When a person abstains
from doing wrong to any creature, in thought, word, or deed, he is then
said to attain to a state of Brahma. True happiness is his who can cast
off that thirst which is incapable of being cast off by the misguided,
which does not decay with decrepitude, and which is regarded as a fatal
disease. In this connection, O king, are heard the verses sung by Pingala
about the manner in which she had acquired eternal merit even at a time
that had been very unfavourable. A fallen woman of the name of Pingala,
having repaired to the place of assignation, was denied the company of
her lover through an accident. At that time of great misery, she
succeeded in acquiring tranquillity of soul.'
"Pingala said, 'Alas, I have for many long years lived, all the while
overcome by frenzy, by the side of that Dear Self in whom there is
nothing but tranquillity. Death has been at my door. Before this, I did
not, however approach that Essence of Purity. I shall cover this house of
one column and nine doors (by means of true Knowledge).[510] What woman
is there that regards that Supreme Soul as her dear lord, even when He
comes near?[511] I am now awake. I have been roused from the sleep of
ignorance. I am no longer influenced by desire. Human lovers, who are
really the embodied forms of hell, shall no longer deceive me by
approaching me lustfully. Evil produces good through the destiny or the
acts of a former life. Roused (from the sleep of ignorance), I have cast
off all desire for worldly objects. I have acquired a complete mastery
over my senses. One freed from desire and hope sleeps in felicity.
Freedom from every hope and desire is felicity. Having driven off desire
and hope, Pingala sleeps in felicity.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Convinced with these and other words uttered by the
learned Brahmana, king Senajit (casting off his grief), experienced
delight and became very happy.'"
