
SECTION CXXXVII
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Upon the Kuru king and Bhima, the foremost of
all endued with strength, having entered the arena, the spectators were
divided into two parties in consequence of the partiality swaying their
affections. Some cried, 'Behold the heroic king of the
Kurus!'--some--'Behold Bhima!'--And on account of these cries, there was,
all on a sudden, a loud uproar. And seeing the place become like a
troubled ocean, the intelligent Bharadwaja said unto his dear son,
Aswatthaman, 'Restrain both these mighty warriors so proficient in arms.
Let not the ire of the assembly be provoked by this combat of Bhima and
Duryodhana.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then the son of the preceptor of the princes
restrained those combatants with their maces uplifted and resembling two
swollen oceans agitated by the winds that blow at the universal
dissolution. And Drona himself entering the yard of the arena commanded
the musicians to stop, and with a voice deep as that of the clouds
addressed these words, 'Behold ye now that Partha who is dearer to me
than my own son, the master of all arms, the son of Indra himself, and
like unto the younger brother of Indra, (Vishnu)! And having performed
the propitiatory rites, the youthful Phalguna, equipped with the finger
protector (gauntlet) and his quiver full of shafts and bow in hand,
donning his golden mail, appeared in the lists even like an evening cloud
reflecting the rays of the setting sun and illumined by the hues of the
rainbow and flashes of lightning.
"On seeing Arjuna, the whole assembly were delighted and conchs began to
be blown all around with other musical instruments. And there arose a
great uproar in consequence of the spectators' exclaiming,--'This is the
graceful son of Kunti!'--'This is the middle (third) Pandava!'--'This is
the son of the mighty Indra!'--'This is the protector of the
Kurus'--'This is the foremost of those versed in arms!'--'This is the
foremost of all cherishers of virtue!'--'This is the foremost of the
persons of correct behaviour, the great repository of the knowledge of
manners!' At those exclamations, the tears of Kunti, mixing with the milk
of her breast, wetted her bosom. And his ears being filled with that
uproar, that first of men, Dhritarashtra, asked Vidura in delight, 'O
Kshatri, what is this great uproar for, like unto that of the troubled
ocean, arising all on a sudden and rending the very heavens?' Vidura
replied, 'O mighty monarch, the son of Pandu and Pritha, Phalguna, clad
in mail hath entered the lists. And hence this uproar!' Dhritarashtra
said, 'O thou of soul so great, by the three fires sprung from Pritha who
is even like the sacred fuel, I have, indeed, been blessed, favoured and
protected!'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'When the spectators, excited with delight, had
somewhat regained their equanimity, Vibhatsu began to display his
lightness in the use of weapons. By the Agneya weapon, he created fire,
and by the Varuna weapon he created water, by the Vayavya weapon, he
created air, and by the Parjanya weapon he created clouds. And by the
Bhauma weapon, he created land, and by the Parvatya weapon, he brought
mountains into being. By the Antardhana weapon all these were made to
disappear. Now the beloved one of his preceptor (Arjuna) appeared tall
and now short; now he was seen on the yoke of his car, and now on the car
itself; and the next moment he was on the ground. And the hero favoured
by his practised dexterity, hit with his various butts--some tender, some
fine and some of thick composition. And like one shaft, he let fly at a
time into the mouth of a moving iron-boar five shafts together from his
bow-string. And that hero of mighty energy discharged one and twenty
arrows into the hollow of a cow's horn hung up on a rope swaying to and
fro. In this manner, O sinless one, Arjuna showed his profound skill in
the use of sword, bow, and mace, walking over the lists in circles.
"And, O Bharata, when the exhibition had well-nigh ended, the excitement
of the spectators had cooled, and the sounds of instruments had died out
there was heard proceeding from the gate, the slapping of arms,
betokening might and strength, and even like unto the roar of the
thunder. And, O king, as soon as this sound was heard, the assembled
multitude instantly thought, 'Are the mountains splitting or is the earth
itself rending asunder, or is the welkin resounding with the roar of
gathering clouds? And then all the spectators turned their eyes towards
the gate. And Drona stood, surrounded by the five brothers, the sons of
Pritha, and looked like the moon in conjunction with the five-starred
constellation Hasta. And Duryodhana, that slayer of foes, stood up in
haste and was surrounded by his century of haughty brothers with
Aswatthaman amongst them. And that prince, mace in hand, thus surrounded
by his hundred brothers with uplifted weapons appeared like Purandara in
days of yore, encircled by the celestial host on the occasion of the
battle with the Danavas.'"
