SECTION CXXXIV
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection, persons acquainted with the
scriptures declare this text in respect of duty, viz., for a Kshatriya
possessed of intelligence and knowledge, (the earning of) religious merit
and (the acquisition of) wealth, constitute his obvious duties. He should
not, by subtle discussions on duty and unseen consequences in respect of
a future world, abstain from accomplishing those two duties. As it is
useless to argue, upon seeing certain foot-prints on the ground, whether
they are wolf's or not, even so is all discussion upon the nature of
righteousness and the reverse. Nobody in this world ever sees the fruits
of righteousness and unrighteousness. A Kshatriya, therefore, should seek
the acquisition of power. He that is powerful is master of everything.
Wealth leads to the possession of an army. He that is powerful[404]
obtains intelligent advisers. He that is without wealth is truly fallen.
A little (of anything in the world) is regarded as the dirty remnant of a
feast.[405] If a strong man does even many bad acts, nobody, through
fear, says or does anything (for censuring or checking him). If
righteousness and Power be associated with Truth, they can then rescue
men from great perils. If, however, the two be compared, Power will
appear to be superior to Righteousness. It is from Power that
Righteousness springs. Righteousness rests upon Power as all immobile
things upon the earth. As smoke depends upon the wind (for its motion),
even so Righteousness depends upon Power. Righteousness which is the
weaker of the two depends for its support upon a tree. Righteousness is
dependent on them that are powerful even as pleasure is dependent upon
them that are given to enjoyment. There is nothing that powerful men
cannot do. Everything is pure with them that are powerful. A powerless
man, by committing evil acts can never escape. Men feel alarmed at his
conduct even as they are alarmed at the appearance of a wolf. One fallen
away from a state of affluence leads a life of humiliation and sorrow. A
life of humiliation and reproach is like death itself The learned have
said that when in consequence of one's sinful conduct one is cast off by
friends and companions, one is pierced repeatedly by the wordy darts of
others and one has to burn with grief on that account. Professors of
scriptures have said with respect to the expiation of sinfulness that one
should (if stained with sinfulness) study the three Vedas, wait upon and
worship the Brahmanas, gratify all men by looks, words, and acts, cast
off all meanness, marry in high families, proclaim the praises of others
while confessing one's own worthlessness, recite mantras, perform the
usual water-rites, assume a mildness of behaviour, and abstain from
speaking much, and perform austere penances, seek the refuge of Brahmanas
and Kshatriyas. Indeed, one who has committed many evil acts, should do
all this, without being angry at the reproaches uttered by men. By
conducting one's self in this way, one may soon become cleansed of all
his sins and regain the regard of the world. Indeed, one wins great
respect in this world and great rewards in the next, and enjoys diverse
kinds of happiness here by following such conduct and by sharing his
wealth with others.'"
