SECTION CLVI
"Bhishma continued, 'Having said these words unto the Salmali. that
foremost of all persons conversant with Brahma, viz., Narada, represented
unto the god of the wind all that the Salmali had said about him.'
"Narada said, 'There is a certain Salmali on the breast of Himavat,
adorned with branches and leaves. His roots extend deep into the earth
and his branches spread wide around. That tree, O god of the wind
disregards thee. He spoke many words fraught with abuse of thyself. It is
not proper, O Wind, that I should repeat them in thy hearing. I know, O
Wind, that thou art the foremost of all created things. I know too that
thou art a very superior and very mighty being, and that in wrath thou
resemblest the Destroyer himself.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of Narada, the god of wind,
wending to that Salmali, addressed him in rage and said as follows.'
"The Wind-god said, 'O Salmali, thou hast spoken in derogation of me
before Narada. Know that I am the god of the wind. I shall certainly show
thee my power and might. I know thee well. Thou art no stranger to me.
The puissant Grandsire, while engaged in creating the world, had for a
time rested under thee. It is in consequence of this incident that I have
hitherto shown thee grace. O worst of trees, it is for this that thou
standest unharmed, and not in consequence of thy own might. Thou
regardest me lightly as if I were a vulgar thing. I shall show myself
unto thee in such a way that thou mayst not again disregard me.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed, the Salmali laughed in derision and
replied, saying, 'O god of the wind, thou art angry with me. Do not
forbear showing the extent of thy might. Do thou vomit all thy wrath upon
me. By giving way to thy wrath, what wilt thou do to me? Even if thy
might had, been thy own (instead of being derived), I would not still
have been afraid of thee. I am superior to thee in might. I should not be
afraid of thee. They are really strong in understanding. They, on the
other hand, are not to be regarded strong that are possessed of only
physical strength.' Thus addressed, the Wind-god said, 'Tomorrow I shall
test thy strength.' After this, night came. The Salmali, concluding
mentally what the extent is of the Wind's might and beholding his own
self to be inferior to the god, began to say to himself, 'All that I said
to Narada is false. I am certainly inferior in might to the Wind. Verity,
he is strong in his strength. The Wind, as Narada said, is always mighty.
Without doubt, I am weaker than other trees. But in intelligence no tree
is my equal. Therefore, relying upon my intelligence I shall look at this
fear that arises from the Wind. If the other trees in the forest all rely
upon the same kind of intelligence, then, verily, no injury can result to
them from the god of the Wind when he becomes angry. All of them.
however, are destitute of understanding, and, therefore, they do not
know, as I know, why or how the Wind succeeds in shaking and tearing them
up.'"
 SECTION CLVII
"Bhishma said, 'Having settled this in his mind, the Salmali. in sorrow,
himself caused all his branches, principal and subsidiary, to be cut off.
Casting off his branches and leaves and flowers, at morn the tree looked
steadily at the Wind, as he came towards him. Filled with rage and
breathing hard, the Wind advanced, felling large trees, towards that spot
where the Salmali stood. Beholding him divested of top and branches and
leaves and flowers, the Wind, filled with joy, smilingly addressed that
lord of the forest which had before such a gigantic appearance, these
"The Wind said, 'Filled with rage, O Salmali, I would have done to thee
precisely what thou hast done to thyself by lopping off all thy branches.
Thou art now divested of thy proud top and flowers, and thou art now
without thy shoots and leaves. In consequence of thy own evil counsels,
thou hast been brought under my power.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of the Wind, the Salmali felt
great shame. Remembering also the words that Narada had said, he began to
repent greatly for his folly. Even in this way, O tiger among kings, a
weak and foolish person, by provoking the enmity of a powerful one, is at
last obliged to repent like the Salmali in fable. Even when possessed of
equal might, people do not suddenly wage hostilities with those that have
injured them. On the other hand, they display their might gradually, O
king! A person of foolish understanding should never provoke the
hostility of one that is possessed of intelligence. In such cases the
intelligence of the intelligent man penetrates (the subject upon which it
is employed) like fire penetrating a heap of dry grass. Intelligence is
the most precious possession that a person call have. Similarly, O king,
a man can have nothing here more valuable than might. One should,
therefore, overlook the wrongs inflicted by a person possessed of
superior strength, even as one should overlook (from compassion) the acts
of a child, and idiot, or one that is blind or deaf. The wisdom of this
saying is witnessed in thy case, O slayer of foes. The eleven Akshauhinis
(of Duryodhana), O thou of great splendour, and the seven (collected by
thyself), were not, in might equal to the single-handed Arjuna of high
soul. All the troops (of Duryodhana), therefore, were routed and slain by
that illustrious Pandava, that son of Paka's chastiser, as he coursed on
the field of battle, relying on his own strength. I have. O Bharata,
discoursed to thee of the duties of kings and the morality of duties in
detail. What else. O king, dost thou wish to hear!'"
