SECTION CLI
"Bhishma said, 'Thus addressed, Janamejaya replied unto the sage, saying,
'Thou rebukest one that deserves to be rebuked. Thou censurest one that
is deserving of censure. Thou upbraidest me and my acts. I implore thee
to be graceful towards me. All my acts have been sinful. I burn, however,
with repentance as if I am in the midst of blazing fire! My mind, in
remembrance of my deeds, is exceedingly cheerless. Verily, I am much
afraid of Yama. How can I bear to live without extracting that dart from
my heart? O Saunaka, suppressing all thy wrath, instruct me now. Formerly
I used to show regard for Brahmanas. I solemnly declare that I shall once
more show the same regard for thee. Let not my line be extinct. Let not
the race in which I am born sink into the dust. It is not proper that
they who have wronged Brahmanas and have for that, in consequence of the
injunctions of the Vedas, forfeited all claim to the respect of the world
and to social intercourse with their fellowmen, should have any bearer of
their names for continuing their races. I am overwhelmed with despair. I,
therefore, repeat my resolves (about mending my conduct). I pray you to
protect me like sages that do not accept gifts protecting the poor.
Sinful wights abstaining from sacrifices never attain to heaven.[439]
Leaving (this world), they have to pass their time in the pits of hell
like Pullindas and Khasas.[440] Ignorant that I am, give me wisdom like a
learned preceptor to his pupil or like a sire to his son. Be gratified
with me, O Saunaka!'
"Saunaka said, 'What wonder is there that a person destitute of wisdom
should do many improper acts? Knowing this, a. person of real wisdom is
never angry with creatures (when they become guilty of folly). By
ascending upon the top of wisdom's palace, one grieves for others, one's
own self being then too pure for becoming an object of other people's
grief. In consequence of one's wisdom one surveys all creatures in the
world like a person on a mountain-top surveying people below. The person
who becomes an object of censure with good men, who hates good men and
who hides himself from their view, never succeeds in obtaining any
blessing and never understands the propriety of acts. Thou knowest what
the energy and the nobility of the Brahmana is as laid down in the Vedas
and other scriptures. Act now in such a way that tranquillity of heart
may be thine and let Brahmanas be thy refuge, If the Brahmanas cease to
be angry with thee, that will ensure thy felicity in heaven. If, again,
thou repentest in sin, thy sight will be clear and thou wilt succeed in
beholding righteousness.'
"Janamejaya said, 'I am repenting of my sins. I will never again seek to
extinguish virtue. I desire to obtain blessedness. Be thou gratified with
me.'
"Saunaka said, 'Dispelling arrogance and pride, O king, I wish thee to
show regard for me![441] Employ thyself in the good of all creatures,
ever remembering the mandates of righteousness. I am not reproving thee
from fear or narrowness of mind or covetousness. Listen now, with these
Brahmanas here, to the words of truth I utter. I do not ask for anything.
I shall, however, instruct thee in the ways of righteousness. All persons
will croak and bray and cry fie on me (for what I am going to do). They
will even call me sinful. My kinsmen and friends will discard me.[442]
Without doubt, however, my kinsmen and friends, hearing the words I
speak, will succeed in vigorously crossing the difficulties of life. Some
that are possessed of great wisdom will understand (my motives) rightly.
Know, O child, what my views are, O Bharata, in respect of the Brahmanas.
Do thou (after listening to me) act in such away that they may, through
my efforts, obtain every blessing. Do thou also, O king, pledge thy word
that thou wilt not again injure the Brahmanas.'
"Janamejaya said, 'I swear, touching even thy feet, that I shall never
again, in thought, word, or deed, injure the Brahmanas.'"
