SECTION XCVII
"Yudhishthira said. 'There are no practices, O king, more sinful than
those of the Kshatriyas. In marching or in battle, the king slays large
multitudes.[287] By what acts then does the king win regions of felicity?
O bull of Bharata's race, tell this, O learned one, unto me that desire
to know.'
"Bhishma said, 'By chastising the wicked, by attaching and cherishing the
good, by sacrifices and gifts, kings become pure and cleansed. It is
true, kings desirous of victory afflict many creatures, but after victory
they advance and aggrandise all. By the power of gifts, sacrifices, and
penances, they destroy their sins, and their merit increases in order
that they may be able to do good to all creatures. The reclaimer of a
field, for reclaiming it, takes up both paddy-blades and weeds. His
action, however, instead of destroying the blades or paddy, makes them
grow more vigorously. They that wield weapons, destroy many that deserve
destruction. Such extensive destruction, however, causes the growth and
advancement of those that remain. He who protects people from plunder,
slaughter, and affliction, in consequence of thus protecting their lives
from robbers, comes to be regarded as the giver of wealth, of life, and
of food. The king, therefore, by thus adoring the deities by means of a
union of all sacrifices whose Dakshina is the dispelling of everybody's
fear, enjoys every kind of felicity here and attains to a residence in
Indra's heaven hereafter.[288] That king who, going out, fights his foes
in battles that have arisen for the sake of Brahmanas and lays down his
life, comes to be regarded as the embodiment of a sacrifice with
illimitable presents. If a king, with his quivers full of shafts, shoots
them fearlessly at his foes, the very gods do not see anyone on earth
that is superior to him. In such a case, equal to the number of shafts
with which he pierces the bodies of his enemies, is the number of regions
that he enjoys, eternal and capable of granting every wish. The blood
that flows from his body cleanses him of All his sins along with the very
pain that he feels on the occasion. Persons conversant with the
scriptures say that the pains a Kshatriya suffers in battle operate as
penances for enhancing his merit. Righteous persons, inspired with fear,
stay in the rear, soliciting life from heroes that have rushed to battle,
even as men solicit rain from the clouds. If those heroes, without
permitting the beseechers to incur the dangers of battle, keep them in
the rear by themselves facing those dangers and defend them at that time
of fear, great becomes their merit. If, again, those timid p sons,
appreciating that deed of bravery, always respect those defenders, they
do what is proper and just. By acting otherwise they cannot free
themselves from fear. There is great difference between men apparently
equal. Some rush to battle, amid its terrible din, against armed ranks of
foes. Indeed, the hero rushes against crowds of foes, adopting the road
to heaven. He, however, who is inspired with dastardly fear, seeks safety
in flight, deserting his comrades in danger. Let not such wretches among
men be born in thy race. The very gods with Indra at their head send
calamities unto them that desert their comrades in battle and come with
unwounded limbs. He who desires to save his own life-breaths by deserting
his comrades, should be slain with sticks or stones or rolled in a mat of
dry grass for being burnt to death. Those amongst the Kshatriyas that
would be guilty of such conduct should be killed after the manner of
killing animals.[289] Death on a bed of repose, after ejecting phlegm and
urine and uttering piteous cries, is sinful for a Kshatriya. Persons
acquainted with the scriptures do not applaud the death which a Kshatriya
encounters with unwounded body. The death of a Kshatriya, O sire, at home
is not praiseworthy. They are heroes. Any unheroic act of theirs is
sinful and inglorious. In disease, one may be heard to cry, saying, 'What
sorrow! How painful! I must be a great sinner.' With face emaciated and
stench issuing fro in his body and clothes, the sick man plunges his
relatives into grief. Coveting the condition of those that are hale, such
a man (amidst his tortures) repeatedly desires for death itself. One that
is a hero, having dignity and pride, does not deserve such in inglorious
death. Surrounded by kinsmen and slaughtering his foes in battle, a
Kshatriya should die at the edge of keen weapons. Moved by desire of
enjoyment and filled with rage, a hero fights furiously and does not feel
the wounds inflicted on his limbs by foes. Encountering death in battle,
he earns that high merit fraught with fame and respect of the world which
belongs to his or her and ultimately obtains a residence in Indra's
heaven. The hero, by not showing his back in fight and contending by
every means in his power, in utter recklessness of life itself, at the
van of battle, obtains the companionship of Indra. Wherever the hero
encountered death in the midst, of foes without displaying ignoble fear
or cheerlessness, he has succeeded in earning regions hereafter of
eternal bliss.'"
