SECTION CLXIII
"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O thou of great wisdom, everything about
that from which spring wrath and lust, O bull of Bharata's race, and
sorrow and loss of judgment, and inclination to do (evil to others), and
jealousy and malice and pride, and envy, and slander, and incapacity to
bear the good of others, and unkindness, and fear. Tell me everything
truly and in detail about all these.'
"Bhishma said, 'These thirteen vices are regarded as very powerful foes
of all creatures. These, O Monarch, approach and tempt men from every
side. They goad and afflict a heedless man or one that is insensate.
Indeed, as soon as they see a person, they assail him powerfully like
wolves jumping upon their prey. From these proceed all kinds of grief.
From these proceed all kinds of sin. Every mortal, O foremost of men,
should always know this. I shall now speak to thee of their origin, of
the objects upon which they rest, and of the means of their destruction,
O lord of the earth! Listen, first, O king, with undivided attention, to
the origin of wrath truly and in detail. Anger springs from covetousness.
It is strengthened by the faults of others. Through forgiveness it
remains dormant, and through forgiveness it disappears. As regards lust,
it springs from resolution. Indulgence strengthens it. When the man of
wisdom resolutely turns away from it, it disappears and dies. Envy of
others proceeds from between wrath and covetousness. It disappears in
consequence of compassion and knowledge of self. In consequence of
compassion for all creatures, and of that disregard for all worldly
objects (that knowledge brings in its train), it disappears. It also
arises from seeing the faults of other people. But in men of intelligence
it quickly disappears in consequence of true knowledge.[465] Loss of
judgment has its origin in ignorance and proceeds from sinfulness of
habit. When the man whom this fault assails begins to take delight in
(the company and counsels of) wise men, the vice at once and immediately
hides its head. Men, O thou of Kuru's race, see conflicting scriptures.
From that circumstance springs the desire for diverse kinds of action.
When true Knowledge has been gained, that desire is allayed. The grief of
an embodied creature proceeds from affection which is awakened by
separation. When, however, one learns that the dead do not return
(whatever the grief one may feel for them), it subsides. Incapacity to
bear other people's good proceeds from wrath and covetousness. Through
compassion for every creature and in consequence of a disregard for all
earthly objects, it is extinguished. Malice proceeds from the abandonment
of truth and indulgence in wickedness. This vice, O child, disappears in
consequence of one's waiting upon the wise and good. Pride, in men,
springs from birth, learning, and prosperity. When those three, however,
are truly known, that vice instantly disappears. Jealousy springs from
lust and delight in low and vulgar people. In consequence of wisdom it is
destroyed. From errors (of conduct) inconsistent with the ordinary course
of men, and through disagreeable speeches expressive of aversion, slander
takes its rise. It disappears, O king, upon a survey of the whole world.
When the person that injures is powerful and the injured one is unable to
avenge the injury, hate shows itself. It subsides, however, through
kindliness. Compassion proceeds from a sight of the helpless and
miserable persons with whom the world abounds. That sentiment disappears
when one understands the strength of virtue.[466] Covetousness in all
creatures spring from ignorance. Beholding the instability of all objects
of enjoyment, it suffers destruction. It has been said that tranquillity
of soul can alone subdue all these thirteen faults. All these thirteen
faults stained the sons of Dhritarashtra. Thyself, always desirous of
truth, hast conquered all of those vices in consequence of thy regard for
seniors.'"
