SECTION CCL
"Suka said, 'Let thy reverence tell me of that which is the foremost of
all duties, indeed, of that duty above which no higher one exists in this
"Vyasa said, 'I shall now tell thee of duties having a very ancient
origin and laid down by the Rishis, duties that are distinguished above
all others. Listen to me with undivided attention. The senses that are
maddening should carefully be restrained by the understanding like a sire
restraining his own inexperienced children liable to fall into diverse
evil habits. The withdrawal of the mind and the senses from all unworthy
objects and their due concentration (upon worthy objects) is the highest
penance. That is the foremost of all duties. Indeed, that is said to be
the highest duty. Directing, by the aid of the understanding, the senses
having the mind for their sixth, and without, indeed, thinking of worldly
objects which have the virtue of inspiring innumerable kinds of thought,
one should live contented with one's own self. When the senses and the
mind, withdrawn from the pastures among which they usually run loose,
come back for residing in their proper abode, it is then that thou wilt
behold in thy own self the Eternal and Supreme Soul.[1064] Those
high-souled Brahmanas that are possessed of wisdom succeed in beholding
that Supreme and Universal Soul which is like unto a blazing fire in
effulgence. As a large tree endued with numerous branches and possessed
of many flowers and fruits does not know in which part it has flowers and
in which it has fruits, after the same manner the Soul as modified by
birth and other attributes, does not know whence it has come and whither
it is to go. There is, however, an inner Soul, which beholds (knows)
everything.[1065] One sees the Soul oneself with the aid of the lighted
lamp of knowledge. Beholding, therefore, thyself with thy own self, cease
to regard thy body as thyself and attain thou to omniscience. Cleansed of
all sins, like unto a snake that has cast off its slough, one attains to
high intelligence here and becomes free from every anxiety and the
obligation of acquiring a new body (in a subsequent birth). Its current
spreading in diverse directions, frightful is this river of life bearing
the world onward in its course. The five senses are its crocodiles. The
mind and its purposes are the shores. Cupidity and stupefaction of
judgment are the grass and straw that float on it, covering its bosom.
Lust and wrath are the fierce reptiles that live in it. Truth forms the
tirtha by its miry banks. Falsehood forms its surges, anger its mire.
Taking its rise from the Unmanifest, rapid is its current, and incapable
of being crossed by persons of uncleansed souls. Do thou, with the aid of
the understanding cross that river having desires for its alligators. The
world and its concerns constitute the ocean towards which that river
runs. Genus and species constitute its unfathomable depth that none can
understand. One's birth, O child, is the source from which that stream
takes its rise. Speech constitutes its eddies. Difficult to cross, only
men of learning and wisdom and understanding succeed in crossing it.
Crossing it, thou wilt succeed in freeing thyself from every attachment,
acquiring a tranquil heart, knowing the Soul, and becoming pure in every
respect. Relying them on a purged and elevated understanding, thou wilt
succeed in becoming Brahma's self. Having dissociated thyself from every
worldly attachment, having acquired a purified Soul and transcending
every kind of sin, look thou upon the world like a person looking from
the mountain top upon creatures creeping below on the earth's surface.
Without giving way to wrath or joy, and without forming any cruel wish,
thou wilt succeed in beholding the origin and the destruction of all
created objects. They that are endued with wisdom regard such an act to
be the foremost of all things. Indeed, this act of crossing the river of
life is regarded by the foremost of righteous persons, by ascetics
conversant with the truth, to be the highest of all acts that one can
accomplish. This knowledge of the all-pervading Soul is intended to be
imparted to one's son. It should be inculcated unto one that is of
restrained senses, that is honest in behaviour, and that is docile or
submissive. This knowledge of the Soul, of which I have just now spoken
to thee, O child, and the evidence of whose truth is furnished by the
Soul itself, is a mystery,--indeed, the greatest of all mysteries, and
the very highest knowledge that one can attain. Brahma hath no
sex,--male, female, or neuter. It is neither sorrow nor happiness. It
hath for its essence the past, the future, and the present. Whatever
one's sex, male or female, the person that attains to the knowledge of
Brahma hath never to undergo rebirth. This duty (of Yoga) hath been
inculcated for attaining to exemption from rebirth.[1066] These words
that I have used for answering thy question lead to Emancipation in the
same way as the diverse other opinions advanced by diverse other sages
that have treated of this subject. I have expounded the topic to thee
after the manner in which it should be expounded. Those opinions
sometimes become productive of fruit and sometimes not. (The words,
however, that I have used are of a different kind, for these are sure to
lead to success).[1067] For this reason, O good child, a preceptor, when
asked by a contented, meritorious, and self-restrained son or disciple,
should, with a delighted heart, inculcate, according to their true
import, these instructions that I have inculcated for the benefit of
thee, my son!'"
