SECTION CCLXXI
"Yudhishthira said, 'The Vedas, O Bharata, discourse of Religion. Profit,
and Pleasure. Tell me, however, O grandsire, the attainment of which
(amongst these three) is regarded as superior.'
"Bhishma said, 'I shall, in this connection, recite to thee the ancient
narrative of the benefit that Kundadhara in days of old had conferred
upon one who was devoted to him. Once on a time a Brahmana destitute of
wealth sought to acquire virtue, induced by the desire of fruit. He
continually set his heart upon wealth for employing it in the celebration
of sacrifices. For achieving his purpose he set himself to the practice
of the austerest penances. Resolved to accomplish his purpose, he began
to worship the deities with great devotion. But he failed to obtain
wealth by such worship of the deities. He thereupon began to reflect,
saying unto himself, 'What is that deity, hitherto unadored by men, who
may be favourably disposed towards me without delay?' While reflecting in
this strain with a cool mind, he beheld stationed before him that
retainer of the deities, viz., the Cloud called Kundadhara. As soon as he
beheld that mighty-armed being, the Brahmana's feelings of devotion were
excited, and he said unto himself, 'This one will surely bestow
prosperity upon me. Indeed, his form indicates as much. He lives in close
proximity to the deities. He has not as yet been adored by other men. He
will verily give me abundant wealth without any delay.' The Brahmana,
then, having concluded thus, worshipped that Cloud with dhupas and
perfumes and garlands of flowers of the most superior kind, and with
diverse kinds of offerings. Thus worshipped, the Cloud became very soon
pleased with his worshipper and uttered these words fraught with benefit
to that Brahmana, 'The wise have ordained expiation for one guilty of
Brahmanicide, or of drinking alcohol or of stealing, or of neglecting all
meritorious vows. There is no expiation, however, for one that is
ungrateful.[1278] Expectation hath a child named Iniquity. Ire, again, is
regarded to be a child of Envy. Cupidity is the child of Deceit.
Ingratitude, however, is barren (and hath no offspring). After this, that
Brahmana, stretched on a bed of Kusa grass, and penetrated with the
energy of Kundadhara, beheld all living beings in a dream. Indeed, in
consequence of his absence of passion, penances, and devotion, that
Brahmana of cleansed soul, standing aloof from all (carnal) enjoyments,
beheld in the night that effect of his devotion to Kundadhara. Indeed, O
Yudhishthira, he beheld the high-souled Manibhadra of great effulgence
stationed in the midst of the deities, employed in giving his orders.
There the gods seemed to be engaged in bestowing kingdoms and riches upon
men, induced by their good deeds, and in taking them away when men fell
off from goodness.[1279] Then, O bull of Bharata's race, Kundadhara of
great effulgence, bending himself low, prostrated himself on the ground
before the gods in the presence of all the Yakshas. At the command of the
gods the high-souled Manibhadra addressed the prostrate Kundadhara and
said, 'What does Kundadhara want?' Thereupon Kundadhara replied, 'If,
indeed, the gods are pleased with me, there, that Brahmana reverences me
greatly. I pray for some favour being shown to him, something, that is,
that may bring him happiness.' Hearing this, Manibhadra, commanded by the
gods, once more said unto Kundadhara of great intelligence these words,
'Rise, rise up, O Kundadhara! Thy suit is successful. Be thou happy. If
this Brahmana be desirous of wealth, let wealth be given to him, that is,
as much wealth as this thy friend desires. At the command of the gods I
shall give him untold wealth.' Kundadhara, then, reflecting upon the
fleeting and unreal character of the status of humanity, set his heart, O
Yudhishthira, upon inclining the Brahmana to penances. Indeed, Kundadhara
said, 'I do not, O giver of wealth, beg for wealth on behalf of this
Brahmana. I desire the bestowal of another favour upon him. I do not
solicit for this devotee of mine mountains of pearls and gems or even.
the whole earth with all her riches. I desire, however, that he should be
virtuous. Let his heart find pleasure in virtue. Let him have virtue for
his stay. Let virtue be the foremost of all objects with him. Even this
is the favour that meets with my approval.' Manibhadra said, 'The fruits
of virtue are always sovereignty and happiness of diverse kinds. Let this
one enjoy those fruits, always freed from physical pain of every kind.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed, Kundadhara, however, of great
celebrity, repeatedly solicited virtue alone for that Brahmana. The gods
were highly pleased at it. Then Manibhadra said, 'The gods are all
pleased with thee as also with this Brahmana. This one shall become a
virtuous-souled person. He shall devote his mind to virtue.' The Cloud,
Kundadhara, became delighted, O Yudhishthira, at thus having been
successful in obtaining his wish. The boon that he had got was one that
was unattainable by anybody else. The Brahmana then beheld scattered
around him many delicate fabrics of cloth. Without minding them at all
(although so costly), the Brahmana came to disrelish the world.'
"The Brahmana said, 'When this one doth not set any value upon good
deeds, who else will? I had better go to the woods for leading a life of
righteousness.'[1280]
"Bhishma continued, 'Cherishing a distaste for the world, and through the
grace also of the gods, that foremost of Brahmanas entered the woods and
commenced to undergo the austerest of penances. Subsisting upon Such
fruits and roots as remained after serving the deities and guests, the
mind of that regenerate person, O monarch, was firmly set upon virtue.
Gradually, the Brahmana, renouncing fruits and roots, betook himself to
leaves of trees as his food. Then renouncing leaves, he took to water
only as his subsistence. After that he passed many years by subsisting
upon air alone. All the while, his strength did not diminish. This seemed
exceedingly marvellous. Devoted to virtue and engaged in the practice of
the severest austerities, after a long time he acquired spiritual vision.
He then reflected, saying unto himself, 'If, being gratified with
anybody, I give him wealth, my speech would never be untrue.'[1281] With
a face lighted up by smiles, he once more began to undergo severer
austerities. And once more, having won (higher) success, he thought that
he could, by a fiat of the will, then create the very highest objects.
'If, gratified with any person whatsoever I give him even sovereignty, he
will immediately become a king, for my words will never be untrue.' While
he was thinking in this way, Kundadhara, induced by his friendship for
the Brahmana and no less by the ascetic success which the Brahmana had
achieved, showed himself, O Bharata (unto his friend and devotee).
Meeting with him the Brahmana offered him worship according to the
observances ordained. The Brahmana, however, felt some surprise, O king.
Then Kundadhara addressed the Brahmana, saying, 'Thou hast now got an
excellent and spiritual eye. Behold with this vision of thine the end
that is attained by kings, and survey all the worlds besides.' The
Brahmana then, with his spiritual vision, beheld from a distance
thousands of kings sunk in hell.'
"Kundadhara said, 'After having worshipped me with devotion thou didst
get sorrow for thy share, what then would have been the good done to thee
by me, and what the value of my favour? Look, look for what end men
desire the gratification of carnal enjoyments. The door of heaven is
closed unto men.'
"Bhishma continued, 'The Brahmana then beheld many men living in this
world, embracing lust, and wrath, and cupidity, and fear, and pride, and
sleep and procrastination, and inactivity.'
"Kundadhara said, 'With these (vices) all human beings are enchained. The
gods are afraid of men. These vices, at the command of the gods, mar and
disconcert on every side.[1282] No man can become virtuous unless
permitted by the gods. (In consequence of their permission) thou hast
become competent to give away kingdoms and wealth through thy penances.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed, the righteous-souled Brahmana,
bending his head unto that Cloud, prostrated himself on the ground, and
said, 'Thou hast, indeed, done me a great favour. Unconscious of the
great affection shown by thee towards me, I had through the influence of
desire and cupidity, failed to display good will towards thee.' Then
Kundadhara said unto that foremost of regenerate persons, 'I have
forgiven thee,' and having embraced him with his arms disappeared there
and then. The Brahmana then roamed through all the worlds, having
attained to ascetic success through the grace of Kundadhara. Through the
puissance gained from virtue and penances, one acquires competence to
sail through the skies and to fructify all one's wishes and purposes, and
finally attain to the highest end. The gods and Brahmanas and Yakshas and
all good men and Charanas always adore those that are virtuous but never
those that are rich or given up to the indulgence of their desires. The
gods are truly propitious to thee since thy mind is devoted to virtue. In
wealth there may be a very little happiness but in virtue the measure of
happiness is very great.'"
