SECTION CCXXV
"Bhishma said, 'After this, he of hundred sacrifices beheld the goddess
of Prosperity, in her own embodied form that blazed splendour, issue out
of the form of the high-souled Vali. The illustrious chastiser of Paka,
beholding the goddess blazing with radiance, addressed Vali in these
words, with eyes expanded in wonder.'
"Sakra said, 'O Vali, who is this one, thus shining with splendour, thus
decked with head plumes, thus adorned with golden bracelets on her upper
arms, and thus emitting a halo of glory on all sides in consequence of
her energy that is issuing out of thy body.'
"Vali said, 'I do not know whether she is an Asura damsel or a celestial
one or a human one. Thou mayst not ask her thyself. Do what pleases thee.'
"Sakra said, 'O thou of sweet smiles, who art thou that art possessed of
such radiance and adorned with plumes that thus issuest from the body of
Vali. I do not know thee. Kindly tell me thy name. Who, indeed, art thou
that thus standest here as Maya herself, blazing with thy own splendour,
after having deserted the lord of the Daityas? O, tell me this as I
question thee.'
"Sree said, 'Virochana did not know me. This Vali also that is the son of
Virochana knows me not. The learned called me by the name of
Duhshaha.[844] Some knew me by the name of Vidhitsa.[845] I have other
names also, O Vasava! They are Bhuti, Lakshmi, and Sree.[846] Thou
knowest me not, O Sakra, nor doth any one among the deities know me.'
"Sakra said, 'O lady that is difficult of being borne, why do you desert
Vali now after having lived in him for a long time? Is it due to any act
of mine or is it due to any act that Vali has done?'
"Sree said, 'Neither the Creator nor the Ordainer rules me. It is Time
that moves me from one place to another. Do not, O Sakra, disregard Vali.'
"Sakra said, 'For what reason, O goddess adorned with plumes, do you
desert Vali? Why also do you approach me (for living in me)? Tell me
this, O thou of sweet smiles!'
'Sree said, 'I live in truth, in gifts, in good vows, in penances, in
prowess, and in virtue. Vali hath fallen off from all these. Formerly, he
was devoted to the Brahmanas. He was truthful and had controlled his
passions. Latterly, however, he began to cherish feelings of animosity
towards the Brahmanas and touched clarified butter with soiled
hands.[847] Formerly, he was always engaged in the performance of
sacrifices. At last, blinded by ignorance and afflicted by Time he began
to boast before all persons, saying that his adorations towards me were
ceaseless. Deserting him (for these faults) I shall henceforth, O Sakra,
dwell in thee. Thou shouldst bear me without heedlessness, and with
penances and prowess.'
"Sakra said, 'O thou that dwellest amid lotuses, there is not a single
person among gods, men, and all creatures, that can bear thee for ever.'
"Sree said, 'Truly, O Purandara, there is none among gods, Gandharvas,
Asuras, or Rakshasas, that can bear me for ever.'
"Sakra said, 'O auspicious lady, tell me how I should conduct myself so
that thou mayst dwell in me always. I shall certainly obey thy behests.
It behoveth thee to answer me truly.'
"Sree said, 'O chief of the deities, I shall tell thee as to how I may be
enabled to dwell in thee always. Divide me into four parts according to
the ordinance laid down in the Vedas.'
"Sakra said, 'I shall assign the habitations according to their strength
and power in bearing thee. As regards myself, I shall always take care, O
Lakshmi, that I may not offend thee in any way. Amongst men, the earth,
that progenitrix of all things, bear them all. She shall bear a fourth
part of thyself. I think she hath the strength to do it.'
"Sree said, 'Here, I yield up a quarter of myself. Let it be established
on the earth. Do thou, after this, make a proper disposition, O Sakra,
for my second quarter.'
"Sakra said, 'The waters, among men, in their liquid form, do various
services to human beings. Let the waters bear a fourth part of thy
person. They have the strength to bear a portion of thine.'
"Sree said, 'I yield up another quarter of mine that is to be established
in the waters. Do thou, after this, O Sakra, assign a proper place for my
third quarter.'
"Sakra said, 'The Vedas, the sacrifices, and the deities are all
established in Fire. Fire will bear thy third quarter, when it is placed
therein.'
"Sree said, 'Here I yield up my third quarter which is to be placed in
Fire. Do thou, O Sakra, after this, assign a proper place for my last
quarter.'
"Sakra said, 'They that are good among men, devoted to Brahmanas, and
truthful in speech, may bear thy fourth quarter. The good have the power
to bear it.'
"Sree said, 'Here I yield up my fourth quarter that is to be placed among
the good. My portions thus assigned to different creatures, do thou
continue to protect me, O Sakra.'
"Sakra said, 'Listen to these words of mine. I have thus distributed thee
among different creatures. Those among creatures that will offend against
thee shall be chastised by me. The chief of the Daityas, viz., Vali, thus
deserted by Sree, then said these words.'
"Vali said, 'At present the Sun shines as much in the east as in the
west, and as much in the north as in the south. When, however, the Sun,
withdrawing himself from all sides, will shine only upon the region of
Brahman situated in the middle of Sumeru, then will again occur a great
battle between the gods and the Asuras, and in that fight I shall
certainly vanquish all of you. When the Sun, withdrawing himself from all
sides, will shine fixedly upon only the region of Brahman, then will
again occur a great battle between the gods and the Asuras, and in that
fight I shall surely conquer all of you.'[848]
"Sakra said, 'Brahman hath commanded me saying that I should never kill
thee. It is for this reason, O Vali, that I do not hurl my thunderbolt
upon thy head. Go whithersoever thou wishest, O chief of the Daityas! O
great Asura, peace to thee! No time will come when the Sun will shine
from only the meridian. The Self-born (Brahman) hath before this ordained
the laws that regulate the Sun's motions. Giving light and heat to all
creatures, he goes on ceaselessly. For six months he travels in a
northward course and then for the other six in a southward course. The
sun travels by these courses (one after another), creating winter and
summer for all creatures.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by Indra, O Bharata, Vali, the chief
of the Daityas, proceeded towards the south. Purandara proceeded towards
the north. The thousand-eyed Indra, after having listened to this speech
of Vali which was characterised by an entire absence of pride, then
ascended the skies.'
