SECTION CCIV
"Manu said, 'As in a dream this manifest (body) lies (inactive) and the
enlivening spirit in its subtile form, detaching itself from the former,
walks forth after the same manner, in the state called deep slumber (or
death), the subtile form with all the senses becomes inactive and the
Understanding, detached from it remains awake. The same is the case with
Existence and Non-Existence.[683] As when quantity of water is clear,
images reflected in it can be seen by the eye, after the same manner, if
the senses be unperturbed, the Soul is capable of being viewed by the
understanding. If, however, the quantity of water gets stirred, the
person standing by it can no longer see those images. Similarly, if the
senses become perturbed, the Soul can no longer be seen by the
understanding. Ignorance begets Delusion. Delusion affects the mind. When
the mind becomes vitiated, the five senses which have the mind for their
refuge become vitiated also. Surcharged with Ignorance, and sunk in the
mire of worldly objects, one cannot enjoy the sweets of contentment or
tranquillity. The Soul (thus circumstanced), undetached from its good and
evil acts, returns repeatedly unto the objects of the world, in
consequence of sin one's thirst is never slaked. One's thirst is slaked
only when one's sin is destroyed. In consequence of attachment to worldly
objects, which has a tendency to perpetuate itself, one wishes for things
other than those for which one should wish, and accordingly fails to
attain to the Supreme.[684] From the destruction of all sinful deeds,
knowledge arises in men. Upon the appearance of Knowledge, one beholds
one's Soul in one's understanding even as one sees one's own reflection
in a polished mirror. One obtains misery in consequence of one's senses
being unrestrained. One obtains happiness in consequence of one's senses
being restrained. Therefore, one should restrain one's mind by
self-effort from objects apprehended by the senses.[685] Above the senses
is the mind; above the mind is the understanding; above the understanding
is the Soul; above the Soul is the Supreme or Great. From the Unmanifest
hath sprung the Soul; from the Soul hath sprung the Understanding; from
the Understanding hath sprung the Mind. When the Mind becomes associated
with the senses, then it apprehends sound and the other objects of the
senses. He who casts off those objects, as also all that are manifest, he
who liberates himself from all things that arise from primordial matter,
being so freed, enjoys immortality.[686] The Sun rising diffuses his
rays. When he sets, he withdraws unto himself those very rays that were
diffused by him. After the same manner, the Soul, entering the body,
obtains the fivefold objects of the senses by diffusing over them his
rays represented by the senses. When, however, he turns back, he is said
to set by withdrawing those rays unto himself.[687] Repeatedly led along
the path that is created by acts, he obtains the fruits of his acts in
consequence of his having followed the practice of acts.[688] Desire for
the objects of the senses keeps away from a person who does not indulge
in such desire. The very principle of desire, however, leaves him who has
beheld his soul, which, of course, is entirely free from desire.[689]
When the Understanding, freed from attachment to the objects of the
senses, becomes fixed in the mind, then does one succeed in attaining to
Brahma, for it is there that the mind with the understanding withdrawn
into it can possibly be extinguished. Brahma is not an object of touch,
or of hearing, or of taste, or of sight, or of smell, or of any deductive
inference from the Known. Only the Understanding (when withdrawn from
everything else) can attain to it. All objects that the mind apprehends
through 'the senses are capable of being withdrawn into the mind; the
mind can be withdrawn into the understanding; the Understanding can be
withdrawn into the Soul, and the Soul into the Supreme.[690] The senses
cannot contribute to the success of the mind. The mind cannot apprehend
the Understanding. The Understanding cannot apprehend the manifested
Soul. The Soul, however, which is subtile, beholds those all.'"
