SECTION CXCI
"Bharadwaja said, 'What has been said to be the consequence of gift? What
of Righteousness? What of conduct? What of Penances well-performed? What
of the study and recitation of the Vedas? And what of pouring libations
upon the fire?'
'Bhrigu said, 'By pouring libations on the sacred fire, sin is burnt. By
study of the Vedas one obtains blessed tranquillity. By gift, one obtains
pleasure and articles of enjoyment. By Penances, one acquires blessed
heaven. Gift is said to be of two kinds: gifts for the other world, and
those for this. Whatever is given to the good attends the giver in the
other world. Whatever is given to those that are not good produces
consequences enjoyable here. The consequences of gifts are commensurate
with the gifts themselves.'
"Bharadwaja said, 'What course of duties should be performed by whom?
What also are the characteristics of duty? How many kinds of duty are
there? It behoveth thee to tell me these.'[572]
"Bhrigu said, 'Those wise men who are engaged in practising the duties
laid down for them succeed in obtaining heaven as their reward. By doing
otherwise people become guilty of folly.'
"Bharadwaja said, 'It behoveth thee to tell me about the four modes of
life that were formerly laid down by Brahman, and the practices ordained
for each of them.'
"Bhrigu said, 'In days of yore, the divine Brahman, for benefiting the
world, and for the protection of righteousness, indicated four modes of
life.[573] Amongst them, residence in the abode of the preceptor is
mentioned as the first (in order of time). He who is in this mode of life
should have his soul cleansed by purity of conduct, by Vedic rites, and
by restraints and vows and humility. He should worship the morning and
evening twilights, the Sun, his own sacred fire, and the deities. He
should cast off procrastination and idleness. He should cleanse his soul
by saluting his preceptor, by studying the Vedas, and by listening to his
preceptor's instructions. He should perform his ablutions thrice (viz.,
in the morning, noon, and evening). He should lead a life of celibacy;
attend to his sacred fire; dutifully serve his preceptor; daily go out on
a round of mendicancy (for supporting himself); and give ungrudgingly
unto his preceptor the whole of what is obtained in alms. Willingly
accomplishing everything that the commands of his preceptor may indicate,
he should be ready to receive such Vedic instruction as his preceptor may
give him as a favour.[574] On this subject there is a verse: That
Brahmana who obtains his Veda by attending with reverence upon his
preceptor, succeeds in attaining to heaven and obtains the fruition of
all his desires. The domestic mode of life is called the second (in point
of time). We shall explain to you all the pious acts and indications of
that mode. Those who having completed their residence in the preceptor's
abode return home, who are of pious conduct, who desire the fruits of a
virtuous course of behaviour with spouses in their company, have this
mode of life ordained for them. In it Virtue, Wealth, and Pleasure, may
all be obtained. It is (thus) suited to the cultivation of the triple
aggregate. Acquiring wealth by irreproachable acts, or with wealth of
high efficacy which is obtained from recitation of the Vedas, or living
upon such means as are utilised by the regenerate Rishis,[575] or with
the produce of mountains and mines, or with the wealth represented by the
offerings made in sacrifices and on the termination of vows and other
observances, and those made unto deities, the householder should lead
this mode of life. That mode of life is regarded as the root of all the
others. They who are residents in the abodes of preceptors, they who lead
lives of mendicancy, and others who live in the observance of vows and
restraints to which they are pledged, derive from this mode the means
they live upon, the offerings they make unto the Pitris and the deities,
and, in short, their entire support. The third mode of life is called the
Forest-life. For those that lead it, there is no storing of wealth and
articles.[576] Generally, these pious and good men, subsisting upon good
food, and engaged in studying the Vedas, roam ever the earth for
journeying to tirthas and visiting diverse realms. Standing up, advancing
forward, sweet speeches uttered in sincerity, gifts according to the
measure of the giver's competence, offer of seats and beds of the best
kind, and presents of excellent food, are some of the means for showing
them regard. On this subject there is a verse: If a guest turns away from
a house with expectations unfulfilled, he is supposed to take away the
merits of the householder and leave the latter all his misdeeds. Then
again in the domestic mode of life the deities are gratified by
sacrifices and other religious rites; the Pitris by the performance of
obsequial rites; the Rishis by cultivation of (Vedic) knowledge, by
listening to the instructions of preceptors, and by committing to memory
the scriptures; and lastly the Creator by begetting children.[577] On
this subject there are two verses: One in the observance of this mode of
life should speak upon all creatures words breathing affection and
agreeable to the ears. To give pain, to inflict mortifications, and harsh
words, are all censurable. Insult, arrogance, and deceit, also should be
avoided. Abstention from injury, truth, and absence of wrath, produce the
merit of penances in all the (four) modes of life. In the domestic mode
of life these are allowed, viz., the use and enjoyment of floral
garlands, ornaments, robes, perfumed oils and unguents; enjoyment of
pleasures derived from dancing and music, both vocal and instrumental,
and all sights and scenes that are agreeable to the sight; the enjoyment
of various kinds of viands and drinks belonging to the principal orders
of edibles, viz., those that are swallowed, those that are lapped, those
that are quaffed, and those that are sucked; and the enjoyment of
pleasures derivable from sports and every kind of amusement and the
gratification of desires. That man who in the observance of this mode of
life seeks the acquisition of the triple aggregate (viz., Religion,
Wealth, and Pleasure), with that of the great end of the three attributes
of Goodness and Passion and Darkness,[578] enjoys great happiness here
and at last attains to the end that is reserved for persons that are
virtuous and good.[579] Even that householder who observes the duties of
his mode of life by following the practice of picking up fallen grains of
corn from the cracks of fields and who abandons sensual pleasure and
attachment to action, does not find it difficult to obtain heaven.'"
