SECTION CCXXXII
"Vyasa said, 'Brahma is the effulgent seed from which, existing as it
does by itself, hath sprung the whole universe consisting of two kinds of
being, viz., the mobile and the immobile.[877] At the dawn of His day,
waking up. He creates with the help of Avidya this universe. At first
springs up that which is called Mahat. That Mahat is speedily transformed
into Mind which is the soul of the Manifest.[878] Overwhelming the Chit,
which is effulgent, with Avidya, Mind creates seven great beings.[879]
Urged by the desire of creating, Mind, which is far-reaching, which has
many courses, and which has desire and doubt for its principal
indications, begins to create diverse kinds of objects by modifications
of itself. First springs from it Space. Know that its property is Sound.
From Space, by modification, arises the bearer of all scents, viz., the
pure and mighty Wind. It is said to possess the attribute of Touch. From
Wind also, by modification, springs Light endued with effulgence.
Displayed in beauty, and called also Sukram, it starts into existence,
thus, possessing the attribute of Form. From Light, by modification,
arises Water having Taste for its attribute. From Water springs Earth
having Scent for its attribute. These are said to represent initial
creation.[880] These, one after another, acquire the attributes of the
immediately preceding ones from which they have sprung. Each has not only
its own special attribute but each succeeding one has the attributes of
all the preceding ones. (Thus Space has only Sound for its attribute.
After Space comes Wind, which has, therefore, both Sound and Touch for
its attributes. From Wind comes Light or Fire, which has Sound, Touch,
and Form for its attributes. From Light is Water, which has Sound, Touch,
Form, and Taste for its attributes. From Water is Earth, which has Sound,
Touch, Form, Taste, and Scent for its attributes). If anybody, perceiving
Scent in Water, were from ignorance to say that it belongs to Water, he
would fall into an error, for Scent is the attribute of Earth though it
may exist in a state of attachment with Water and also Wind. These seven
kinds of entities, possessing diverse kinds of energy, at first existed
separately from one another. They could not create objects without all of
them coming together into a state of commingling. All these great
entities coming together, and commingling with one another, form the
constituent parts of the body which are called limbs.[881] In consequence
of the combination of those limbs, the sum total, invested with form and
having six and ten constituent parts, becomes what is called the body.
(When the gross body is thus formed), the subtile Mahat, with the
unexhausted residue of acts, then enters that combination called the
gross body.[882] Then the original Creator of all beings, having by his
Maya divided Himself, enters that subtile form for surveying or
overlooking everything. And inasmuch as he is the original Creator of all
beings he is on that account called the Lord of all beings.[883] It is he
who creates all beings mobile and immobile. After having thus assumed the
form of Brahman he creates the worlds of the gods, the Rishis, the
Pitris, and men; the rivers, the seas, and the oceans, the points of the
horizon, countries and provinces, hills and mountains, and large trees,
human beings, Kinnaras, Rakshasas, birds, animals domestic and wild, and
snakes. Indeed, he creates both kinds of existent things, viz., those
that are mobile and those that are immobile; and those that are
destructible and those that are indestructible. Of these created objects
each obtains those attributes which it had during the previous Creation;
and each, indeed, obtains repeatedly the same attributes at every
subsequent Creation. Determined in respect of character by either
injuriousness or peacefulness, mildness or fierceness, righteousness or
unrighteousness, truthfulness or untruthfulness, each creature, at every
new creation, obtains that particular attribute which it had cherished
before. It is in consequence of this that that particular attribute
attaches to it. It is the Ordainer himself who attaches variety to the
great entities (of Space, Earth, etc.), to the objects of the senses
(such as form, etc.), and to size or bulk of existent matter, and
appoints the relations of creatures with those multiform entities.
Amongst men who have devoted themselves to the science of things, there
are some who say that, in the production of effects, exertion is supreme.
Some learned persons say that Destiny is supreme, and some that it is
Nature which is the agent. Others say that Acts flowing from (personal)
exertion, and Destiny, produce effects, aided by Nature. Instead of
regarding any of these as singly competent for the production of effects,
they say that it is the union of all three that produces all effects. As
regards this subject,[884] some say that such is the case; some, that
such is not the case; some, that both of these are not the case; and
some, that it is not that the reverse of both are not. These, of course,
are the contentions of those that depend on Acts, with reference to
objects. They however, whose vision is directed to truth regard Brahma as
the cause.[885] Penance is the highest good for living creatures. The
roots of penance are tranquillity and self-restraint. By penance one
obtains all things that one wishes for in one's mind. By penance one
attains to that Being who creates the universe. He who (by penance)
succeeds in attaining to that Being becomes the puissant master of all
beings. It is by Penance that the Rishis are enabled to read the Vedas
ceaselessly. At the outset the Self-born caused those excellent Vedic
sounds, that are embodiments of knowledge and that have neither beginning
nor end to (spring up and) flow on (from preceptor to disciple). From
those sounds have sprung all kinds of actions. The names of the Rishis,
all things that have been created, the varieties of form seen in existent
things, and the course of actions, have their origin in the Vedas.[886]
Indeed, the Supreme Master of all beings, in the beginning, created all
things from the words of the Vedas. Truly, the names of the Rishis, and
all else that has been created, occur in the Vedas. Upon the expiration
of his night (i.e., at the dawn of his day), the uncreate Brahman
creates, from prototypes that existed before, all things which are, of
course, well-made by Him.[887] In the Vedas hath been indicated the topic
of the Soul's Emancipation, along with the ten means constituted by study
of the Vedas, adoption of the domestic mode of life, penances, observance
of duties common to all the modes of life, sacrifices, performance of all
such acts as lead to pure fame, meditation which is of three kinds, and
that kind of emancipation which is called success (Siddhi) attainable in
this life.[888] That incomprehensible Brahma which has been declared in
the words of the Vedas, and which has been indicated more clearly in the
Upanishads by those who have an insight into the Vedas, can be realised
by gradually following the practices referred to above.[889] Unto a
person who thinks he has a body, this consciousness of duality, fraught
again with that of pairs of opposites, is born only of acts in which he
is engaged. (That consciousness of duality ceases during dreamless
slumber or when Emancipation has been attained). That person, however,
who has attained to Emancipation, aided by his knowledge, forcibly drives
off that consciousness of duality. Two Brahmas should be known, viz., the
Brahma represented by sound (i.e., the Vedas), and secondly that which is
beyond the Vedas and is supreme. One that is conversant with Brahma
represented by sound succeeds in attaining to Brahma that is Supreme. The
slaughter of animals is the sacrifice laid down for the Kshatriyas. The
growing of corn is the sacrifice laid down for the Vaisyas. Serving the
three other orders is the sacrifice laid down for the Sudras. Penances
(or worship of Brahma) is the sacrifice laid down for the Brahmanas. In
the Krita age the performance of sacrifices was not necessary. Such
performance became necessary in the Treta age. In the Dwapara, sacrifices
have begun to fall off. In the Kali, the same is the case with them. In
Krita age, men, worshipping only one Brahma, looked upon the Richs, the
Samans, the Yajuses and the rites and sacrifices that are performed from
motives of advantage, as all different from the object of their worship,
and practised only Yoga, by means of penances. In the Treta age, many
mighty men appeared that swayed all mobile and immobile objects. (Though
the generality of men in that age were not naturally inclined to the
practice of righteousness, yet those great leaders forced them to such
practice.) Accordingly, in that age, the Vedas, and sacrifices and the
distinctions between the several orders, and the four modes of life,
existed in a compact state. In consequence, however, of the decrease in
the period of life in Dwapara, all these, in that age, fall off from that
compact condition. In the Kali age, all the Vedas become so scarce that
they may not be even seen by men. Afflicted by iniquity, they suffer
extermination along with the rites and sacrifices laid down in them. The
righteousness which is seen in the Krita age is now visible in such
Brahmanas as are of cleansed souls and as are devoted to penances and the
study of the scriptures. As regards the other yugas, it is seen that
without at once giving up the duties and acts that are consistent with
righteousness, men, observant of the practices of their respective
orders, and conversant with the ordinance of the Vedas are led by the
authority of the scriptures, to betake themselves from motives of
advantage and interest to sacrifices and vows and pilgrimages to sacred
waters and spots.[890] As in the season of rains a large variety of new
objects of the immobile order are caused to come forth into life by the
showers that fall from the clouds, even so many new kinds of duty or
religious observances are brought about in each yuga. As the same
phenomena reappear with the reappearance of the seasons, even so, at each
new Creation the same attributes appear in each new Brahman and Hara. I
have, before this, spoken to thee of Time which is without beginning and
without end, and which ordains this variety in the universe. It is that
Time which creates and swallows up all creatures. All the innumerable
creatures that exist subject to pairs of opposites and according to their
respective natures, have Time for their refuge. It is Time that assumes
those shapes and it is Time that upholds them.[891] I have thus
discoursed to thee, O son, on the topics about which thou hadst inquired,
viz., Creation, Time, Sacrifices and other rites, the Vedas, the real
actor in the universe, action, and the consequences of action.'"
