SECTION CCXXIX
"Yudhishthira said, 'By what disposition, what course of duties, what
knowledge, and what energy, does one succeed in attaining to Brahma which
is immutable and which is beyond the reach of primordial nature.'[866]
"Bhishma said, 'One that is engaged in the practice of the religion of
nivritti, that eats abstemiously, and that has his senses under complete
control, can attain to Brahma which is immutable and which is above
primordial nature. In this connection is cited the old narrative, O
Bharata, of the discourse between Jaigishavya and Asita. Once on a time
Asita-Devala addressed Jaigishavya who was possessed of great wisdom and
fully acquainted with the truths of duty and morality.'
"Devala said, 'Thou art not gladdened when praised. Thou dost not give
way to wrath when blamed or censured. What, indeed, is thy wisdom? Whence
hast thou got it? And what, indeed, is the refuge of that wisdom?'
"Bhishma said, 'Thus questioned by Devala, the pure Jaigishavya of
austere penances, said those words of high import, fraught with full
faith and profound sense.'
"Jaigishavya said, 'O foremost of Rishis, I shall tell thee of that which
is the highest end, that which is the supreme goal, that which is
tranquillity, in the estimation of all persons of righteous acts. They, O
Devala, who behave uniformly towards those that praise them and those
that blame them, they who conceal their own vows and good acts, they who
never indulge in recriminations, they who never say even what is good
when it is calculated to injure (instead of producing any benefit), they
who do not desire to return injury for injury received, are said to be
men possessed of wisdom.[867] They never grieve for what is yet to come.
They are concerned with only what is before them and acts as they should.
They never indulge in sorrow for what is past or even call it to their
minds. Possessed of power and regulated minds, they do at their pleasure,
according to the way in which it should be done, what waits for them to
do in respect of all objects, O Devala, if solicited regardfully
thereto.[868] Of mature knowledge, of great wisdom, with wrath under
complete control, and with their passions kept under sway, they never do
an injury to any one in thought, word, or deed. Destitute of envy, they
never injure others, and possessed of self-control, they are never pained
at the sight of other people's prosperity. Such men never indulge in
exaggerated speeches, or set themselves in praising others, or in
speaking ill of them. They are again never affected by praise and blame
uttered by others in respect of them. They are tranquil in respect of all
their desires, and are engaged in the good of all creatures. They never
give way to wrath, or indulge in transports of joy, or injure any
creature. Untying all the knots of their hearts, they pass on very
happily. They have no friends nor are they the friends of others. They
have no foes nor are they the foes of other creatures. Indeed, men that
can live in this way can pass their days for ever in happiness. O best of
regenerate ones, they who acquire a knowledge of the rules of morality
and righteousness, and who observe those rules in practice, succeed in
winning joy, while they who fall off from the path of righteousness are
afflicted by anxieties and sorrow. I have now betaken myself to the path
of righteousness. Decried by others, why shall I get annoyed with them,
or praised by others, why shall I be pleased? Let men obtain whatsoever
objects they please from whatsoever pursuits in which they engage
themselves. (I am indifferent to acquisitions and losses). Praise and
blame are unable to contribute to my advancement or the reverse. He that
has understood the truths of things becomes gratified with even disregard
as if it were ambrosia. The man of wisdom is truly annoyed with regard as
if it were poison. He who is freed from all faults sleeps fearlessly both
here and hereafter even if insulted by others. On the other hand, he who
insults him, suffers destruction. Those men of wisdom who seek to attain
to the highest end, succeed in obtaining it by observing conduct such as
this. The man who has vanquished all his senses is regarded to have
performed all the sacrifices. Such a person attains to the highest rung,
viz., that of Brahma, which is eternal and which transcends the reach of
primordial nature. The very gods, the Gandharvas, the Pisachas, and the
Rakshasas, cannot reach the rung which is his who has attained to the
highest end.'"
