SECTION CCXXX
"Yudhishthira said, 'What man is there who is dear to all, who gladdens
all persons, and who is endued with every merit and every accomplishment?'
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection I shall recite to thee the words that
Kesava, asked by Ugrasena, said unto him on a former occasion.'
"Ugrasena said, 'All persons seem to be very solicitous of speaking of
the merits of Narada. I think that celestial Rishi, must really be
possessed of every kind of merit. I ask thee, tell me this, O Kesava!'
"Vasudeva said, 'O chief of the Kukkuras, listen to me as I mention in
brief those good qualities of Narada with which I am acquainted, O king!
Narada is as learned in the scriptures as he is good and pious in his
conduct. And yet, on account of his conduct, he never cherishes pride
that makes one's blood so hot. It is for this reason that he is
worshipped everywhere. Discontent, wrath, levity, and fear, these do not
exist in Narada. He is free from procrastination, and possessed of
courage. For this he is worshipped everywhere. Narada deserves the
respectful worship of all. He never falls back from his words through
desire or cupidity. For this he is worshipped everywhere. He is fully
conversant with the principles that lead to the knowledge of the soul,
disposed to peace, possessed of great energy, and a master of his senses.
He is free from guile, and truthful in speech. For this he is worshipped
with respect everywhere. He is distinguished by energy, by fame, by
intelligence, by knowledge, by humility, by birth, by penances, and by
years. For these he is everywhere worshipped with respect. He is of good
behaviour. He dresses and houses himself well. He eats pure food. He
loves all. He is pure in body and mind. He is sweet-speeched. He is free
from envy and malice. For this he is everywhere worshipped with respect.
He is certainly always employed in doing good to all people. No sin
dwells in him. He never rejoices at other people's misfortunes. For this
he is everywhere worshipped with respect. He always seeks to conquer all
earthly desires by listening to Vedic recitations and attending to the
Puranas. He is a great renouncer and he never disregards any one.[869]
For this he is everywhere worshipped with respect. He casts an equal eye
on all; and, therefore, he has no one whom he loves and none whom he
hates. He always speaks what is agreeable to the hearer. For this he is
everywhere worshipped with respect. He is possessed of great learning in
the scriptures. His conversation is varied and delightful. His knowledge
and wisdom are great. He is free from cupidity. He is free also from
deception. He is large-hearted. He has, conquered wrath and cupidity. For
this he is everywhere worshipped with respect. He has never quarrelled
with any one for any subject connected with profit or pleasure. All
faults have been torn away by him. For this he is everywhere worshipped
with respect. His devotion (to Brahma) is firm. His soul is blameless. He
is well-versed in the Srutis. He is free from cruelty. He is beyond the
influence of delusion or faults. For this he is worshipped everywhere
with respect. He is unattached to all such things as are objects of
attachment (for others). For all that he seems to be attached to all
things.[870] He is never long subject to the influence of any doubt. For
this he is everywhere worshipped with respect. He has no yearning for
objects connected with profit and pleasure. He never glorifies his own
self. He is free from malice. He is mild in speech. For this he is
everywhere worshipped with respect. He observes the hearts, different
from one another, of all men, without blaming any of them. He is
well-versed in all matters connected with the origin of things. He never
disregards or shows hatred for any kind of science. He lives according to
his own standard of morality. He never suffers his time to pass away
fruitlessly. His soul is under his control For this he is everywhere
worshipped with respect. He has toiled in subjects that deserve the
application of toil. He has earned knowledge and wisdom. He is never
satiated with yoga. He is always attentive and ready for exertion. He is
ever heedful. For this he is everywhere worshipped with respect. He has
never to feel shame for any deficiency of his. He is very attentive. He
is always engaged by others in accomplishing what is for their good. He
never divulges the secrets of others. For this he is everywhere
worshipped with respect. He never yields to transports of joy on
occasions of making even valuable acquisitions. He is never pained at
losses. His understanding is firm and stable. His soul is unattached to
all things. For this he is everywhere worshipped with respect. Who,
indeed, is there that will not love him who is thus possessed of every
merit and accomplishment, who is clever in all things, who is pure in
body and mind, who is entirely auspicious, who is well-versed with the
course of time and its opportuneness for particular acts, and who is
well-acquainted with all agreeable things?'"
