SECTION CCXXXIV
"Vyasa said, 'Thou hadst asked me about the Creation of all beings; I
have now narrated that to thee in full. Listen to me as I tell thee now
what the duties are of a Brahmana. The rituals of all ceremonies for
which sacrificial fees are enjoined, commencing with Jatakarma and ending
with Samavartana, depend for their performance upon a preceptor competent
in the Vedas.[894] Having studied all the Vedas and having displayed a
submissive behaviour towards his preceptor during his residence with him,
and having paid the preceptor's fee, the youth should return home with a
thorough knowledge of all sacrifices.[895] Receiving the permission of
his preceptor, he should adopt one of the four modes of life and live in
it in due observance of its duties till he casts off his body. He should
either lead a life of domesticity with spouses and engaged in creating
offspring, or live in the observance of Brahmacharya; or in the forest in
the company of his preceptor, or in the practice of the duties laid down
for a yati. A life of domesticity is said to be the root of all the other
modes of life. A self-restrained householder who has conquered all his
attachments to worldly objects always attains to success (in respect of
the great object of life). A Brahmana, by begetting children, by
acquiring a knowledge of the Vedas, and by performing sacrifices, pays
off the three debts he owes.[896] He should then enter the other modes of
life, having cleansed himself by his acts. He should settle in that place
which he may ascertain to be the most sacred spot on earth, and he should
strive in all matters that lead to fame, for attaining to a position of
eminence. The fame of Brahmanas increases through penances that are very
austere, through mastery of the various branches of knowledge, through
sacrifices, and through gifts. Indeed, a person enjoys endless regions of
the righteous (in the next world) as long as his deeds or the memory
thereof lasts in this world. A Brahmana should teach, study, officiate at
other people's sacrifices, and offer sacrifices himself. He should not
give away in vain or accept other people's gifts in vain. Wealth,
sufficient in quantity, that may come from one who is assisted in a
sacrifice, from a pupil, or from kinsmen (by marriage) of a daughter,
should be spent in the performance of sacrifice or in making gifts.
Wealth coming from any of these sources should never be enjoyed by a
Brahmana singly.[897] For a Brahmana leading a life of domesticity there
is no means save the acceptance of gifts for the sake of the deities, or
Rishis, or Pitris, or preceptor or the aged, or the diseased, or the
hungry.[898] Unto those that are persecuted by unseen foes, or those that
are striving to the best of their power to acquire knowledge, one should
make gifts from one's own possessions, including even cooked food, more
than one can fairly afford.[899] Unto a deserving person there is nothing
that cannot be given. They that are good and wise deserve to have even
the prince of steeds, called Uchchaisravas, belonging to Indra
himself.[900] Of high vows (king) Satyasandha, having, with due humility,
offered his own life-breaths for saving those of a Brahmana, ascended to
heaven. Sankriti's son Rantideva, having given only lukewarm water to the
high-souled Vasishtha, ascended to heaven and received high honours
there. Atri's royal son Indradamana, possessed of great intelligence,
having given diverse kinds of wealth to a deserving person, acquired
diverse regions of felicity in the next world. Usinara's son Sivi, having
given away his own limbs and the dear son of loins for the sake of a
Brahmana, ascended to heaven from this world. Pratardana, the ruler of
Kasi, having given away his very eyes to a Brahmana, obtained great fame
both here and hereafter. King Devavridha, having given away a very
beautiful and costly umbrella, with eight golden ribs, proceeded to
heaven with all the people of his kingdom. Sankriti of Atri's race,
possessed of great energy, having given instruction to his disciples on
the subject of Impersonal Brahma, proceeded to regions of great felicity.
Amvarisha of great prowess, heaving given unto the Brahmanas eleven
Arvudas of kine, proceeded to heaven with all the people of his kingdom.
Savitri, by giving away her ear-rings, and king Janamejaya, by giving
away his own body, both proceeded to high regions of felicity. Yuvanaswa,
the son of Vrishadarbha, by giving away diverse kinds of gems, a fine
mansion, and many beautiful women, ascended to heaven. Nimi, the ruler of
the Videhas, gave away his kingdom, Jamadagni's son (Rama) gave away the
whole earth; and Gaya gave away the earth with all her towns and cities,
unto the Brahmanas. Once when the clouds ceased to pour, Vasishtha,
resembling Brahman himself, kept alive all creatures like Prajapati
keeping them alive (by his energy and kindness). Karandhama's son Marutta
of cleansed soul, by giving away his daughter to Angiras, speedily
ascended to heaven. Brahmadatta, the ruler of the Panchalas, possessed of
superior intelligence, by giving away two precious jewels called Nidhi
and Sankha unto some of the foremost of the Brahmanas, obtained many
regions of felicity. King Mitrasaha, having given his own dear wife
Madayanti unto the high-souled Vasishtha, ascended to heaven with that
wife of his. The royal sage Sahasrajit, possessed of great fame having
cast off dear life itself for the sake of a Brahmana, ascended to regions
of great felicity. King Satadyumna, having given to Mudgala a mansion
made of gold and full of every object of comfort and use, ascended to
heaven. The king of the Salwas, known by the name of Dyutimat, possessed
of great prowess, gave unto Richika his entire kingdom and ascended to
heaven. The Royal sage Madiraswa, by giving away his daughter of slender
waist to Hiranyahasta, ascended to such regions as are held in esteem by
the very gods. The royal sage Lomapada, of great prowess, by giving away
his daughter Santa to Rishyasringa, obtained the fruition of all his
wishes. King Prasenajit, of great energy, by giving away a hundred
thousand kine with calves, ascended to excellent regions of felicity.
These and many others, possessed of great and well-ordered souls and
having their senses under control, ascended, by means Of gifts and
penances, to heaven. Their fame will last as long as the earth herself
will last. All of them have, by gifts, sacrifices and procreation of
issue, proceeded to heaven.'"
