
SECTION CXLV
"Vaisampayana said, Then prince Duryodhana, along with his brothers began
to gradually win over the people to his side by grants of wealth and
honours. Meanwhile, some clever councillors, instructed by Dhritarashtra,
one day began to describe (in court) the town of Varanavata as a charming
place. And they said, The festival of Pasupati (Siva) hath commenced in
the town of Varanavata. The concourse of people is great and the
procession is the most delightful of all ever witnessed on earth. Decked
with every ornament, it charmed the hearts of all spectators.' Thus did
those councillors, instructed by Dhritarashtra, speak of Varanavata, and
whilst they were so speaking, the Pandavas, O king, felt the desire of
going to that delightful town. And when the king (Dhritarashtra)
ascertained that the curiosity of the Pandavas had been awakened, the son
of Ambika addressed them, saying, 'These men of mine often speak of
Varanavata as the most delightful town in the world. If therefore, ye
children, ye desire to witness that festival, go to Varanavata with your
followers and friends and enjoy yourselves there like the celestials. And
give ye away pearls and gems unto the Brahmanas and the musicians (that
may be assembled there). And sporting there for some time as ye please
like the resplendent celestials and enjoying as much pleasure as ye like,
return ye to Hastinapura again.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Yudhishthira, fully understanding the motives
of Dhritarashtra and considering that he himself was weak and friendless,
replied unto the king, saying, 'So be it.' Then addressing Bhishma, the
son of Santanu, the wise Vidura, Drona, Valhika, the Kaurava, Somadatta,
Kripa, Aswatthaman, Bhurisravas, and the other councillors, and Brahmanas
and ascetics, and the priests and the citizens, and the illustrious
Gandhari, he said slowly and humbly, 'With our friends and followers we
go to the delightful and populous town of Varanavata at the command of
Dhritarashtra. Cheerfully give us your benedictions so that acquiring
prosperity, therewith we may not be touched by sin.' Thus addressed by
the eldest of Pandu's sons, the Kaurava chiefs all cheerfully pronounced
blessings on them, saying, 'Ye sons of Pandu, let all the elements bless
you along your way and let not the slightest evil befall you.'
"The Pandavas, having performed propitiatory rites for obtaining (their
share of) the kingdom, and finishing their preparations, set out for
Varanavata.'"
