SECTION CCLXV
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited an old narrative of what was
recited by king Vichakhy through compassion for all creatures. Beholding
the mangled body of a bull, and hearing the exceedingly painful groans of
the kine in a cow-slaying sacrifice, and observing the cruel Brahmanas
that gathered there for assisting at the ceremonies, that king[1195]
uttered these words, 'Prosperity to all the kine in the world.' When the
slaughter had commenced, these words expressive of a blessing (to those
helpless animals) were pronounced. And the monarch further said, 'Only
those that are transgressors of defined limits, that are destitute of
intelligence, that are atheists and sceptics, and that desire the
acquisition of celebrity through sacrifices and religious rites speak
highly of the slaughter of animals in sacrifices.[1196] The
righteous-souled Manu has applauded (the observance of) harmlessness in
all (religious) acts. Indeed, men slaughter animals in sacrifices, urged
by only the desire of fruit.[1197] Hence, guided by authority (in respect
of slaughter and abstention from slaughter or harmlessness) one
conversant (with the scriptures) should practise the true course of duty
which is exceedingly subtile. Harmlessness to all creatures is the
highest of all duties. Living in the vicinity of an inhabited place and
injuring oneself to the observance of rigid vows, and disregarding the
fruits indicated of Vedic acts, one should give up domesticity, adopting
a life of Renunciation. Only they that are mean are urged by the desire
of fruit.[1198] Reverentially mentioning sacrifices and trees and
sacrificial stakes, men do not eat tainted meat. This practice, however,
is not worthy of applause.[1199] Wine, fish, honey, meat, alcohol, and
preparations of rice and sesame seeds, have been introduced by knaves.
The use of these (in sacrifices) is not laid down in the Vedas. The
hankering after these arises from pride, error of judgment, and cupidity.
They that are true Brahmanas realise the presence of Vishnu in every
sacrifice. His worship, it has been laid down, should be made with
agreeable Payasa. (The leaves and flowers of) such trees as have been
indicated in the Vedas, whatever act is regarded as worthy and whatever
else is held as pure by persons of pure hearts and cleansed natures and
those eminent for knowledge and holiness, are all worthy of being offered
to the Supreme Deity and not unworthy of His acceptance.'[1200]
"Yudhishthira said, 'The body and all sorts of dangers and calamities are
continually at war with each other. How, therefore, will a person who is
totally free from the desire of harming and who on this account will not
be able to act, succeed in keeping up his body?'[1201]
"Bhishma said, 'One should, when able, acquire merit and act in such a
way that one's body may not languish and suffer pain, and that death may
not come.'"[1202]
