SECTION CLXXXVIII
"Bhrigu said, 'Brahman first created a few Brahmanas who came to be
called Prajapatis (lords of creation). Possessed of splendour equal to
that of the fire or the Sun, they were created out of the energy of that
First-born Being. The puissant Lord then created Truth, Duty, Penance,
the eternal Vedas, all kinds of pious acts, and Purity, for enabling
creatures to attain to heaven (by practising them). After this, the
Deities and the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Daityas, the Asuras, the
great snakes, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Serpents, the Pisachas, and
human beings with their four divisions, viz., Brahmanas, Kshatriyas,
Vaisyas, and Sudras, O best of regenerate ones, and all the other orders
of creatures that exist, were created. The complexion the Brahmanas
obtained was white; that which the Kshatriyas obtained was red; that
which the Vaisyas got was yellow; and that which was given to the Sudras
was black.'
"Bharadwaja said, 'If the distinction between the four orders (of human
beings) be made by means only of colour (attribute), then it seems that
all the four orders have been mingled together.[562] Lust, wrath, fear,
cupidity, grief, anxiety, hunger, toil, possess and prevail over all men.
How can men be distinguished by the possession of attributes? The bodies
of all men emit sweat, urine, faeces, phlegm, bile, and blood. How then
can men be distributed into classes? Of mobile objects the number is
infinite; the species also of immobile objects are innumerable. How,
then, can objects of such very great diversity be distributed into
classes?'
"Bhrigu said, 'There is really no distinction between the different
orders. The whole world at first consisted of Brahmanas. Created (equal)
by Brahman, men have, in consequence of their acts, become distributed
into different orders. They that became fond of indulging in desire and
enjoying pleasures, possessed of the attributes of severity and wrath,
endued with courage, and unmindful of the duties of piety and
worship,--these Brahmanas possessing the attribute of Passion,--became
Kshatriyas. Those Brahmanas again who, without attending to the duties
laid down for them, became possessed of both the attributes of Goodness
and Passion, and took to the professions of cattle-rearing and
agriculture, became Vaisyas. Those Brahmanas again that became fond of
untruth and injuring other creatures, possessed of cupidity,--engaged in
all kinds of acts for a living, and fallen away from purity of behaviour,
and thus wedded to the attribute of Darkness, became Sudras. Separated by
these occupations, Brahmanas, falling away from their own order, became
members of the other three orders. All the four orders, therefore, have
always the right to the performance of all pious duties and of
sacrifices. Even thus were the four orders at first created equal by
Brahman who ordained for all of them (the observances disclosed in) the
words of Brahma (in the Vedas). Through cupidity alone, many fell away,
and became possessed by ignorance. The Brahmanas are always devoted to
the scriptures on Brahma; and mindful of vows and restraints, are capable
of grasping the conception of Brahma. Their penances therefore, never go
for nothing. They amongst them are not Brahmanas that are incapable of
understanding that every created thing is Supreme Brahma. These, falling
away, became members of diverse (inferior) orders. Losing the light of
knowledge, and betaking themselves to an unrestrained course of conduct,
they take birth as Pisachas and Rakshasas and Pretas and as individuals
of diverse Mleccha species. The great Rishis who at the beginning sprang
into life (through Brahman's Will) subsequently created, by means of
their penances, men devoted to the duties ordained for them and attached
to the rites laid down in the Eternal Vedas. That other Creation,
however, which is eternal and undecaying, which is based upon Brahma and
has sprung from the Primeval God, and which has its refuge upon yoga, is
a mental one.'"[563]
 SECTION CLXXXIX
"Bharadwaja said, 'By what acts does one become a Brahmana? By what, a
Kshatriya? O best of regenerate ones, by what acts again does one become
a Vaisya or a Sudra? Tell me this, O foremost of speakers.'
"Bhrigu said, 'That person is called a Brahmana who has been sanctified
by such rites as those called jata and others; who is pure in behaviour;
who is engaged in studying the Vedas; who is devoted to the six
well-known acts (of ablutions every morning and evening, silent
recitation of mantras, pouring libations on the sacrificial fire,
worshipping the deities, doing the duties of hospitality to guests, and
offering food to the Viswedevas); who is properly observant of all pious
acts; who never takes food without having offered it duly to gods and
guests; who is filled with reverence for his preceptor; and who is always
devoted to vows and truth. He is called a Brahmana in whom are truth,
gifts, abstention from injury to others, compassion, shame,
benevolence,[564] and penance. He who is engaged in the profession of
battle, who studies the Vedas, who makes gifts (to Brahmanas) and takes
wealth (from those he protects) is called a Kshatriya. He who earns fame
from keep of cattle, who is employed in agriculture and the means of
acquiring wealth, who is pure in behaviour and attends to the study of
the Vedas, is called a Vaisya.[565] He who takes pleasure in eating every
kind of food, who is engaged in doing every kind of work, who is impure
in behaviour, who does not study the Vedas, and whose conduct is unclean,
is said to be a Sudra. If these characteristics be observable in a Sudra,
and if they be not found in a Brahmana, then such a Sudra is no Sudra,
and, such a Brahmana is no Brahmana. By every means should cupidity and
wrath be restrained. This as also self-restraint, are the highest results
of Knowledge. Those two passions (viz., cupidity and wrath), should, with
one's whole heart, be resisted. They make their appearance for destroying
one's highest good. One should always protect one's prosperity from one's
wrath, one's penances from pride; one's knowledge from honour and
disgrace; and one's soul from error. That intelligent person, O
regenerate one, who does all acts without desire of fruit, whose whole
wealth exists for charity, and who performs the daily Homa, is a real
Renouncer.[566] One should conduct oneself as a friend to all creatures,
abstaining from all acts of injury. Rejecting the acceptance of all
gifts, one should, by the aid of one's own intelligence, be a complete
master of one's passions. One should live in one's soul where there can
be no grief. One would then have no fear here and attain to a fearless
region hereafter. One should live always devoted to penances, and with
all passions completely restrained; observing the vow of taciturnity, and
with soul concentrated on itself; desirous of conquering the unconquered
senses, and unattached in the midst of attachments. All things that can
be perceived by the senses are called Manifest. All, however, that is
Unmanifest, that is beyond the ken of the senses, that can be ascertained
only by the subtile senses, should be sought to be known.[567] If there
be no faith, one will never succeed in attaining to that subtile sense.
Therefore, one should hold oneself in faith. The mind should be united
with Prana, and Prana should then be held within Brahma. By dissociating
oneself from all attachments, one may obtain absorption into Brahma.
There is no need of attending to any other thing. A Brahmana can easily
attain to Brahma by the path of Renunciation. The indications of a
Brahmana are purity, good behaviour and compassion unto all creatures.'"
