SECTION CLXXXII
"Yudhishthira said, 'Whence has this universe consisting of mobile and
immobile creatures been created? Whom does it go to when destruction sets
in? Tell me this, O grandsire! Indeed, by whom has this universe with its
oceans, its firmament, its mountains, its clouds, its lands, its fire,
and its wind, been created. How were all objects created? Whence this
division into separate orders of existence? Whence are their purity and
impurity, and the ordinances about virtue and vice? Of what kind is the
life of living creatures? Where also do they go who die. Tell us
everything about this and the other world.'
sacred words that Bhrigu said in reply to the questions of Bharadwaja.
Beholding the great Rishi Bhrigu blazing with energy and splendour,
seated on the Kailasa summit, Bharadwaja addressed him in the following
"Bharadwaja said, 'By whom was this world with its ocean, its firmament,
its mountains, its clouds, its lands, its fire, and its wind, created?
How were all creatures first created? Whence this distinction of castes?
Whence the purity and the impurity of (behaviour), and whence the
ordinances about virtue and vice, for living creatures? Of what kind is
the life of living creatures? Where do they go who die? It behoveth thee
to tell me everything about this and the other world.' Thus addressed
about his doubts by Bharadwaja, the illustrious and regenerate Rishi
Bhrigu who resembled Brahma itself, replied unto him, saying these words.'
"Bhrigu said, 'There is a Primeval Being, known to the great Rishis, of
the name of Manasa. He is without beginning and without end. That Divine
Being is incapable of being penetrated by weapons. He is without decay
and is Immortal. He is said to be Unmanifest. He is Eternal, Undecaying,
and Unchangeable. Through Him are creatures born and through Him they
die. He first created a Divine Being known by the name of Mahat.[549]
Mahat created Consciousness. That Divine Being created Space. That
puissant Being is the holder of all created objects. From Space was born
Water, and from Water were born Fire and Wind. Through the union of Fire
and Wind was born the Earth. Self-born Manasa then created a divine Lotus
pregnant with Energy. From that Lotus sprang Brahman, that Ocean of
Veda.[550] The Srutis say that as soon as born, that divine Being uttered
the words, 'I am He!' For this He came to be called by the name of
Consciousness. He has all created things for his body and He is their
Creator.[551] These five elements that we see are that Brahman of great
energy. The mountains are his bones. The earth is his fat and flesh. The
oceans are his blood. Space is his stomach. The Wind is his breath. Fire
is his energy. The rivers are his arteries and veins. Agni and Soma,
otherwise called the Sun and the Moon, are called his eyes. The firmament
above is his head. The earth is his two feet. The cardinal and subsidiary
points of the horizon are his arms. Without doubt, He is incapable of
being known and His Soul is inconceivable by even persons crowned with
ascetic success. The Divine Being, who pervades the whole universe, is
also known by the name of Ananta (Infinite). He lives in Consciousness,
and is incapable of being known by persons of uncleansed souls. Asked by
thee I have now told thee of Him who created Consciousness for evoking
into existence all created objects, and from whom this universe has
sprung.'
"Bharadwaja said, 'What is the extent of the firmament, of the points of
the horizon, of the surface of this earth, and of the Wind? By telling me
the truth, solve my doubts.'
"Bhrigu said, 'The sky thou seest above is Infinite. It is the abode of
persons crowned with ascetic success and of divine beings. It is
delightful, and consists of various regions. Its limits cannot be
ascertained. The Sun and the Moon cannot see, above or below, beyond the
range of their own rays. There where the rays of the Sun and the Moon
cannot reach are luminaries[552] which are self-effulgent and which
possess splendour like that of the Sun or the fire. Know this, O giver of
honours, that possessed of far-famed splendour, even these last do not
behold the limits of the firmament in consequence of the inaccessibility
and infinity of those limits. This Space which the very gods cannot
measure is fall of many blazing and self-luminous worlds each above the
other. Beyond the limits of land are oceans of water. Beyond water is
darkness. Beyond darkness is water again, and beyond the last is fire.
Downwards, beyond the nether regions, is water. Beyond water is the
region belonging to the great snakes. Beyond that is sky once more, and
beyond the sky is water again. Even thus there is water and sky
alternately without end. Even such are the limits of the Divinity
represented by water. The very gods are unable to ascertain limits of
fire and wind and water. The nature of fire, wind, water, and land, is
like that of space. They are distinguished through want of true
Knowledge. Sages read in diverse scriptures the limits that have been
declared of the three worlds and the ocean. Who is there, however, that
would set limits to what cannot be grasped by vision and what is
inaccessible (in all its parts)? If even it becomes possible to ascertain
the limits of the firmament which is the track of the gods and beings
crowned with ascetic success, it can never be possible to set limits to
that which is limitless and known by the name of the Infinite, to that
which correspond with the name by which it is known, viz., what has been
called the high-souled Manasa? When again His form is sometimes
contracted and sometimes expanded, how can any one else except one that
is equal to Him, be able to comprehend His limits? From the Lotus (of
which I have already spoken) was first created the Omniscient lord,
Brahman, endued with form, of essence comprised of Righteousness, and the
Creator of all mobile and immobile things.
"Bharadwaja said, 'If Brahman sprang from the Lotus, then it is the Lotus
that should be regarded as the First-born and not Brahman. Why, however,
is Brahma said to be the first? Do thou remove that doubt of mine.'
"Bhrigu said, 'The Earth it is that is called the Lotus. It was created
for giving a seat unto that form of Manasa which became Brahman. Reaching
up to heaven itself, the Sumeru became the pericarp of the Lotus.
Remaining within it, the puissant Lord of the Universe created all the
worlds.'"
