SECTION CCCLIX
"Bhishma said, 'Upon the expiry of the period of full fifteen days, the
Naga chief (Padmanabha), having finished his task of dragging the car of
Surya and obtained the latter's permission, came back to his own house.
Beholding him come back, his spouse approached him quickly for washing
his feet and dutifully discharging other tasks of a similar nature.
Having gone through these tasks, she took her seat by his side, The Naga
then, refreshed from fatigue, addressed his dutiful and chaste wife,
saying, I hope, my dear wife, that during my absence thou hast not been
unmindful of worshipping the deities and guests agreeably to the
instructions I gave thee, and according to the ordinances laid down in
the scriptures. I hope, without yielding to that uncleansed understanding
which is natural to persons of thy sex, thou hast, during my absence from
home, been firm in the observance of the duties of hospitality. I trust
that thou hast not transcended the barriers of duty and righteousness.'
"The wife of the Naga said, 'The duty of disciples is to wait with
reverence upon their preceptor accomplishing his bidding; that of
Brahmanas is to study the Vedas and bear them in memory; that of servants
is to obey the commands of their masters; that of the king is to protect
his people by cherishing the good and chastising the wicked. It is said
that the duties of a Kshatriya embrace the protection of all creatures
from wrong and oppression. The duty of the Sudra is to serve with
humility persons of the three regenerate orders, viz., Brahmanas,
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas. The religion of the house-holder, O chief of the
Nagas, consists in doing good to all creatures. Frugality of fare and
observance of vow in due order, constitute merit (for persons of all
classes) in consequence of the connection that exists between the senses
and the duties of religion.[1933] Who am I? Whence have I come? What are
others to me and what am I to others?--these are the thoughts to which
the mind should ever be directed by him who leads that course of life
which leads to Emancipation. Chastity and obedience to the husband
constitute the highest duty of the wife. Through thy instruction, O chief
of the Nagas, I have learnt this well. I, therefore, that am well
conversant with my duty, and that have thee for my husband--thee that art
devoted to righteousness,--O, why shall I, swerving from the path of
duty, tread along the path of disobedience and sin? During thy absence
from home, the adorations to the deities have not fallen off in any
respect. I have also, without the slightest negligence, attended to the
duties of hospitality towards persons arrived as guests in thy abode.
Fifteen days ago a Brahmana has come here. He has not disclosed his
object to me. He desires to have an interview with thee. Dwelling the
while on the banks of the Gomati he is anxiously expecting thy return. Of
rigid vows, that Brahmana is sitting there, engaged in the recitation of
the Vedas. O chief of the Nagas, I have made a promise to him to the
effect that I would despatch thee to him as soon as thou wouldst come
back to thy abode. Hearing these words of mine, O best of Nagas, it
behoveth thee to repair thither. O thou that hearest with thy eyes, it
behoveth thee to grant unto that regenerate person the object that has
brought him hither!'"[1934]
