SECTION CCCLX
"The Naga said, 'O thou of sweet smiles, for whom hast thou taken that
Brahmana? Is he really a human being or is he some deity that has come
hither in the disguise of a Brahmana? O thou of great fame, who is there
among human beings that would be desirous of seeing me or that would be
competent for the purpose? Can a human being, desiring to see me, leave
such a command with thee about dispatching me to him for paying him a
visit at the place where he is dwelling? Amongst the deities and Asuras
and celestial Rishis, O amiable lady, the Nagas are endued with great
energy. Possessed of great speed, they are endued again with excellent
fragrance. They deserve to be worshipped. They are capable of granting
boons. Indeed, we too deserve to be followed by others in our train. I
tell thee, O lady, that we are incapable of being seen by human
beings.'[1935]
"The spouse of the Naga chief said, 'Judging by his simplicity and
candour I know that that Brahmana is not any deity who subsists on air. O
thou of great wrath, I also know this, viz., that he reveres thee with
all his heart. His heart is set upon the accomplishment of some object
that depends upon thy aid. As the bird called Chataka, which is fond of
rain, waits in earnest expectation of a shower (for slaking its thirst),
even so is that Brahmana waiting in expectation of a meeting with
thee.[1936] Let no calamity betake him in consequence of his inability to
obtain a sight of thee. No person born like thee in a respectable family
can be regarded to remain respectable by neglecting a guest arrived at
his house.[1937] Casting off that wrath which is natural to thee, it
behoveth thee to go and see that Brahmana. It behoveth thee not to suffer
thyself to be consumed by disappointing that Brahmana. The king or the
prince, by refusing to wipe the tears of persons that come to him from
hopes of relief, incurs the sin of foeticide. By abstaining from speech
one attains to wisdom. By practising gifts one acquires great fame. By
adhering to truthfulness of speech, one acquires the gift of eloquence
and comes to be honoured in heaven. By giving away land one attains to
that high end which is ordained for Rishis leading the sacred mode of
life. By earning wealth through righteous means, one succeeds in
attaining to many desirable fruits. By doing in its entirety what is
beneficial for oneself, one can avoid going to hell. That is what the
righteous say.
"The Naga said, 'I had no arrogance due to pride. In consequence,
however, of my birth, the measure of my arrogance was considerable. Of
wrath, which is born of desire, O blessed lady, I have none. It has all
been consumed by the fire of thy excellent instructions. I do not behold,
O blessed dame, any darkness that is thicker than wrath. In consequence,
however, of the Naga having excess of wrath, they have become object of
reproach with all persons.[1938] By succumbing to the influence of wrath,
the ten-headed Ravana of great prowess, became the rival of Sakra and was
for that reason slain by Rama in battle. Hearing that the Rishi Rama of
Bhrigu's race had entered the inner apartments of their palace for
bringing away the calf of the Homa cow of their sire, the sons of
Karttaviryya, yielding to wrath, took such entry as an insult to their
royal house, and as the consequence thereof, they met with destruction at
the hands of Rama. Indeed, Karttaviryya of great strength, resembling the
Thousand-eyed Indra himself, in consequence of his having yielded to
wrath, was slain in battle by Rama of Jamadagni's race. Verily, O amiable
lady at thy words I have restrained my wrath, that foe of penances that
destroyer of all that is beneficial for myself. I praise my own self
greatly since, O large-eyed one, I am fortunate enough to own thee for my
wife,--thee that are possessed of every virtue and that hast
inexhaustible merits. I shall now proceed to that spot where the Brahmana
is staying. I shall certainly address that Brahmana in proper words and
he shall certainly go hence, his wishes being accomplished."
