
SECTION CLIV
(Hidimva-vadha Parva)
"Vaisampayana said, 'Not far from the place where the Pandavas were
asleep, a Rakshasa by name Hidimva dwelt on the Sala tree. Possessed of
great energy and prowess, he was a cruel cannibal of visage that was grim
in consequence of his sharp and long teeth. He was now hungry and longing
for human flesh. Of long shanks and a large belly, his locks and beard
were both red in hue. His shoulders were broad like the neck of a tree;
his ears were like unto arrows, and his features were frightful. Of red
eyes and grim visage, the monster beheld, while casting his glances
around, the sons of Pandu sleeping in those woods. He was then hungry and
longing for human flesh. Shaking his dry and grizzly locks and scratching
them with his fingers pointed upwards, the large-mouthed cannibal
repeatedly looked at the sleeping sons of Pandu yawning wistfully at
times. Of huge body and great strength, of complexion like the colour of
a mass of clouds, of teeth long and sharp-pointed and face emitting a
sort of lustre, he was ever pleased with human flesh. And scenting the
odour of man, he addressed his sister, saying, 'O sister, it is after a
long time that such agreeable food hath approached me! My mouth waters at
the anticipated relish of such food. My eight teeth, so sharp-pointed and
incapable of being resisted by any substance, I shall, today, after a
long time, put into the most delicious flesh. Attacking the human throat
and even opening the veins, I shall (today) drink a plentiful quantity of
human blood, hot and fresh and frothy. Go and ascertain who these are,
lying asleep in these woods. The strong scent of man pleaseth my
nostrils. Slaughtering all these men, bring them unto me. They sleep
within my territory. Thou needest have no fear from them. Do my bidding
soon, for we shall then together eat their flesh, tearing off their
bodies at pleasure. And after feasting to our fill on human flesh we
shall then dance together to various measures!'
"Thus addressed by Hidimva in those woods, Hidimva, the female cannibal,
at the command of her brother, went, O bull of Bharata's race, to the
spot where the Pandavas were. And on going there, she beheld the Pandavas
asleep with their mother and the invincible Bhimasena sitting awake. And
beholding Bhimasena unrivalled on earth for beauty and like unto a
vigorous Sala tree, the Rakshasa woman immediately fell in love with him,
and she said to herself, 'This person of hue like heated gold and of
mighty arms, of broad shoulders as the lion, and so resplendent, of neck
marked with three lines like a conch-shell and eyes like lotus-petals, is
worthy of being my husband. I shall not obey the cruel mandate of my
brother. A woman's love for her husband is stronger than her affection
for her brother. If I slay him, my brother's gratification as well as
mine will only be momentary. But if I slay him not, I can enjoy, with him
for ever and ever.' Thus saying, the Rakshasa woman, capable of assuming
form at will, assumed an excellent human form and began to advance with
slow steps towards Bhima of mighty arms. Decked with celestial ornaments
she advanced with smiles on her lips and a modest gait, and addressing
Bhima said, 'O bull among men, whence hast thou come here and who art
thou? Who, besides, are these persons of celestial beauty sleeping here?
Who also, O sinless one, is this lady of transcendent beauty sleeping so
trustfully in these woods as if she were lying in her own chamber? Dost
thou not know that this forest is the abode of a Rakshasa. Truly do I
say, here liveth the wicked Rakshasa called Hidimva. Ye beings of
celestial beauty, I have been sent hither even by that Rakshasa--my
brother--with the cruel intent of killing you for his food. But I tell
thee truly that beholding thee resplendent as a celestial, I would have
none else for my husband save thee! Thou who art acquainted with all
duties, knowing this, do unto me what is proper. My heart as well as my
body hath been pierced by (the shafts of) Kama (Cupid). O, as I am
desirous of obtaining thee, make me thine. O thou of mighty arms, I will
rescue thee from the Rakshasa who eateth human flesh. O sinless one, be
thou my husband. We shall then live on the breasts of mountains
inaccessible to ordinary mortals. I can range the air and I do so at
pleasure. Thou mayest enjoy great felicity with me in those regions.'
"Hearing these words of hers, Bhima replied, 'O Rakshasa woman, who can,
like a Muni having all his passions under control, abandon his sleeping
mother and elder and younger brothers? What man like me would go to
gratify his lust, leaving his sleeping mother and brothers as food for a
Rakshasa?'
"The Rakshasa woman replied, 'O, awaken all these, I shall do unto you
all that is agreeable to thee! I shall certainly rescue you all from my
cannibal brother?'
"Bhima then said, 'O Rakshasa woman, I will not, from fear of thy wicked
brother, awaken my brothers and mother sleeping comfortably in the woods.
O timid one, Rakshasas are never able to bear the prowess of my arms.
And, O thou of handsome eyes, neither men, nor Gandharvas, nor Yakshas
are able to bear my might. O amiable one, thou mayst stay or go as thou
likest, or mayst even send thy cannibal brother, O thou of delicate
shape. I care not.'"
