SECTION CCCLVI
"The host replied, 'I have heard these words of thine, that are so
consoling, with as much gratification as is felt by a person heavily
loaded when that load is taken off his head or shoulders. The
gratification that a traveller who has made a long journey on foot feels
when he lies down on a bed, that which a person feels when he finds a
seat after having stood for a long while for want of room, or that which
is felt by a thirsty person when he finds a glass of cool water, or that
which is felt by a hungry man when he finds savoury food set before him,
or that which a guest feels when a dish of desirable food is placed
before him at the proper time, or that which is felt by an old man when
after long coveting he gets a son, or that which is experienced by one
when meeting with a dear friend or relative about whom one had become
exceedingly anxious, resembles that with which I have been filled in
consequence of these words uttered by thee.[1931] Like a person with
upturned gaze I have heard what has fallen from thy lips and am
reflecting upon their import. With these wise words of thine thou hast
truly instructed me! Yes, I shall do what thou hast commanded me to do.
Thou mayst go tomorrow at dawn, passing the night happily with me and
dispelling thy fatigue by such rest. Behold, the rays of the divine Surya
have been partially dimmed and the god of day is proceeding in his
downward course!"
"Bhishma continued, 'Hospitably waited upon by that Brahmana, the learned
guest, O slayer of foes, passed that night in the company of his host.
Indeed, both of them passed the night happily, conversing cheerfully with
each other on the subject of the duties of the fourth mode of life, viz.,
Sannyasa (Renunciation). So engrossing was the nature of their
conversation that the night passed away as if it were day. When morning
came, the guest was worshipped with due rites by the Brahmana whose heart
had been eagerly set upon the accomplishment of what (according to the
discourse of the guest) was regarded by him to be beneficial for himself.
Having dismissed his guest, the righteous Brahmana, resolved to achieve
his purpose, took leave of his kinsmen and relatives, and set out in due
time for the abode of that foremost of Nagas, with heart steadily
directed towards it.'"
