SECTION CCCLXI
"Bhishma said, 'Having said these words unto his dear spouse, the chief
of the Nagas proceeded to that place where the Brahmana was sitting in
expectation of an interview with him. As he proceeded, he thought of the
Brahman and wandered as to what the business could be that had brought
him to the Naga city. Arrived at his presence, O chief of men, that
foremost of Nagas devoted by his nature to righteousness, addressed his
guest in sweet words, saying, O Brahmana do not yield to wrath. I address
thee in peace. Do not be angry. After whom hast thou come hither? What is
thy object? Coming to thee, I ask thee in affection, O regenerate one
whom dost thou adore in this retired spot on the banks of the Gomati!'
"The Brahmana said, 'Know that my name is Dharmaranya, and that I have
come hither for obtaining a sight of the Naga Padmanabha, O foremost of
all regenerate persons. With him I have some business. I have heard that
he is not at home and that, therefore, I am not now near his present
quarters. Like a Chataka waiting in expectation of the clouds, I am
waiting for him whom I regard as dear to me. For dispelling all evil from
him and bringing about what is beneficial to him, I am engaged in
reciting the Vedas till he comes and am in Yoga and passing my time
happily.'
"The Naga said, 'Verily, thy conduct is exceedingly good. Pious thou art
and devoted to the good of all righteous persons. O highly blessed
Brahmana, every praise is due to thee. Thou beholdest the Naga with eyes
of affection. I am that Naga, O learned Rishi, whom thou seekest. Do thou
command me, as thou wishest, in respect of what is agreeable to thee and
what I should do for thee. Having heard from my spouse that thou art
here, I have approached this spot, O regenerate one, for beholding thee.
When thou hast come hither, thou art certain to return hence with thy
object fulfilled. It behoveth thee, O foremost of regenerate persons, to
employ me to any task with all confidence. All of us have certainly been
purchased by thee with thy merits,[1939] since thou, disregarding what is
for thy own good, hast employed thy time in seeking the good of
ourselves.'
"The Brahmana said, 'O highly blessed Naga, I have come hither, moved by
the desire of obtaining a sight of thee. I have come here, ignorant as I
am with all things, for asking thee about something, O Naga, relying on
the Jiva-soul, I desire to attain to the Supreme Soul which is the end of
the Jiva-soul. I am neither attached to, nor dissociated from, the
world.[1940] Thou shinest with the effulgence of thy own merits covered
by pure fame,--with an effulgence that is as agreeable as that of the
moon. O thou that livest on air alone, do thou first answer a question
that I wish to put to thee. Afterwards I shall inform thee of the object
that has brought me hither!'"
