SECTION CCCLIV
"Bhishma said, 'In an excellent town called by the name of Mahapadma
which was situate on the southern side of the river Ganga, there lived,
O, best of men, a Brahmana of concentrated soul. Born in the race of
Atri, he was endued with amiability. All his doubts had been dispelled
(by faith and contemplation) and he was well conversant with the path he
was to follow. Ever observant of the religious duties, he had his anger
under perfect control. Always contented, he was the, complete master of
his senses. Devoted to penances and study of the Vedas, he was honoured
by all good men. He earned wealth by righteous means and his conduct in
all things corresponded with the mode of life he led and the order to
which he belonged. The family to which he belonged was large and
celebrated. He had many kinsmen and relatives, and many children and
spouses. His behaviour was always respectable and faultless. Observing
that he had many children, the Brahmana betook himself to the
accomplishment of religious acts on a large scale. His religious
observances, O king, had reference to the customs of his own
family.[1926] The Brahmana reflected that three kinds of duties have been
laid down for observances. There were first, the duties ordained in the
Vedas in respect of the order in which he was born and the mode of life
he was leading (viz., a Brahmana in the observance of domesticity). There
were secondly, the duties prescribed in the scriptures, viz., those
especially called the Dharmasastras. And, thirdly, there were those
duties that eminent and revered men of former times have followed though
not occurring either in the Vedas or the scriptures.[1927] Which of these
duties should I follow? Which of them, again, followed by me, are likely
to lead to my benefit? Which, indeed, should be my refuge?--Thoughts like
these always troubled him. He could not solve his doubts. While troubled
with such reflections, a Brahmana of concentrated soul and observant of a
very superior religion, came to his house as a guest. The house-holder
duly honoured his guest according to those ordinances of worship that are
laid down in the scriptures. Beholding his guest refreshed and seated at
ease, the host addressed him in the following words."
"The Brahmana said, 'O sinless one, I have become exceedingly attached to
thee in consequence of the sweetness of thy conversation. Thou hast
become my friend. Listen to me, for I wish to say something unto thee. O
foremost of Brahmanas, after making over the duties of a householder to
my son, I wish to discharge the highest duties of man. What, O regenerate
one, should be my path? Relying upon the Jiva soul, I wish to achieve
existence in the one (supreme) soul. Alas, bound up in the ties of
attachment, I have not the heart to actually set myself to the
accomplishment of that task.[1928] And since the best portion of my life
has passed away in the observance of domesticity, I desire to devote the
remnant of my life in earning the means of defraying the expenses of my
journey in respect of the time to come. The desire has arisen in my mind
of crossing the ocean of the world. Alas, whence shall I get the raft of
religion (with which to accomplish my purposes)? Hearing that even the
very deities are persecuted and made to endure the fruits of their acts,
and beholding the rows of Yama's standards and flags floating over the
heads of all creatures, my heart fails to derive pleasure from the
diverse objects of pleasure with which it comes into contact. Beholding
also that the Yatis depend for their sustenance upon alms obtained in
course of their rounds of mendicancy, I have no respect for the religion
of the Yatis as well. O my reverend guest, do thou, aided by that
religion which is founded upon the basis of intelligence and reason, set
me to the observance of a particular course of duties and
observance![1929]'
"Bhishma continued, 'Endued with great wisdom, the guest, hearing this
speech of his host which was consistent with righteousness, said these
sweet words in a melodious voice.'
"The guest said, 'I myself also am confounded with respect to this topic.
The same thought occupies my mind. I am unable to arrive at definite
conclusions. Heaven has many doors. There are some that applaud
Emancipation. Some regenerate persons praise the fruits attainable by the
performance of sacrifices. Some there are that take refuge in the forest
mode of life. Some, again, betake themselves to the domestic mode of
life. Some rely upon the merits attainable by an observance of the duties
of kings. Some rely upon the fruits of that culture which consists in
restraining the soul. Some think that the merits resulting from a dutiful
obedience to preceptors and seniors are efficacious. Some betake
themselves to restraints imposed on speech. Some by waiting dutifully
upon their mothers and fathers, have gone to heaven. Some have ascended
to heaven by practising the duty of compassion, and some by practising
Truth. Some rush to battle, and after laying down their lives, have
attained to heaven. Some, again, attaining to success by practising the
vow called Unccha, have betaken themselves to the path of heaven. Some
have devoted themselves to the study of the Vedas. Endued with
auspiciousness and wedded to such study, these men, possessed of
intelligence, with tranquil souls, and having their senses under complete
control, attain to heaven. Others characterised by simplicity and truth,
have been slain by men of wickedness. Endued with pure souls, such men of
truth and simplicity, have become honoured denizens of heaven. In this
world, it is seen, that men betake themselves to heaven, through a
thousand doors of duty, all standing wide open. My understanding has been
troubled by thy question, like a fleecy cloud before the wind.'"
