SECTION CCLXXXI
"Yudhishthira said, 'How great was the love of virtue possessed by Vritra
of immeasurable energy, whose knowledge was incomparable and whose
devotion to Vishnu was so great. The status occupied by Vishnu of
immeasurable energy is exceedingly difficult of apprehension. How, O
tiger among kings, could Vritra (who was an Asura) comprehended it (so
well)? Thou hast spoken of Vritra's acts. I too have listened to thee in
full faith. In consequence, however, of my seeing that one point (in thy
discourse) is unintelligible (and that, therefore, it requires
explanation), my curiosity has been roused for questioning thee
again.[1387] How, indeed, was Vritra, who was virtuous, devoted to
Vishnu, endued with knowledge of truth derivable from a just
comprehension of the Upanishads and Vedanta, vanquished by Indra, O
foremost of men? O chief of the Bharatas, resolve me this doubt. Indeed,
tell me, O tiger among kings, how Vritra was vanquished by Sakra![1388] O
grandsire, O thou of mighty arms, tell me in detail how the battle took
place (between the chief of the deities and the foremost of Asuras). My
curiosity to hear it is very great.'
Bhishma said, 'In days of yore, Indra, accompanied by the celestial
forces, proceeded on his car, and beheld the Asura Vritra stationed
before him like a mountain. He was full five hundred Yojanas in height, O
chastiser of foes, and three hundred Yojanas in circumference. Beholding
that form of Vritra, which was incapable of being vanquished by the three
worlds united together, the celestial became penetrated with fear and
full of anxiety. Indeed, suddenly seeing that gigantic form of his
antagonist, O king, Indra was struck with palsy in the lower extremities.
Then, on the eve of that great battle between the deities and the Asuras,
there arose loud shouts from both sides, and drums and other musical
instruments began to beat and blow. Beholding Sakra stationed before him,
O thou of Kuru's race, Vritra felt neither awe nor fear, nor was he
disposed to muster all his energies for the fight.[1389] Then the
encounter commenced, inspiring the three worlds with terror, between
Indra, the chief of the deities, and Vritra of high soul. The entire
welkin was enveloped by the combats of both sides with swords and axes
and lances and darts and spears and heavy clubs and rocks of diverse
sizes and bows of loud twang and diverse kinds of celestial weapons and
fires and burning brands. All the celestials with Grandsire at their
head, and all the highly-blessed Rishis, came to witness the battle, on
their foremost of cars; and the Siddhas also, O bull of Bharata's race,
and the Gandharvas, with the Apsaras, on their own beautiful and foremost
of cars, came there (for the same purpose). Then Vritra, that foremost of
virtuous persons, quickly overwhelmed the welkin and the chief of the
deities with a thick shower of rocks. The celestials, at this, filled
with rage, dispelled with their showers of arrows that thick downpour of
rocks showered by Vritra in battle. Then Vritra, O tiger among the Kurus,
possessed of mighty strength and endued with large powers of illusion,
stupefied the chief of the deities by fighting wholly with the aid of his
powers of illusion. When he of a hundred sacrifices, thus afflicted by
Vritra. was overcome by stupefaction, the sage Vasishtha restored him to
his senses by uttering Somanas.'[1390]
"Vasishtha said, 'Thou art the foremost of the gods, O chief of the
deities, O slayer of Daityas and Asuras! The strength of the three worlds
is in thee! Why, then, O Sakra, dost thou languish so! There, Brahman,
and Vishnu, and Siva, that lord of the universe, the illustrious and
divine Soma, and all the highest Rishis (stand, beholding thee)! Do not,
O Sakra, yield to weakness, like an ordinary person! Firmly resolved on
battle, slay thy foes, O chief of the celestials! There, that Master of
all the worlds, viz., the Three-eyed (Siva), the adored of all the
worlds, is eyeing thee! Cast off this stupefaction, O chief of the
celestials! There, those regenerate Rishis, headed by Vrihaspati, are
praising thee, for thy victory, in celestial hymns.'[1391]
"Bhishma continued, 'While Vasava of great energy was thus being restored
to consciousness by the high-souled Vasishtha, his strength became
greatly enhanced. The illustrious chastiser of Paka then, relying upon
his intelligence, had recourse to high Yoga and with its aid dispelled
these illusions of Vritra. Then Vrihaspati, the son of Angiras, and those
foremost of Rishis possessed of great prosperity, beholding the prowess
of Vritra, repaired to Mahadeva, and impelled by the desire of benefiting
the three worlds, urged him to destroy the great Asura. The energy of
that illustrious lord of the universe thereupon assumed the character of
a fierce fever and penetrated the body of Vritra the lord of
Asuras.[1392] The illustrious and divine Vishnu, adored of all the
worlds, bent upon protecting the universe, entered the thunderbolt of
Indra. Then Vrihaspati of great intelligence and Vasishtha of exceeding
energy, and all the other foremost of Rishis, repairing to Him of a
hundred sacrifices, viz., the boon-giving Vasava, the adored of all the
worlds, addressed him, saying, 'Slay Vritra, O puissant one, without
delay!'
"Maheswara said, 'Yonder, O Sakra, stands the great Vritra, accompanied
by a great force. He is the soul of the universe, capable of going
everywhere, endued with large powers of illusion, and possessed of great
celebrity. This foremost of Asuras is, therefore, incapable of being
vanquished by even the three worlds united together. Aided by Yoga, do
thou slay him, O chief of the deities. Do not disregard him. For full
sixty thousand years, O chief of the celestials, Vritra practised the
severest penances for obtaining strength. Brahman gave him the boons he
had solicited, viz., the greatness that belongs to Yogins, large powers
of illusion, excess of might, and superabundant energy. I impart to thee
my energy, O Vasava! The Danava has now lost his coolness. Do thou,
therefore, slay him now with thy thunderbolt!'
"Sakra said, 'Before thy eyes, O foremost of gods, I shall, through thy
grace, slay with my thunderbolt this invincible son of Diti.'
"Bhishma continued, 'When the great Asura or Daitya was overtaken by that
fever (born of Mahadeva's energy), the deities and the Rishis, filled
with joy, uttered loud cheers, At the same time drums, and conchs of loud
blare, and kettle drums and tabors began to beat and blow by thousands.
Suddenly all the Asuras became afflicted with the loss of memory. In a
trice, their powers of illusion also disappeared. The Rishis and the
deities, ascertaining the foe to be thus possessed, uttered the praises
of both Sakra and Isana, and began to urge the former (to make no delay
in destroying Vritra). The form that Indra assumed on the eve of the
encounter, while seated on his car and while his praises were being
hymned by the Rishis, became such that none could look at it without
awe.'"[1393]
