SECTION CCCLIII
"Sauti said, 'After Vaisampayana had explained to king Janamejaya in this
way the glory of Narayana, he began to discourse on another topic by
reciting the question of Yudhishthira and the answer that Bhishma gave in
the presence of all the. Pandavas and the Rishis as also of Krishna
himself. Indeed, Vaisampayana began by saying what follows.[1924]
"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast, O grandsire discoursed to us on the
duties appertaining to the religion of Emancipation. It behoveth thee now
to tell us what the foremost duties are of persons belonging to the
several modes of life!'[1925]
"Bhishma said, 'The duties ordained in respect of every mode of life are
capable, if well performed, of leading to heaven and the high fruit of
Truth. Duties which are as so many doors, to great sacrifices and gifts
and none of the practices inculcated by them are futile in respect of
consequence. One who adopts particular duties with steady and firm faith,
praises these duties adopted by him to the exclusion of the rest, O chief
of Bharata's race. This particular topic, however, on which thou wishest
me to discourse was in days of yore the subject of conversation between
the celestial Rishi Narada and the chief of the deities, viz., Indra. The
great Rishi Narada, O king, revered by all the world is a siddha i.e.,
his sadhana has met fulfilment. He wanders through all the worlds
unobstructed by anything, like the all-pervading wind itself. Once upon a
time he repaired to the abode of Indra. Duly honoured by the chief of the
deities, he sat close to his host. Beholding him seated at his ease and
free from fatigue, the lord of Sachi addressed him, saying,--O great
Rishi, is there any thing wonderful that has been beheld by thee, O
sinless one? O regenerate Rishi, crowned with ascetic success, thou
rovest, moved by curiosity, through the universe of mobile and immobile
objects, witnessing all things. O celestial Rishi, there is nothing in
the universe that is unknown to thee. Do thou tell me, therefore, of any
wonderful incident which thou may t have seen or heard of or felt. Thus
questioned, Narada, that foremost of speakers, O king, then commented to
recite unto the chief of the celestials the extensive history that
follows. Listen now to me as I recite that story which Narada told before
Indra. I shall narrate it in the same manner in which the celestial Rishi
had narrated it, and for the same purpose that he had in view!'"
