SECTION CCCLV
"The guest continued, 'For all that, O Brahmana, I shall endeavour to
instruct thee duly. Listen to me as I recite to thee that which I have
heard from my preceptor. In that place whence, in course of a former
creation, the wheel of righteousness was set in motion, in that forest
which is known by the name of Naimisha, and which is situate on the banks
of the Gomati, there is a city called after the Nagas. There, in that
region, all the deities, being assembled together, had in days of old
performed a grand sacrifice. There the foremost of earthly kings,
Mandhatri, vanquished Indra, the chief of the celestials. A mighty Naga,
of righteous soul, dwells in the city that stands in that region. That
great Naga is known by the name of Padmanabha or Padma. Walking in the
triple path (of acts, knowledge, and adoration) he gratifies all
creatures in thought, word, and deed. Reflecting upon all things with
great care, he protects the righteous and chastises the wicked by
adopting the quadruple policy of conciliation, provoking dissensions,
making gifts or bribes, and using force. Repairing thither, thou shouldst
put to him the questions thou wishest. He will show thee truly what the
highest religion is. That Naga is always fond of guests. Endued with
great intelligence, he is well conversant with the scriptures. He is
possessed of all desirable virtues the like of which are not to be
noticed in any other person. By disposition he is always observant of
those duties which are performed with or in water.[1930] He is devoted to
the study of the Vedas. He is endued with penances and self-restraint. He
has great wealth. He performs sacrifice, makes gifts, abstains from
inflicting injury and practises forgiveness. His conduct in all respects
is excellent. Truthful in speech and freed from malice, his behaviour, is
good and his senses are under proper control. He eats after feeding all
his guests and attendants. He is kind of speech. He has knowledge of what
is beneficial and what is simple and right and what is censurable. He
takes stock of what he does and what he leaves undone. He never acts with
hostility towards any one. He is always engaged in doing what is
beneficial to all creatures. He belongs to a family that is as pure and
stainless as the water of a lake in the midst of the Ganges.'"
