SECTION CCCLI
Janamejaya said, "O regenerate one, are there many Purushas or is there
only one? Who, in the universe, is the foremost of Purushas? What, again,
is said to be the source of all things?"
Vaisampayana said, In the speculations of the Sankhya and the Yoga
systems many Purushas have been spoken of, O jewel of Kuru's race. Those
that follow these systems do not accept that there is but one Purusha in
the universe.[1916] In the same manner in which the many Purushas are
said to have one origin in the Supreme Purusha, it may be said that this
entire universe is identical with that one Purusha of superior
attributes. I shall explain this now, after bowing to my preceptor Vyasa,
that foremost of Rishis, who is conversant with the soul, endued with
penances, self-restrained, and worthy of reverent worship. This
speculation on Purusha, O king, occurs in all the Vedas. It is well known
to be identical with Rita and Truth. The foremost of Rishis, viz., Vyasa,
has thought upon it. Having occupied themselves with reflection on what
is called Adhyatma, diverse Rishis, O king, having Kapila for their
first, have declared their opinions on the topic both generally and
particularly. Through the grace of Vyasa of immeasurable energy, I shall
expound to thee what Vyasa has said in brief on this question of the
Oneness of Purusha. In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
discourse between Brahma, O king, and the Three-eyed Mahadeva. In the
midst of the Ocean of milk, there is a very high mountain of great
effulgence like that of gold, known, O monarch, by the name of
Vaijayanta. Repairing thither all alone, from his own abode of great
splendour and felicity, the illustrious deity Brahma used very often to
pass his time, engaged in thinking on the course of Adhyatma. While the
four-faced Brahma of great intelligence was seated there, his son
Mahadeva, who had sprung from his forehead encountered him one day in
course of his wanderings through the universe. In days of yore, the
Three-eyed Siva endued with puissance and high Yoga, while proceeding
along the sky, beheld Brahma seated on that mountain and, therefore,
dropped down quickly on its top. With a cheerful heart he presented him
before his progenitor and worshipped his feet. Beholding Mahadeva
prostrated at his feet, Brahma took him up with his left hand. Having
thus raised Mahadeva up, Brahma, that puissant and one Lord of all
creatures, then addressed his son, whom he met after a long time, in
"The Grandsire said, 'Welcome art thou, O thou of mighty arms. By good
luck I see thee after such a long time come to my presence. I hope, O
son, that everything is right with thy penances and thy Vedic studies and
recitations. Thou art always observant of the austerest penances. Hence I
ask thee about the progress and well-being of those penances of thine!'
"Rudra said, 'O illustrious one, through thy grace, all is well with my
penances and Vedic studies. It is all right, again, with the universe. I
saw thy illustrious self a long while ago in thy own home of felicity and
effulgence. I am coming thence to this mountain that is now the abode of
thy feet.[1917] Great is the curiosity excited in my mind by this
withdrawal of thyself into such a lone spot from thy usual region of
felicity and splendour. Great must the reason be, O Grandsire, for such
an act on thy part. Thy own foremost abode is free from the pains of
hunger and thirst, and inhabited by both deities and Asuras, by Rishis of
immeasurable splendour, as also by Gandharvas and Apsaras. Abandoning
such a spot of felicity, thou residest alone in this foremost of
mountains. The cause of this cannot but be grave.
"Brahma said, 'This foremost of mountains, called Vaijayanta, is always
my residence. Here, with concentrated mind, I meditate on the one
universal Purusha of infinite proportions.'
"Rudra said, 'Self-born thou art. Many are the Purushas that have been
created by thee. Others again, O Brahma, are being created by thee. The
Infinite Purusha, however, of whom thou speakest, is one and single. Who
is that foremost of Purushas, O Brahma, that is being meditated by thee?
Great is the curiosity I feel on this point. Do thou kindly dispel the
doubt that has taken possession of my mind.
"Brahma said, 'O son, many are those Purushas of whom thou speakest. The
one Purusha, however, of whom I am thinking, transcends all Purushas and
is invisible. The many Purushas that exist in the universe have that one
Purusha as their basis; and since that one Purushas is said to be the
source whence all the innumerable Purushas have sprung, hence all the
latter, if they succeed in divesting themselves of attributes, become
competent to enter into that one Purusha who is identified with the
universe, who is supreme, who is the foremost of the foremost, who is
eternal, and who is himself divested of and is above all attributes."
