SECTION CCLXXXV
"Yudhishthira said, 'It behoveth thee, O sire, to tell me those names by
which Daksha, that progenitor of creatures, adored the great deity. O
sinless one, a reverent curiosity impels me to hear them.'
"Bhishma said, 'Hear, O Bharata, what the names, both secret and
proclaimed, are of that god of gods, that deity of extraordinary feats,
that ascetic of secret vows.'
"Daksha said, 'I bow to thee, O lord of all the gods to the destroyer of
the forces of the Asuras. Thou art the paralyser of the strength of the
celestial chief himself. Thou art adored by both gods and Danavas. Thou
art thousand-eyed, thou art fierce-eyed, and thou art three-eyed. Thou
art the friend of the ruler of the Yakshas. Thy hands and feet extend in
all directions to all places. Thy eyes also and head and mouth are turned
on all sides. Thy ears too are everywhere in the universe, and thou art
thyself everywhere, O Lord! Thou art shaft-eared, thou art large-eared,
and thou art pot-eared. Thou art the receptacle of the Ocean. Thy ears
are like those of the elephant, or of the bull, or like extended palms.
Salutations to thee! Thou hast a hundred stomachs, a hundred revolutions,
and a hundred tongues. I bow to thee! The utterers of the Gayatri sing
thy praises in uttering the Gayatri, and the worshippers of the Sun adore
thee in adoring the Sun. The Rishis regard thee as Brahmana, as Indra,
and as the (illimitable) firmament above. O thou of mighty form, the
Ocean and the Sky are thy two forms. All the deities dwell in thy form
even as kine dwell within the fold. In thy body I behold Soma, and Agni,
and the lord of the Waters, and Aditya, and Vishnu, and Brahmana, and
Vrihaspati. Thou, O illustrious one, art Cause and Effect and Action and
Instrument of everything unreal and real, and thou art Creation and
Destruction. I bow unto thee that art called Bhava and Sarva and Rudra. I
bow unto thee that art the giver of boons. I bow always unto thee that
art the Lord of all creatures. Salutations to thee that art the slayer of
Andhaka. Salutations to thee that hast three matted locks, to thee that
hast three heads, to thee that art armed with an excellent trident; to
thee that hast three eyes and that art, therefore, called Tryamvaka and
Trinetra! Salutations to thee that art the destroyer of the triple city!
Salutations to thee that art called Chanda, and Kunda; to thee that art
the (universal) egg and also the bearer of the (universal) egg; to thee
that art the holder of the ascetic's stick, to thee that hast ears
everywhere, and to thee that art called Dandimunda! Salutations to thee
whose teeth and hair are turned upwards, to thee that art stainless and
white, and that art stretched all over the universe; to thee that art
red, to thee that art tawny, and to thee that hast a blue throat!
Salutations to thee that art of incomparable form, that art of dreadful
form, and that art highly auspicious! To thee that art Surya, that hast a
garland of Suryas round thy neck, and that hast standards and flags
bearing the device of Surya. Salutations to thee that art the Lord of
spirits and ghosts, to thee that art bull-necked, and that art armed with
the bow; to thee that crushest all foes, to thee that art the
personification of chastisement, and to thee that art clad in leaves (of
trees) and rags. Salutations to thee that bearest gold in thy stomach, to
thee that art cased in golden mail, to thee that art gold-crested, to
thee that art the lord of all the gold in the world! Salutations to thee
that hast been adored, that deservest to be adored, and that art still
being adored; to thee that art all things, that devourest all things, and
that art the soul of all things! Salutations to thee that art the Hotri
(in sacrifices), that art the (Vedic) mantras uttered (in sacrifices),
and that ownest white flags and standards. Salutations to thee that art
the navel of the universe, that art both cause and effect in the form of
the five primal elements, and that art the coverer of all covers.
Salutations to thee that art called Krisanasa, that art of thin limbs,
and that art thin. Salutations to thee that art always cheerful and that
art the personification of confused sounds and voices. Salutations to
thee that art about to be stretched on the earth, that art already
stretched, and that standing upright. Salutations to thee that art fixed,
that art running, that art bald, and that bearest matted locks on thy
head. Salutation to thee that art fond of dancing and that strikest thy
puffed cheeks making thy mouth a drum.[1407] Salutations to thee that art
fond of lotuses that blow in rivers, and that art always fond of singing
and playing on musical instruments. Salutations to thee that art the
eldest-born, that art the foremost of all creatures, and that art the
crusher of the Asura Vala. Salutations to thee that art the Master of
Time, that art the personification of Kalpa; that art the embodiment of
all kinds of destruction, great and small. Salutations to thee that
laughest awfully and as loud as the beat of a drum, and that observest
dreadful vows! Salutations for ever to thee that art fierce, and that
hast ten arms. Salutations to thee that art armed with bones and that art
fond of the ashes of funeral pyres. Salutations to thee that art awful,
that art terrible to behold, and that art an observer of dreadful vows
and practices. Salutations to thee that ownest an ugly mouth, that hast a
tongue resembling a scimitar, and that hast large teeth. Salutations to
thee that art fond of both cooked and uncooked meat, and that regardest
the gourded Vina as highly dear. Salutations to thee that causest rain,
that helpest the cause of righteousness, that art identifiable with the
form of Nandi, and that art Righteousness' self! Salutations to thee that
art ever moving like wind and the other forces, that the controller of
all things, and that art always engaged in cooking all creatures (in the
cauldron of Time).[1408] Salutations to thee that art the foremost of all
creatures, that art superior, and that art the giver of boons.
Salutations to thee that hast the best of garlands, the best of scents,
and the best of robes, and that givest the best of boons to the best of
creatures. Salutations to thee that art attached, that art freed from all
attachments, that art of the form of Yoga contemplation, and that art
adorned with a garland of Akshas. Salutations to thee that art united as
cause and disunited as effects, and that art the form of shadow and of
light. Salutations to thee that art amiable, and that art frightful, and
that art exceedingly so. Salutations to thee that art auspicious, that
art tranquil, and that art most tranquil. Salutations to thee that art of
one leg and many eyes, and that hast only one head; to thee that art
fierce, to thee that art gratified with little offerings, and thee that
art fond of equity. Salutations to thee that art the artificer of the
universe, and that art ever united with the attribute of tranquillity.
Salutations to thee that bearest a foe-frightening bell, that art of the
form of the jingle made by a bell, and that art of the form of sound when
it is not perceptible by the ear.[1409] Salutations to thee that art like
a thousand bells jingled together, and that art fond of a garland of
bells, that art like the sound that the life-breaths make, that art of
the form of all scents and of the confused noise of boiling liquids.
Salutations to thee that art beyond three Huns, and that art fond of two
Huns. Salutations to thee that art exceedingly tranquil, and that hast
the shade of mountain trees for thy habitation.[1410] Thou art fond of
the heart-flesh of all creatures, that cleansest from all sins, and that
art of the form of sacrificial offerings. Salutations to thee that art of
the form of Sacrifice, that art the Sacrificer himself, that art the
Brahmana into whose mouth is poured the sacrificial butter, and that art
the fire into which is poured the butter inspired with mantras[1411]
Salutations to thee that art of the form of (sacrificial) Ritwijes, that
hast thy senses under control, that art made of Sattwa, and that hast
Rajas also in thy make. Salutations to thee that art of the banks of
Rivers, of Rivers themselves, and of the lord of all Rivers (viz., the
Ocean)! Salutations to thee that art the giver of food, that art the lord
of all food, and that art identical with him that takes food! Salutations
to thee that hast a thousand heads and a thousand feet-, to thee that
hast a thousand tridents uplifted in thy hands, and a thousand eyes!
Salutations to thee that art of the form of the rising Sun, and that art
of the form of a child, that art the protector of attendants all of whom
are of the form of children,[1412] and that art, besides, of the form of
children's toys. Salutations to thee that art old, that art covetous,
that art already agitated, and that art about to be agitated. Salutations
to thee that hast locks of hair marked by the current of the Ganges, and
that hast locks of hair resembling blades of Munja grass! Salutations to
thee that art gratified with the six (well-known) acts, and that art
devoted to the performance of the three acts.[1413] Salutations to thee
that hast assigned the duties of the respective modes of life.
Salutations to thee that deservest to, be praised in sounds, that art of
the form of sorrow, and that art of the form of deep and confused noise.
Salutations to thee that hast eyes both white and tawny, as also dark and
red. Salutations to thee that hast conquered thy vital breaths, that art
of the form of weapons, that rivest all things, and that art exceedingly
lean. Salutations to thee that always discoursest of Religion, Pleasure,
Profit, and Emancipation. Salutations to thee that art a Sankhya, that
art the foremost of Sankhyas, and that art the introducer of the
Sankhya-Yoga.[1414] Salutations to thee that hast a car and that art
without a car (for thy journeys).[1415] Salutations to thee that hast the
intersections of four roads for thy car; to thee that hast the skin of a
black deer for thy upper garments, and that hast a snake for thy sacred
thread. Salutations to thee that art Isana, that art of body as hard as
thunderbolt, and that art of green locks. Salutations to thee that art of
three eyes, that art the lord of Amvika, that art Manifest, and that art
Unmanifest.[1416] Salutations to thee that art Desire, that art the Giver
of all desires, that art the Killer of all desires, and that art the
discriminator between the gratified and the ungratified. Salutations to
thee that art all things, the Giver of all things, and the Destroyer of
all things. Salutations to thee that art the hues which appear in the
evening sky. Salutations to thee that art of mighty strength, that art of
mighty arms, that art a mighty Being, and that art of great effulgence.
Salutations to thee that lookest like a mighty mass of clouds, and that
art the embodiment of eternity! Salutations to thee that art of
well-developed body, that art of emaciated limbs, that bearest matted
locks on thy head, and that art clad in barks of trees and skins of
animals. Salutations to thee that hast matted locks as effulgent as the
Sun or the Fire, and that hast barks and skins for thy attire.
Salutations to thee that art possessed of the effulgence of a thousand
Suns, and that art ever engaged in penances. Salutations to thee that art
the excitement of Fever and that art endued with matted locks drenched
with the waters of the Ganges characterised by hundreds of eddies.
Salutations to thee that repeatedly revolvest the Moon, the Yugas, and
the clouds.[1417] Thou art food, thou art he who eats that food, thou art
the giver of food, thou art the grower of food, and thou art the creator
of food. Salutations to thee that cookest food and that eatest cooked
food, and that art both wind and fire! O lord of all the lords of the
gods, thou art the four orders of living creatures, viz., the viviparous,
the oviparous, the filth-born, and plants. Thou art the Creator of the
mobile and immobile universe, and thou art their Destroyer! O foremost of
all persons conversant with Brahma, they that are conversant with Brahma
regard thee as Brahma! The utterers of Brahma say that thou art the
Supreme source of Mind, and the Refuge upon which Space, Wind, and Light
rest. Thou art the Richs and the Samans, and the syllable Om. O foremost
of all deities, those utterers of Brahma that sing the Samans constantly
sing thee when they utter the syllables Hayi-Hayi, Huva-Hayi, and
Huva-Hoyi.[1418] Thou art made up of the Yajuses, of the Richs, and of
the offerings poured on the sacrificial fire. The hymns contained in the
Vedas and the Upanishads adore thee![1419] Thou art the Brahmanas and the
Kshatriyas, the Vaisyas, and the Sudras, and the other castes formed by
intermixture. Thou art those masses of clouds that appear in the sky;
thou art Lightning; and thou art the roar of thunder. Thou art the year,
thou art the seasons, thou art the month, and thou art the fortnight.
Thou art Yuga, thou art the time represented by a twinkle of the eye,
thou art Kashtha, thou art the Constellations, thou art the Planets, thou
art Kala. Thou art the tops of all trees, thou art the highest summits of
all mountains. Thou art the tiger among the lower animals, thou art
Garuda among birds, and thou art Ananta among snakes. Thou art the ocean
of milk among all oceans and thou art the bow among instruments for
hurling weapons. Thou art the thunder among weapons, and thou art Truth
among vows. Thou art Aversion and thou art Desire: thou art attachment
and thou art stupefaction (of judgment): thou art Forgiveness and thou
art Unforgiveness. Thou art Exertion, and thou art Patience: thou art
Cupidity: thou art Lust and thou art Wrath: thou art Victory and thou art
Defeat. Thou art armed with mace, and thou art armed with shaft: thou art
armed with the bow, and thou bearest the Khattanga and the Jharjhara in
thy hands. Thou art he who cuttest down and piercest and smitest. Thou
art he who leads (all creatures) and he who gives them pain and grief.
Thou art Righteousness which is marked by ten virtues; thou art Wealth or
Profit of every kind; and thou art Pleasure. Thou art Ganga, thou art the
Oceans, thou art the Rivers, thou art the lakes, and thou art the tanks.
Thou art the thin creepers, thou art the thicker creeping plants, thou
art all kinds of grass, and thou art the deciduous herbs. Thou art all
the lower animals and thou art the birds. Thou art the origin of all
objects and acts, and thou art that season which yields fruits and
flowers. Thou art the beginning and thou art the end of the Vedas; thou
art the Gayatri, and thou art Om. Thou art Green, thou art Red, thou art
Blue, thou art Dark, thou art of Bloody hue, thou art of the colour of
the Sun, thou art Tawny, thou art Brown, and thou art Dark blue.[1420]
Thou art without colour, thou art of the best colour, thou art the maker
of colours, and thou art without comparison. Thou art of the name of
Gold, and thou art fond of Gold. Thou art Indra, thou art Yama, thou art
the Giver of boons, thou art the Lord of wealth, and thou art Agni. Thou
art the Eclipse, thou art the Fire called Chitrabhanu, thou art Rahu, and
thou art the Sun. Thou art the fire upon which sacrificial butter is
poured. Thou art He who pours the butter. Thou art He in honour of whom
the butter is poured, thou art the butter itself that is poured, and thou
art the puissant Lord of all. Thou art those sections of the Brahmans
that are called Trisuparna, thou art all the Vedas; and thou art the
sections called Satarudriya in the Yajuses. Thou art the holiest of
holies, and the auspicious of all auspicious things. Thou animatest the
inanimate body. Thou art the Chit that dwellest in the human form.
Invested with attributes, thou becomest subject to Destruction. Thou art
Jiva, that is He who is never subject to destruction when uninvested with
attributes. Thou art full yet thou becomest liable to decay and death in
the form of the body which is Jiva's accompaniment. Thou art the breath
of life, and thou art Sattwa, thou art Rajas, thou art Tamas, and thou
art not subject to error. Thou art the breaths called Prana, Apana,
Samana, Udana, and Vyana. Thou art the opening of the eye and shutting of
the eye. Thou art the act of Sneezing and thou art the act of Yawning.
Thou art of red eyes which are ever turned inwards. Thou art of large
mouth and large stomach.[1421] The bristles on thy body are like needles.
The beard is green. Thy hair is turned upwards. Thou art swifter than the
swiftest. Thou art conversant with the principles of music both vocal and
instrumental, and fond of both vocal and instrumental music.[1422] Thou
art a fish roving in the waters, and thou art a fish entangled in the
net. Thou art full, thou art fond of sports, and thou art of the form of
all quarrels and disputes. Thou art Time, thou art bad time, thou art
time that is premature, and thou art time that is over-mature.[1423] Thou
art the killing, thou art the razor (that kills), and thou art that which
is killed. Thou art the auxiliary and thou art the adversary, and thou
art the destroyer of both auxiliaries and adversaries. Thou art the time
when clouds appear, thou art of large teeth, and thou art Samvartaka and
Valahaka.[1424] Thou art manifest in the form of splendour. Thou art
concealed in consequence of being invested with Maya (or illusion). Thou
art He who connects creatures with the fruits of their acts. Thou hast a
bell in thy hand. Thou playest with all mobile and immobile things (as
with thy toys). Thou art the cause of all causes. Thou art a Brahma (in
the form of Pranava), thou art Swaha; thou art the bearer of the Danda,
thy head is bald, and thou art he who has his words, deeds and thoughts
under control.[1425] Thou art the four Yugas, thou art the four Vedas,
thou art He from whom the four (Sacrificial) fires have flowed.[1426]
Thou art the Director of all the duties of the four modes of life. Thou
art the maker of the four Orders. Thou art always fond of dice. Thou art
cunning. Thou art the chief of the spirits distributed into ganas
(clans), and their ruler. Thou art adorned with red garlands and attired
in robes that are red. Thou sleepest on the mountain-breast, and thou art
fond of the red hue. Thou art the artisan; thou art the foremost of
artists; and it is thou from whom all arts have flowed. Thou art the
tearer of the eyes of Bhaga; thou art Fierce, and thou art He who
destroyed the teeth of Pushan.[1427] Thou art Swaha, thou art Swadha,
thou art Vashat, thou art Salutation's form, and thou art the words
Namas-Namas uttered by all worshippers. Thy observances and thy penances
are not known to others. Thou art Pranava; thou art the firmament
bespangled with myriads of stars. Thou art Dhatri, and Vidhatri, and
Sandhatri, Vidhatri, and the Refuge of all things in the form of the
Supreme cause, and thou art independent of all Refuge. Thou art
conversant with Brahma, thou art Penance, thou art Truth, thou art the
soul of Brahmacharya, and thou art Simplicity.[1428] Thou art the soul of
creatures, thou art the Creator of all creatures, thou art absolute
Existence, and thou art the Cause whence the Past, the Present, and the
Future, have sprung. Thou art Earth, thou art Firmament, and thou art
Heaven. Thou art Eternal, thou art Self-restrained, and thou art the
great god. Thou art initiated, and thou art not initiated. Thou art
forgiving; thou art unforgiving; and thou art the chastiser of all who
are rebellious. Thou art the lunar month, thou art the cycle of the Yugas
(i.e., Kalpa), thou art Destruction, and thou art Creation. Thou art
Lust, thou art the vital seed, thou art subtile, thou art gross, and thou
art fond of garlands made of Karnikara flowers. Thou hast a face like
that of Nandi, thou hast a face that is terrible, thou hast a handsome
face, thou hast an ugly face, and thou art without a face. Thou hast four
faces, thou hast many faces, and thou hast a fiery face when engaged in
battles. Thou art gold-stomached (i.e., Narayana), thou art (unattached
to all things like) a bird (unattached to the earth whence it derives its
food and to which it belongs), thou art Ananta (the lord of mighty
snakes), and thou art Virat (hugest of the huge). Thou art the destroyer
of Unrighteousness, thou art called Mahaparswa, thou art Chandradhara,
and thou art the chief of the spirit-clans. Thou lowedst like a cow, thou
wert the protector of kine, and thou hast the lord of bulls for thy
attendant.[1429] Thou art the protector of the three worlds, thou art
Govinda, thou art the director of the senses, and thou art incapable of
being apprehended by the senses. Thou art the foremost of all creatures,
thou art fixed, thou art immobile, thou tremblest not, and thou art of
the form of trembling![1430] Thou art incapable of being resisted, thou
art the destroyer of all poisons, thou art incapable of being borne (in
battle), and thou art incapable of being transcended, thou canst not be
made to tremble, thou canst not be measured, thou canst not be
vanquished, and thou art victory.[1431] Thou art of swift speed, thou art
the Moon, thou art Yama (the universal destroyer), thou bearest (without
flinching) cold and heat and hunger and weakness and disease. Thou art
all mental agonies, thou art all physical diseases, thou art the curer of
all diseases, and thou art those diseases themselves which thou curest.
Thou art the destroyer of my Sacrifice which had endeavoured to escape in
the form of deer. Thou art the advent and the departure of all diseases.
Thou hast a high crest. Thou hast eyes like lotus-petals. Thy habitation
is in the midst of a forest of lotuses. Thou bearest the ascetic's staff
in thy hands. Thou hast the three Vedas for thy three eyes. Thy
chastisements are fierce and severe. Thou art the destroyer of the egg
(whence the universe springs). Thou art the drinker of both poison and
fire, thou art the foremost of all deities, thou art the drinker of Soma,
thou art the lord of the Maruts.[1432] Thou art the drinker of Nectar.
Thou art the Master of the universe. Thou shinest in glory, and thou art
the lord of all the shining ones. Thou protectest from poison and death,
and thou drinkest milk and Soma. Thou art the foremost of the protectors
of those that have fallen off from heaven, and thou protectest him who is
the first of the deities.[1433] Gold is thy vital seed. Thou art male,
thou art female, thou art neuter. Thou art an infant, thou art a youth,
thou art old in years with thy teeth worn out, thou art the foremost of
Nagas, thou art Sakra, thou art the Destroyer of the universe, and thou
art its Creator. Thou art Prajapati, and thou art adored by the
Prajapatis, thou art the supporter of the universe, thou hast the
universe for thy form, thou art endued with great energy, and thou hast
faces turned towards all directions. The Sun and the Moon are thy two
eyes, and the Grandsire is thy heart. Thou art the Ocean. The goddess
Saraswati is thy speech and Fire and Wind are thy might. Thou art Day and
Night. Thou art all acts including the opening and the shutting of the
eye. Neither Brahman, nor Govinda, nor the ancient Rishis, are competent
to understand thy greatness, O auspicious deity, truly. Those subtile
forms which thou hast are invisible to us. Rescue me and, O, protect me
as the sire protects the son of his loins. O, protect one! I deserve thy
protection. I bow to thee, O sinless one! Thou, O illustrious one, art
full of compassion for thy devotees. I am always devoted to thee. Let him
be always my protector who stayeth alone on the other side of the ocean,
in a form that is difficult to be apprehended, and overwhelming many
thousands of persons![1434] I bow to that Soul of Yoga who is beheld in
the form of an effulgent Light by persons that have their senses under
control, that are possessed of the attribute of Sattwa, that have
regulated their breaths, and that have conquered sleep.[1435] I bow to
him who is endued with matted locks, who bears the ascetic's staff in his
hand, who is possessed of a body having a long abdomen, who has a
kamandalu tied to his back, and who is the Soul of Brahman. I bow to Him
who is the soul of water, in whose hair are the clouds, in the joints of
whose body are the rivers, and in whose stomach are the four oceans. I
seek the protection to Him who, when the end of the Yuga comes, devours
all creatures and stretches himself (for sleep) on the wide expanse of
water that covers the universe. Let him who entering Rahu's mouth
drinketh Soma in the night and who becoming Swarbhanu devoureth Surya
also, protect me![1436] The deities, who are mere infants and who have
all sprung from thee after Brahman's creation, enjoy their respective
shares (in sacrificial offerings). Let them (peacefully) enjoy those
offerings made with Swaha and Swadha, and let them derive pleasure from
those presents. I bow to them.[1437] Let those Beings that are of the
stature of the thumb and that dwell in all bodies, always protect and
gratify me.[1438] I always bow to those Beings who dwelling within
embodied creatures make the latter cry in grief without themselves crying
in grief, and who gladden them without themselves being glad. I always
bow to those Rudras who dwell in rivers, in oceans, in hills and
mountains, in mountain-caves, in the roots of trees, in cow-pens, in
inaccessible forests, in the intersections of roads, in roads, in open
squares, in banks (of rivers and lakes and oceans), in elephant-sheds, in
stables, in car-sheds, in deserted gardens and houses, in the five primal
elements, and in the cardinal and subsidiary directions. I bow repeatedly
unto them that dwell in the space amidst the Sun and the Moon, as also in
rays of the Sun and the Moon, and them that dwell in the nether regions,
and them that have betaken themselves to Renunciation and other superior
practices for the sake of the Supreme.[1439] I bow always unto them that
are unnumbered, that are unmeasured, and that have no form, unto those
Rudras, that is, that are endued with infinite attributes. Since thou, O
Rudra, art the Creator of all creatures, since, O Hara, thou art the
Master of all creatures, and since thou art the indwelling Soul of all
creatures, therefore wert thou not invited by me (to my Sacrifices).
Since thou art He who is adored in all sacrifices with plentiful gifts,
and since it is Thou that art the Creator of all things, therefore I did
not invite thee. Or, perhaps, O god, stupefied by thy subtile illusion I
failed to invite thee. Be gratified with me, blessed by thyself, O Bhava,
with me possessed by the quality of Rajas. My Mind, my Understanding, and
my Chitta all dwell in thee, O god!
"Hearing these adorations, that Lord of all creatures, viz., Mahadeva,
ceased (to think of inflicting further injuries on Daksha). Indeed,
highly gratified, the illustrious deity addressed Daksha, saying, 'O
Daksha of excellent vows, pleased have I been with these adorations of
thine. Thou needst not praise me more. Thou shalt attain to my
companionship. Through my grace, O progenitor of creatures, thou shalt
earn the fruit of a thousand horse-sacrifices, and a hundred Vajapeyas
(in consequence of this one incomplete sacrifice of thine).
"Once more, Mahadeva, that thorough master of words, addressed Daksha and
said unto him these words fraught with high consolation, 'Be thou the
foremost of all creatures in the world. Thou shouldst not, O Daksha,
entertain any feelings of grief for these injuries inflicted on thy
Sacrifice. It has been seen that in former Kalpas too I had to destroy
thy Sacrifice.[1440] O thou of excellent vows, I shall grant thee again
some more boons. Take them from me. Dispelling this cheerlessness that
overspreads thy face, listen to me with undivided attention. With the aid
of arguments addressed to reason the deities and the Danavas have
extracted from the Vedas consisting of six branches and from the system
of Sankhya and Yoga a creed in consequence of which they have practised
the austerest penances for many long years. The religion, however, which
I have extracted, is unparalleled, and productive of benefits on every
side. It is open to men in all modes of life to practise it. It leads to
Emancipation. It may be acquired in many years or through merit by
persons who have restrained their senses. It is shrouded in mystery. They
that are divested of wisdom regard it as censurable. It is opposed to the
duties laid down in respect of the four orders of men and the four modes
of life, and agrees with those duties in only a few particulars. They
that are well-skilled in the science of (drawing) conclusions (from
premises) can understand its propriety: and they who have transcended all
the modes of life are worthy of adopting it. In days of yore, O Daksha,
this auspicious religion called Pasupata had been extracted by me. The
proper observance of that religion produces immense benefits. Let those
benefits be thine, O highly blessed one! Cast off this fever of thy
heart.' Having said these words, Mahadeva, with his spouse (Uma) and with
all his attendants disappeared from the view of Daksha of immeasurable
prowess. He who would recite this hymn that was first uttered by Daksha
or who would listen to it when recited by another, would never meet with
the smallest evil and would attain to a long life. Indeed, as Siva is the
foremost of all the deities, even so is this hymn, agreeable with the
Srutis, is the foremost of all hymns. Persons desirous of fame, kingdom,
happiness, pleasure, profit, and wealth, as also those desirous of
learning, should listen with feelings of devotion to the recital of this
hymn. One suffering from disease, one distressed by pain, one plunged
into melancholy, one afflicted by thieves or by fear, one under the
displeasure of the king in respect of his charge, becomes freed from fear
(by listening or reciting this hymn). By listening to or reciting this
hymn, one, in even this earthly body of his, attains to equality with the
spirits forming the attendants of Mahadeva. One becomes endued with
energy and fame, and cleansed of all sin (through the virtue of this
hymn). Neither Rakshasas, nor Pisachas, nor ghosts, nor Vinayakas, create
disturbances in his house where this hymn is recited. That woman, again,
who listens to this hymn with pious faith, observing the while the
practices of Brahmacharya, wins worship as a goddess in the family of her
sire and that of her husband.[1441] All the acts of that person become
always crowned with success who listens or recites with rapt attention to
the whole of this hymn. In consequence of the recitation of this hymn all
the wishes one forms in one's mind and all the wishes one clothes in
words become crowned with fruition. That man obtains all objects of
enjoyment and pleasure and all things that are wished for by him, who,
practising self-restraint, makes according to due rites offerings unto
Mahadeva, Guha, Uma, and Nandi, and after that utters their names without
delay, in proper order and with devotion. Such a man, departing from this
life, ascends to heaven, and has never to take birth among the
intermediate animals or birds. This was said even by the puissant Vyasa,
the son of Parasara.'"
