4
Vaishampayana said, "King Yudhishthira, thus praised by the gods, the
Maruts and the Rishis, proceeded to that place where those foremost ones
of Kurus race were. He beheld Govinda endued with his Brahma-form. It
resembled that form of his which had been seen before and which,
therefore, helped the recognition. Blazing forth in that form of his, he
was adorned with celestial weapons, such as the terrible discus and
others in their respective embodied forms. He was being adored by the
heroic Phalguna, who also was endued with a blazing effulgence. The son
of Kunti beheld the slayer of Madhu also in his own form. Those two
foremost of Beings, adored by all the gods, beholding Yudhishthira,
received him with proper honours.
"In another place, the delighter of the Kurus beheld Karna, that foremost
one among all wielders of weapons, resembling a dozen Suryas in
splendour. In another part he beheld Bhimasena of great puissance,
sitting in the midst of the Maruts, and endued with a blazing form. He
was sitting by the side of the God of Wind in his embodied form. Indeed,
he was then in a celestial form endued with great beauty, and had
attained to the highest success. In place belonging to the Ashvinis, the
delighter of the Kurus beheld Nakula and Sahadeva, each blazing with his
own effulgence.
"He also beheld the princess of Pancala, decked in garlands of lotuses.
Having attained to Heaven, she was sitting there, endued with a form
possessed of solar splendour. King Yudhishthira suddenly wished to
question her. Then the illustrious Indra, the chief of the gods, spoke to
him, This one is Sree herself. It was for your sake that she took birth,
as the daughter of Drupada, among human beings, issuing not from any
mothers womb, O Yudhishthira, endued with agreeable perfume and capable
of delighting the whole world. For your pleasure, she was created by the
wielder of the trident. She was born in the race of Drupada and was
enjoyed by you all. These five highly blessed Gandharvas endued with the
effulgence of fire, and possessed of great energy, were, O king, the sons
of Draupadi and yourself.
"Behold Dhritarashtra, the king of the Gandharvas, possessed of great
wisdom. Know that this one was the eldest brother of thy sire. This one
is thy eldest brother, the son of Kunti, endued with effulgence of fire.
The son of Surya, thy eldest brother, the foremost of men, even this one
was known as the son of Radha. He moves in the company of Surya. Behold
this foremost of Beings. Among the tribes of the Saddhyas, the gods, the
Viswedevas, and the Maruts, behold, O king of kings, the mighty
car-warriors of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, viz., those heroes having
Satyaki for their first, and those mighty ones among the Bhojas. Behold
the son of Subhadra, invincible in battle, now staying with Soma. Even he
is the mighty bowman Abhimanyu, now endued with the gentle effulgence of
the great luminary of the night. Here is the mighty bowman Pandu, now
united with Kunti and Madri. Thy sire frequently comes to me on his
excellent car. Behold the royal Bhishma, the son of Santanu, now in the
midst of the Vasus. Know that this one by the side of Brihaspati is thy
preceptor Drona. These and other kings, O son of Pandu, who had warred on
thy side now walk with the Gandharvas or Yakshas or other sacred beings.
Some have attained to the status of Guhyakas, O king. Having cast off
their bodies, they have conquered Heaven by the merit they had acquired
through word, thought and deed.
4
Vaishampayana said, "Hearing this intelligence, O monarch, Dhritarashtra
the son of Ambika, feeling the acme of grief, regarded Suyodhana to be
already dead. Exceedingly agitated, the king fell down on the Earth like
an elephant deprived of its senses. When that foremost of the monarchs,
greatly agitated, fell down on the Earth, loud wails were uttered, O best
of the Bharatas, by the ladies (of the royal household). That noise was
so loud that it seemed to fill the entire Earth. Immersed in a deep ocean
of woe, the Bharata ladies, with hearts exceedingly agitated and scorched
by grief, wept aloud. Approaching the king, Gandhari, O bull of Bharata's
race, and the other ladies of the household, all fell down on the earth,
deprived of their senses. Then Sanjaya, O king, began to comfort those
ladies stricken with grief, bathed in tears, and reft of consciousness.
Comforted (by Sanjaya), those ladies began to tremble repeatedly like a
plantain grove shaken by the wind. Vidura also, sprinkling that
descendant of Kuru with water, began to comfort the puissant monarch who
had knowledge only for his eye. Slowly restored to consciousness, and
understanding that the ladies of the household were there, the king, O
monarch, remained perfectly silent for some time like one reft of reason.
Having reflected then for some time, and repeatedly drawn long breaths,
the king censured his own sons and applauded the Pandavas. Censuring also
his own intelligence and that of Shakuni the son of Subala, the king,
having reflected for a long time, began to tremble repeatedly.
Controlling his mind once more, the king, with sufficient fortitude,
questioned his charioteer Sanjaya the son of Gavalgana.
"Dhritarashtra said, 'I have heard, O Sanjaya, all that thou hast said.
Hath my son Duryodhana, O Suta, who is ever desirous of victory, already
gone to Yama's abode, despairing of success? Tell me truly, O Sanjaya,
all this even if thou wilt have to repeat it!'"
Vaishampayana continued, "Thus addressed by the king, O Janamejaya, the
Suta said unto him, 'The mighty car-warrior Vaikartana, O monarch, hath
been slain with his sons and brothers, and other Suta warriors, all of
whom were mighty bowmen ready to lay down their lives in battle!
Duhshasana also hath been slain by the renowned son of Pandu. Indeed, his
blood also hath been, from wrath, drunk by Bhimasena in battle!'"
