6
Janamejaya said, "O holy one, according to what rites should the learned
listen to the Bharata? What are the fruits (acquirable by hearing it)?
What deities are to be worshipped during the several paranas? What should
be the gifts that one should make, O holy one, at every parva or sacred
day (during the continuance of the recitation)? What should be the
qualification of the reciter to be engaged? Tell me all this!
Vaishampayana said, "Hear, O king, what the procedure is, and what the
fruits, O Bharata, are that will spring from ones listening (to a
recitation of the Bharata). Even this, O king of kings, is what thou
askest me. The deities of Heaven, O ruler of Earth, came to this world
for sport. Having achieved their task, they ascended once more to Heaven.
Listen to what I shall tell thee in brief. In the Mahabharata is to be
found the births of Rishis and deities on the Earth. In this treatise,
called Bharata, O foremost one of Bharatas race, are to be seen in one
place the eternal Rudras, the Saddhyas, and the Viswedevas; the Adityas,
the two deities named the Ashvinis, the regents of the World, the great
Rishis, the Guhyakas, the Gandharvas, the Nagas, the Vidyadharas, the
Siddhas, the diverse deities, the Self-born visible in a body, with many
ascetics; the Hills and Mountains, Oceans and Seas and Rivers, the
diverse tribes of Apsaras; the Planets, the Years, the Half-years, and
the Seasons; and the whole universe of mobile and immobile entities, with
all the gods and Asuras.
"Hearing their celebrity, and in consequence of a recitation of their
names and achievements, a man that has committed even terrible sins, will
be cleansed. Having, with a concentrated soul and cleansed body, heard
this history duly, from the beginning, and having reached its end, one
should make Sraddha offerings, O Bharata, unto those (foremost of persons
who have been mentioned in it). Unto the Brahmanas also, O chief of
Bharatas race, should, with due devotion and according to ones power, be
made large gifts and diverse kinds of gems, and kine, and vessels of
white brass for milking kine, and maidens decked with every ornament, and
possessed of every accomplishment suited to enjoyment, as also diverse
kinds of conveyances, beautiful mansions, plots of land, and cloths.
Animals also should be given, such as horses and elephants in rage, and
beds, and covered conveyances borne on the shoulders of men, and
well-decked cars. Whatever objects occur in the house, of the foremost
kind, whatever wealth of great value occurs in it, should be given away
unto Brahmanas. Indeed, one should give away ones own self, wives, and
children.
"One desirous of hearing the Bharata, should hear it without a doubting
heart, with cheerfulness and joy; and as, he proceeds listening to its
recitation, he should according to the extent of his power, make gifts
with great devotion.
"Hear how a person that is devoted to truth and sincerity, that is
self-restrained, pure (in mind), and observant of those acts which lead
to purity of body, that is endued with faith, and that has subjugated
wrath, attains to success (in the matter of a recitation of the Bharata).
He should appoint as reciter one that is pure (of body), that is endued
with good and pious conduct, that should be robed in white, that should
have a complete mastery over his passions, that is cleansed of all
offences, that is conversant with every branch of learning, that is
endued with faith, that is free from malice, that is possessed of
handsome features, that is blessed, self-restrained, truthful, and with
passions under control, and that is beloved of all for the gifts he makes
and the honours of which he is the possessor.
"The reciter, seated at his ease, free from all bodily complaints, and
with rapt attention, should recite the text without too much slowness,
without a labouring voice, without being fast or quick, quietly, with
sufficient energy, without confusing the letters and words together, in a
sweet intonation and with such accent and emphasis as would indicate the
sense giving full utterance to the three and sixty letters of the
alphabet from the eight places of their formation. Bowing unto Narayana,
and to Nara, that foremost of men, as also to the goddess Sarasvati,
should the word Jaya be uttered.
"Listening to the Bharata, O king, when recited, O thou of Bharatas race,
by a reader of this kind, the listener, observant of vows all the while
and cleansed by purificatory rites, acquires valuable fruits. When the
first Parana is reached, the hearer should gratify Brahmanas with
presents of all desirable objects. By doing this, one obtains the fruits
of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. He acquires a large (celestial) car teeming
with diverse orders of Apsaras (that wait upon him). With a glad heart,
and with the deities in his company, he proceeds to Heaven, his heart
rapt (in felicity).
"When the second Parana is reached, the hearer acquires the fruits of the
Atiratra vow. Indeed, he ascends a celestial car made entirely of
precious gems. Wearing celestial garlands and robes, and decked with
celestial unguents and always shedding a celestial fragrance around, he
receives high honours in Heaven.
"When the third Parana is reached, he acquires the fruits of the
Dwadasaha vow. Indeed be resides in Heaven for myriads of years, like a
god.
"At the fourth Parana he acquires the fruits of the Vajapeya sacrifice.
"At the fifth, twice those fruits are his. Ascending a celestial car that
resembles the rising sun or a blazing fire, and with the deities for his
companions, he goes to Heaven and sports in felicity for myriads of years
in the abode of Indra.
"At the sixth Parana, twice, and at the seventh, thrice those fruits
become his. Ascending a celestial car that resembles the summit of the
Kailasa mountains (in beauty), that is equipt with an altar made of
stones of lapis lazuli and other precious gems, that is surrounded by
beautiful objects of diverse kinds, that is decked with gems and corals,
that moves at the will of the rider, and that teems with waiting Apsaras,
he roves through all the regions of felicity, like a second deity of the
Sun.
"At the eight Parana, he acquires the fruits of the Rajasuya sacrifice.
He ascends a car as beautiful as the rising moon, and unto which are
yoked steeds white as the rays of the moon and endued with the speed of
thought. He is served by women of the foremost beauty and whose faces are
more charming than the moon. He hears the music of the garlands that
encircle their waists and the Nupuras encircling their ankles. Sleeping
with his head resting on the laps of women of transcendent beauty, he
awakes greatly refreshed.
"At the ninth Parana, he acquires, O Bharata, the fruits of that foremost
of sacrifices, viz., the Horse-sacrifice. Ascending on a car equipt with
a chamber consisting of a top supported by columns of gold, furnished
with a seat made of stones of lapis lazuli, with windows on all sides
made of pure gold, and teeming with waiting Apsaras and Gandharvas and
other celestials, he blazes forth in splendour. Wearing celestial
garlands and robes, and decked with celestial unguents, he sports in
bliss, with deities for his companions, in Heaven, like a second deity
himself.
"Reaching the tenth Parana and gratifying Brahmanas, he acquires a car
which tinkles with innumerable bells, which is decked with flags and
banners, which is equipt with a seat made of precious gems, which has
many arches made of lapis lazuli, which has a net-work of gold all round,
which has turrets made of corals, which is adorned with Gandharvas and
Apsaras well-skilled in singing, and which is fit for the residence of
the Righteous. Crowned with a diadem of the complexion of fire, decked
with ornaments of gold, his person smeared with celestial sandalpaste,
garnished with celestial wreaths, he roves through all celestial regions,
enjoying all celestial objects of enjoyment, and endued with great
splendour, through the grace of the deities.
"Thus accoutred, he receives high honours in Heaven for many long years.
With Gandharvas in his company, for full 21,000 years, he sports in bliss
with Indra himself in abode of Indra. He roves at pleasure every day
through the diverse regions of the gods, riding on celestial cars and
conveyances, and surrounded by celestial damsels of transcendent beauty.
He is able to go to the abode of the solar deity, of the lunar deity, and
of Siva, O king. Indeed, he succeeds in living in the same region with
Vishnu himself. It is even so, O monarch. There is no doubt in this. A
person listening with faith, becomes even so. My preceptor has said this.
Unto the reciter should be given all such objects as he may wish.
Elephants and steeds and cars and conveyances, especially animals and the
vehicles they draw, a bracelet of gold, a pair of ear-rings, sacred
threads, beautiful robes, and perfumes in especial (should be given). By
worshipping him as a deity one attains to the regions of Vishnu.
"After this I shall declare what should be given away, as each parva is
reached of the Bharata in course of its recitation, unto brahmanas, after
ascertaining their birth, country, truthfulness, and greatness, O chief
of Bharatas race, as also their inclination for piety, and unto
kshatriyas too, O king, after ascertainment of similar particulars.
Causing the Brahmanas to utter benedictions, the business of recitation
should be begun. When a parva is finished, the brahmanas should be
worshipped to the best of ones power. At first, the reciter, clad in good
robes and smeared with perfumed paste, should, O king, be duly fed with
honey and frumenty of the best kind.
"When the Astika-parva is being recited, brahmanas should be entertained
with fruits and roots, and frumenty, and honey and clarified butter, and
rice boiled with raw sugar.
"When the Sabha-parva is being recited, brahmanas should be fed with
habisya along with apupas and pupas and modakas, O king.
"When the Aranyaka-parva is being recited, superior brahmanas should be
fed with fruits and roots.
"When the Arani-parva is reached, water-pots full of water should be
given away. Many superior kinds of delicious food, also rice and fruits
and roots, and food possessed of every agreeable attribute, should be
presented unto the brahmanas.
"During the recitation of the Virata-parva diverse kinds of robes should
be given away; and during that of the Udyoga-parva, O chief of the
Bharatas, the twice-born ones, after being decked with perfumes and
garlands, should be entertained with food possessed of every agreeable
quality.
"During the recitation of the Bhishma-parva, O king of kings, after
giving them excellent cars and conveyances, food should be given that is
pure and well-cooked and possessed of every desirable attribute.
"During the Drona-parva food of very superior kind should be given to
learned brahmanas, as also beds, O monarch, and bows and good swords.
"During the recitation of the Karna-parva, food of the foremost kind,
besides being pure and well-cooked, should be presented unto the
brahmanas by the house-holder with rapt mind.
"During the recitation of the Shalya-parva, O king of kings, food with
confectionery and rice boiled with raw sugar, as also cakes of wheat and
soothing and nutritive viands and drinks should be presented.
"During the recitation of the Gada-parva, brahmanas should be entertained
with food mixed with mudga.
"During the recitation of the Stri-parva, foremost of brahmanas should be
entertained with gems and precious stones; and during the recitation of
the Aishika-parva, rice boiled in ghee should first be given, and then
food pure and well-cooked, and possessed of every desirable quality,
should be presented.
"During the recitation of the Shanti-parva, the brahmanas should be fed
with havisya.
"When the Asvamedhika-parva is reached, food possessed of every agreeable
quality should be given; and when the Asramvasika is reached, brahmanas
should be entertained with havisya.
"When the Mausala is reached, scents and garlands possessed of agreeable
qualities should be given away.
"During the Mahaprasthanika, similar presents should be made, possessed
of every quality of an agreeable kind.
"When the Svarga-parva is reached, the brahmanas should be fed with
havisya.
"Upon the conclusion of the Harivansa, a 1,000 brahmanas should be fed.
Unto each of them should be presented a cow accompanied with a piece of
gold. Half of this should be presented to each poor man, O king.
"Upon the conclusion of all the Parvas, the house-holder of wisdom should
give unto the reciter a copy of the Mahabharata with a piece of gold.
When the Harivansa Parva is being recited, Brahmanas should be fed with
frumenty at each successive Parana, O king. Having finished all the
Parvas, one versed in the scriptures, robing himself in white, wearing
garlands, decked with ornaments, and properly purified, should place a
copy of the Mahabharata on an auspicious spot and cover it with a piece
of silken cloth and worship it, according to due rites, with scents and
garlands, offering each at a time. Indeed, O king, the several volumes of
this treatise should be worshipped by one with devotion and concentrated
mind. Offerings should be made unto them of diverse kinds of food and
garlands and drinks and diverse auspicious articles of enjoyment. Gold
and other precious metals should be given as Dakshina. The names should
then be taken of all the deities as also of Nara and Narayana. Then,
adorning the persons of some foremost of Brahmanas with scents and
garlands, they should be gratified with diverse kinds of gifts of
enjoyable and very superior or costly articles. By doing this, one
attains to the merits of the Atiratra sacrifice. Indeed, at each
successive Parva, he acquires the merits that attach to the performance
of a sacrifice. The reciter, O chief of the Bharatas, should be possessed
of learning and endued with a good voice and a clear utterance respecting
both letters and words. Even such a man should, O chief of the Bharatas,
recite the Bharata. After entertaining a number of foremost Brahmanas,
presents should be made unto them according to the ordinances. The
reciter also, O chief of the Bharatas, should be decked with ornaments
and fed sumptuously. The reciter being gratified, the house-holder
attains to an excellent and auspicious contentment. If the Brahmanas are
gratified, all the deities are gratified. After this, O chief of the
Bharatas, Brahmanas should be duly entertained with diverse kinds of
enjoyable articles and superior things.
"I have thus indicated the ordinances, O foremost of men, (about the
manner of reciting these scriptures) in answer to thy enquiries. Thou
shouldst observe them with faith. In listening to a recitation of the
Bharata and at each Parana, O best of kings, one that desires to attain
to the highest good should listen with the greatest care and attention.
One should listen to the Bharata every day. One should proclaim the
merits of the Bharata every day. One in whose house the Bharata occurs,
has in his hands all those scriptures which are known by the name of
Jaya. The Bharata is cleansing and sacred. In the Bharata are diverse
topics. The Bharata is worshipped by the very gods. The Bharata is the
highest goal. The Bharata, O chief of the Bharatas, is the foremost of
all scriptures. One attains to Emancipation through the Bharata. This
that I tell thee is certain truth. One that proclaims the merits of this
history called the Mahabharata, of the Earth, of the cow, of Sarasvati
(the goddess of speech), of Brahmanas, and of Keshava, has never to
languish.
"In the Vedas, in the Ramayana, and in the sacred Bharata, O chief of
Bharatas race, Hari is sung in the beginning, the middle, and at the end.
That in which occur excellent statements relating to Vishnu, and the
eternal Srutis, should be listened to by men desirous of attaining to the
highest goal. This treatise is sanctifying. This is the highest indicator
as regards duties; this is endued with every merit. One desirous of
prosperity should listen to it. Sins committed by means of the body, by
means of words, and by means of the mind, are all destroyed (through
listening to the Bharata) as Darkness at sunrise. One devoted to Vishnu
acquires (through this) that merit which is acquired by listening to the
eighteen Puranas. There is no doubt in this. Men and women (by listening
to this) would certainly attain to the status of Vishnu. Women desirous
of having children should certainly listen to this which proclaims the
fame of Vishnu. One desirous of attaining to the fruits that attach to a
recitation of the Bharata should, according to ones power, give unto the
reciter Dakshina, as also an honorarium in gold. One desirous of ones own
good should give unto the reciter a Kapila cow with horns cased in gold
and accompanied by her calf, covered with a cloth. Ornaments, O chief of
Bharatas race, for the arms, as also those for the ears, should be given.
Besides these, other kinds of wealth should be presented. Unto the
reciter, O king of men, gift of land should be made. No gift like that of
land could ever be or will be. The man that listens (to the Bharata) or
that recites it to other people, becomes cleansed of all his sins and
attains at last to the status of Vishnu. Such a man rescues his ancestors
to the eleventh degree, as also himself with his wives and sons, O chief
of Bharatas race. After concluding a recitation of the Bharata, one
should, O king, perform a Homa with all its ten parts.
"I have thus, O chief of men, told everything in thy presence. He that
listens with devotion to this Bharata from the beginning becomes cleansed
of every sin even if he be guilty of Brahmanicide or the violation of his
preceptors bed, or even if he be a drinker of alcohol or a robber of
other peoples wares, or even if he be born in the Chandala order.
Destroying all his sins like the maker of day destroying darkness, such a
man, without doubt, sports in felicity in the region of Vishnu like
Vishnu himself."
The End of the Svargarohanika-parva
The Eighteen parvas of the Mahabharata are thus complete
6
"Dhritarashtra said, 'Thou hast, O son, mentioned the names of those of
my side that have been slain in battle by the Pandavas. Tell me now, O
Sanjaya, the names of those amongst the Pandavas that have been slain by
the people of my side!'
"Sanjaya said, 'The Kuntis possessed of great prowess in battle, endued
with great energy and great might, have been slain in fight by Bhishma,
with all their kinsmen and advisers. The Narayanas, the Valabhadras, and
hundreds of other heroes, all devoted (to the Pandavas) have been slain
in battle by the heroic Bhishma. Satyajit, who was equal to the
diadem-decked Arjuna himself in battle as regards energy and might, hath
been slain in battle by Drona of sure aim. Many mighty bowmen among the
Pancalas, all of whom were skilled in battle, encountering Drona, have
repaired to Yama's abode. So the two kings Virata and Drupada, both
venerable in years, who exerted themselves with great prowess for their
ally, have, with their sons, been slain in battle by Drona. That
invincible hero, viz., Abhimanyu, who, though a child in years, was still
equal in battle to Arjuna or Keshava or Baladeva, O lord, that, warrior
who was highly accomplished in battle, after making an immense slaughter
of the foe, was at last encompassed by six foremost of car-warriors and
slain by them. Unable to resist Arjuna himself, they thus slew Arjuna's
son! Deprived of his car, that hero, viz., the son of Subhadra, still
stayed in battle, remembering the duties of a Kshatriya. At last, O king,
Duhshasana's son slew him on the field. The slayer of the Patachchatras,
viz., the handsome son of Amvashtha, surrounded by a large force, had put
forth all his prowess for the sake of his allies. Having made a great
slaughter among the foe, he was encountered by Duryodhana's son, the
brave Lakshmana, in battle and despatched to Yama's abode. The mighty
bowman Vrihanta, accomplished in arms and invincible in battle, hath been
despatched to Yama's abode by Duhshasana, exerting himself with great
prowess. The two kings Manimat and Dandadhara, both of whom were
invincible in battle and had put forth their prowess for their allies,
have been slain by Drona. Ansumat the ruler of the Bhojas, that mighty
car-warrior at the head of his own forces, hath been despatched to Yama's
abode by Drona exerting himself with great prowess. Citrasena, the ruler
of the sea-coast, with his son, O Bharata, hath been forcibly despatched
by Samudrasena to Yama's abode. Another ruler of a maritime country,
viz., Nila, and Vyaghradatta of great energy, have both, O king, been
despatched to Yama's abode by Ashvatthama. Citrayudha and Citrayodhin,
after making a great slaughter, have both been slain in battle by Vikarna
exerting himself with great prowess and displaying diverse manoeuvres of
his car. The chief of the Kaikeyas, who was equal to Vrikodara himself in
battle and surrounded by Kaikeya warriors, has been slain by Kaikeya, the
brother by the brother. Janamejaya of the hilly country, endued with
great prowess and accomplished in encounters with the mace, hath, O king,
been slain by thy son Durmukha. Those two foremost of men, viz., the
brothers Rochamana, like two brilliant planets, have together been
despatched to heaven by Drona with his shafts. Many other kings, O
monarch, endued with great prowess, have fought (for the Pandavas) Having
achieved the most difficult feats, all of them have gone to Yama's abode.
Purujit and Kuntibhoja, the two maternal uncles of Savyasaci, have been
despatched by Drona with shafts to such regions as are attained by death
in battle. Abhibhu the Kasis, at the head of many of his followers, hath
been obliged by Vasudana's son to lay down his life in battle. Yudhamanyu
of immeasurable prowess, and Uttamauja of great energy, after slaying
hundreds of heroic warriors, have themselves been slain by our men. The
Pancala prince Mitravarman, O Bharata, those two foremost of bowmen, have
been despatched to Yama's abode by Drona. Shikhandi's son Kshatradeva,
that foremost of warriors, possessed of great bravery, hath, O king, been
slain by thy grandson Lakshmana, O sire! The two heroes Sucitra and
Citravarman, who were sire and son and endued with great might, and who
careered fearlessly in battle, have been slain by Drona. Vardhakshemi, O
monarch, who was like the ocean at full tide, having had his weapons
exhausted in battle, hath at last obtained undisturbed peace. That
foremost of Sutas, viz., Senavindu, having consumed many foes in battle,
hath, at last, O king been slain by Bahlika. Dhrishtaketu, O monarch,
that foremost of car-warriors among the Cedis, after accomplishing the
most difficult feats, hath repaired to the abode of Yama. Similarly, the
heroic Satyadhriti, endued with great prowess, having made a great
slaughter in battle for the sake of the Pandavas, has been despatched to
Yama's abode. That lord of Earth, viz., Suketu, the son of Shishupala,
having slain many foes, hath at last been slain by Drona in battle.
Virata's son Sankha, as also Uttara of great strength, having
accomplished the most difficult feats, have repaired to Yama's abode.
Similarly, Satyadhriti of the Matsyas, and Madiraswa of great energy, and
Suryadatta possessed of great prowess, have all been slain by Drona with
his shafts. Srenimat also, O monarch, having fought with great prowess
and accomplished the most difficult feats, hath repaired to Yama's abode.
Similarly, the chief of the Magadhas, that slayer of hostile heroes,
endued with great energy and acquainted with the highest weapons,
sleepeth on the field of battle, slain by Bhishma. Vasudana also, having
made an immense carnage in battle, has been despatched to Yama's abode by
Bharadwaja's son exerting himself with great prowess. These and many
other mighty car-warriors of the Pandavas have been slain by Drona
exerting himself with great energy. I have now told them all that thou
hadst asked me.'"
