
SECTION CLXVII
(Chaitraratha Parva)
After this citizens returned to their respective houses and the Pandavas
continued to dwell at Ekachakra as before.
"Janamejaya said, 'O Brahmana, what did those tigers among men, the
Pandavas, do after they had slain the Rakshasa Vaka?'
"Vaisampayana said, 'The Pandavas, O king, after slaying the Rakshasa
Vaka, continued to dwell in the abode of that Brahmana, employed in the
study of the Vedas. Within a few days there came a Brahmana of rigid vows
unto the abode of their host to take up his quarters there. Their host,
that bull among Brahmanas, ever hospitable unto all guests, worshipping
the newly-arrived Brahmana with due ceremonies, gave him quarters in his
own abode. Then those bulls among men, the Pandavas, with their mother
Kunti, solicited the new lodger to narrate to them his interesting
experiences. The Brahmana spake to them of various countries and shrines
and (holy) rivers, of kings and many wonderful provinces and cities. And
after this narration was over, that Brahmana, O Janamejaya, also spoke of
the wonderful self-choice of Yajnasena's daughter, the princes of
Panchala, and of the births of Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandi, and of the
birth, without the intervention of a woman, of Krishna (Draupadi) at the
great sacrifice of Drupada.
"Then those bulls among men, the Pandavas, hearing of these extraordinary
facts regarding that illustrious monarch (Drupada), and desiring to know
the details thereof, asked the Brahmana, after his narration was
concluded, to satisfy their curiosity. The Pandavas said, 'How, O
Brahmana, did the birth of Dhrishtadyumna the son of Drupada, take place
from the (sacrificial) fire? How also did the extraordinary birth of
Krishna take place from the centre of the sacrificial platform? How also
did Drupada's son learn all weapons from the great bowman Drona? And, O
Brahmana, how and for whom and for what reason was the friendship between
Drona and Drupada broken off?'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus questioned, O monarch, by those bulls
among men, the Brahmana narrated all the particulars about the birth of
Draupadi.'"
