2
Vaishampayana said: "Those princes of restrained souls and devoted to
Yoga, proceeding to the north, beheld Himavat, that very large mountain.
Crossing the Himavat, they beheld a vast desert of sand. They then saw
the mighty mountain Meru, the foremost of all high-peaked mountains. As
those mighty ones were proceeding quickly, all rapt in Yoga, Yajnaseni,
falling of from Yoga, dropped down on the Earth. Beholding her fallen
down, Bhimasena of great strength addressed king Yudhishthira the just,
saying, O scorcher of foes, this princess never did any sinful act. Tell
us what the cause is for which Krishna has fallen down on the Earth!
"Yudhishthira said: O best of men, though we were all equal unto her she
had great partiality for Dhananjaya. She obtains the fruit of that
conduct today, O best of men."
Vaishampayana continued: "Having said this, that foremost one of Bharatas
race proceeded on. Of righteous soul, that foremost of men, endued with
great intelligence, went on, with mind intent on itself. Then Sahadeva of
great learning fell down on the Earth. Beholding him drop down, Bhima
addressed the king, saying, He who with great humility used to serve us
all, alas, why is that son of Madravati fallen down on the Earth?
"Yudhishthira said, He never thought anybody his equal in wisdom. It is
for that fault that this prince has fallen down.
Vaishampayana continued: "Having said this, the king proceeded, leaving
Sahadeva there. Indeed, Kuntis son Yudhishthira went on, with his
brothers and with the dog. Beholding both Krishna and the Pandava
Sahadeva fallen down, the brave Nakula, whose love for kinsmen was very
great, fell down himself. Upon the falling down of the heroic Nakula of
great personal beauty, Bhima once more addressed the king, saying, This
brother of ours who was endued with righteousness without incompleteness,
and who always obeyed our behests, this Nakula who was unrivalled for
beauty, has fallen down.
"Thus addressed by Bhimasena, Yudhishthira, said, with respect to Nakula,
these words: He was of righteous soul and the foremost of all persons
endued with intelligence. He, however, thought that there was nobody that
equalled him in beauty of person. Indeed, he regarded himself as superior
to all in that respect. It is for this that Nakula has fallen down. Know
this, O Vrikodara. What has been ordained for a person, O hero, must have
to be endured by him.
"Beholding Nakula and the others fall down, Pandus son Arjuna of white
steeds, that slayer of hostile heroes, fell down in great grief of heart.
When that foremost of men, who was endued with the energy of Shakra, had
fallen down, indeed, when that invincible hero was on the point of death,
Bhima said unto the king, I do not recollect any untruth uttered by this
high-souled one. Indeed, not even in jest did he say anything false. What
then is that for whose evil consequence this one has fallen down on the
Earth?
"Yudhishthira said, Arjuna had said that he would consume all our foes in
a single day. Proud of his heroism, he did not, however, accomplish what
he had said. Hence has he fallen down. This Phalguna disregarded all
wielders of bows. One desirous of prosperity should never indulge in such
sentiments."
Vaishampayana continued: "Having said so, the king proceeded on. Then
Bhima fell down. Having fallen down, Bhima addressed king Yudhishthira
the just, saying, O king, behold, I who am thy darling have fallen down.
For what reason have I dropped down? Tell me if thou knowest it.
"Yudhishthira said, Thou wert a great eater, and thou didst use to boast
of thy strength. Thou never didst attend, O Bhima, to the wants of others
while eating. It is for that, O Bhima, that thou hast fallen down.
"Having said these words, the mighty-armed Yudhishthira proceeded on,
without looking back. He had only one companion, the dog of which I have
repeatedly spoken to thee, that followed him now.
