51
Vaishampayana said, "There, in that tirtha, O Bharata, where the Lord of
stars had in former days performed the rajasuya sacrifice, a great battle
was fought in which Taraka was the root of the evil. Bathing in that
tirtha and making many presents, the virtuous Bala of cleansed soul
proceeded to the tirtha of the muni named Sarasvata. There, during a
drought extending for twelve years, the sage Sarasvata, in former days,
taught the Vedas unto many foremost of brahmanas."
Janamejaya said, "Why did the sage Sarasvata, O thou of ascetic merit,
teach the Vedas unto the rishis during a twelve years' drought?"
Vaishampayana continued, "In days of yore, O monarch, there was an
intelligent sage of great ascetic merit. He was celebrated by the name of
Dadhica. Possessing a complete control over his senses, he led the life
of a brahmacari. In consequence of his excessive ascetic austerities
Shakra was afflicted with a great fear. The sage could not be turned
(away from his penance) by the offer of even diverse kinds of rewards. At
last the chastiser of Paka, for tempting the sage, despatched unto him
the exceedingly beautiful and celestial apsara, by name Alambusa. Thither
where on the banks of the Sarasvati the high-souled sage was engaged in
the act of gratifying the gods, the celestial damsel named above, O
monarch, made her appearance. Beholding that damsel of beautiful limbs,
the vital seed of that ascetic of cleansed soul came out. It fell into
the Sarasvati, and the latter held it with care. Indeed, O bull among
men, the River, beholding that seed, held it in her womb. In time the
seed developed into a foetus and the great river held it so that it might
be inspired with life as a child. When the time came, the foremost of
rivers brought forth that child and then went, O lord, taking it with
her, to that rishi.
Beholding that best of rishis in a conclave, Sarasvati, O monarch, while
making over the child, said these words, 'O regenerate rishi, this is thy
son whom I held through devotion for thee! That seed of thine which fell
at sight of the apsara Alambusa, had been held by me in my womb, O
regenerate rishi, through devotion for thee, well knowing that that
energy of thine would never suffer destruction! Given by me, accept this
faultless child of thy own!' Thus addressed by her, the rishi accepted
the child and felt great joy. Through affection, that foremost of
brahmanas then smelt the head of his son and held him in a close embrace,
O foremost one of Bharata's race, for some time. Gratified with the
River, the great ascetic Dadhica then gave a boon to her, saying, 'The
vishvadevas, the rishis, and all the tribes of the gandharvas and the
apsaras, will henceforth, O blessed one, derive great happiness when
oblations of thy water are presented unto them!'
Having said so unto that great river, the sage, gratified and filled with
joy, then praised her in these words. Listen to them duly, O king! 'Thou
hast taken thy rise, O highly blessed one, from the lake of Brahman in
days of old. All ascetics of rigid vows know thee, O foremost of rivers!
Always of agreeable features, thou hast done me great good! This thy
great child, O thou of the fairest complexion, will be known by the name
of Sarasvata! This thy son, capable of creating new worlds, will become
known after thy name! Indeed, that great ascetic will be known by the
name of Sarasvata! During a drought extending for twelve years, this
Sarasvata, O blessed one, will teach the Vedas unto many foremost of
brahmanas! O blessed Sarasvati, through my grace, thou shalt, O beautiful
one, always become the foremost of all sacred rivers!' Even thus was the
great River praised by the sage after the latter had granted her boons.
The River then, in great joy, went away, O bull of Bharata's race, taking
with her that child.
Meanwhile, on the occasion of a war between the gods and the danavas,
Shakra wandered through the three worlds in search of weapons. The great
god, however, failed to find such weapons as were fit to slay the foes of
the celestials. Shakra then said unto the gods. 'The great asuras are
incapable of being dealt with by me! Indeed, without the bones of
Dadhica, our foes could not be slain! Ye best of celestials, repair,
therefore, to that foremost of rishis and solicit him, saying, "Grant us,
O Dadhica, thy bones! With them we will slay our foes!"
Besought by them for his bones, that foremost of rishis, O chief of
Kuru's race, unhesitatingly gave up his life. Having done what was
agreeable to the gods, the sage obtained many regions of inexhaustible
merit. With his bones, meanwhile, Shakra joyfully caused to be made many
kinds of weapons, such as thunderbolts, discs, heavy maces, and many
kinds of clubs and bludgeons. Equal unto the Creator himself, Dadhica,
had been begotten by the great rishi Bhrigu, the son of the Lord of all
creatures, with the aid of his austere penances. Of stout limbs and
possessed of great energy, Dadhica had been made the strongest of
creatures in the world. The puissant Dadhica, celebrated for his glory,
became tall like the king of mountains. The chastiser of Paka had always
been anxious on account of his energy. With the thunderbolt born of
brahma energy, and inspired with mantras, O Bharata, Indra made a loud
noise when he hurled it, and slew nine and ninety heroes among the
daityas. After a long and dreadful time had elapsed since then, a
drought, O king, occurred that extended for twelve years. During that
drought extending for twelve years, the great rishis, for the sake of
sustenance, fled away, O monarch, on all sides.
Beholding them scattered in all directions, the sage Sarasvata also set
his heart on flight. The river Sarasvati then said unto him, 'Thou needst
not, O son, depart hence, for I will always supply thee with food even
here by giving thee large fishes! Stay thou, therefore, even here!' Thus
addressed (by the river), the sage continued to live there and offer
oblations of food unto the rishis and the gods. He got also his daily
food and thus continued to support both himself and the gods.
After that twelve year's drought had passed away, the great rishis
solicited one another for lectures on the Vedas. While wandering with
famished stomachs, the rishis had lost the knowledge of the Vedas. There
was, indeed, not one amongst them that could understand the scriptures.
It chanced that someone amongst them encountered Sarasvata, that foremost
of rishis, while the latter was reading the Vedas with concentrated
attention. Coming back to the conclave of rishis, he spoke to them of
Sarasvata of unrivalled splendour and god-like mien engaged in reading
the Vedas in a solitary forest. Then all the great rishis came to that
spot, and jointly spoke unto Sarasvata, that best of ascetics, these
words, 'Teach us, O sage!' Unto them the ascetic replied, saying, 'Become
ye my disciples duly!' The conclave of ascetics answered, 'O son, thou
art too young in years!' Thereupon he answered the ascetics, 'I must act
in such a way that my religious merit may not suffer a diminution! He
that teaches improperly, and he that learns improperly, are both lost in
no time and come to hate each other! It is not upon years, or
decrepitude, or wealth, or the number of kinsmen, that rishis found their
claim to merit! He amongst us is great who is capable of reading and
understanding the Vedas!'
Hearing these words of his, those munis duly became his disciples and
obtaining from him their Vedas, once more began to praise their rites.
60,000 munis became disciples of the regenerate rishi Sarasvata for the
sake of acquiring their Vedas from him. Owning obedience to that
agreeable rishi, though a boy, the munis each brought a handful of grass
and offered it to him for his seat. The mighty son of Rohini, and elder
brother of Keshava, having given away wealth in that tirtha, then
joyfully proceeded to another place where lived (in days of yore) an old
lady without having passed through the ceremony of marriage."
