
SECTION CLXXII
"Vaisampayana said, 'After Vyasa had gone away, those bulls among men,
the Pandavas, saluted the Brahmana and bade him farewell, and proceeded
(towards Panchala) with joyous hearts and with their mother walking
before them. Those slayers of all foes, in order to reach their
destination, proceeded in a due northerly direction, walking day and
night till they reached a sacred shrine of Siva with the crescent mark on
his brow. Then those tigers among men, the sons of Pandu, arrived at the
banks of the Ganga. Dhananjaya, that mighty car-warrior, walking before
them, torch in hand, for showing the way and guarding them (against wild
animals). And it so happened that at that time the proud king of the
Gandharvas, with his wives, was sporting in that solitary region in the
delightful waters of the Ganga. The king of the Gandharvas heard the
tread of the Pandavas as they approached the river. On hearing the sounds
of their foot-steps, the mighty Gandharvas were inflamed with wrath, and
beholding those chastisers of foes, the Pandavas, approach towards him
with their mother, he drew his frightful bow to a circle and said, 'It is
known that excepting the first forty seconds the grey twilight preceding
nightfall hath been appointed for the wandering of the Yakshas, the
Gandharvas and the Rakshasas, all of whom are capable of going everywhere
at will. The rest of the time hath been appointed for man to do his work.
If therefore, men, wandering during those moments from greed of gain,
come near us, both we and the Rakshasas slay those fools. Therefore,
persons acquainted with the Vedas never applaud those men--not even kings
at the head of their troops--who approach any pools of water at such a
time. Stay ye at a distance, and approach me not. Know ye not that I am
bathing in the waters of the Bhagirathi? Know that I am Angaraparna the
Gandharva, ever relying on my own strength! I am proud and haughty and am
the friend of Kuvera. This my forest on the banks of the Ganga, where I
sport to gratify all my senses, is called Angaraparna after my own name.
Here neither gods, nor Kapalikas, nor Gandharvas nor Yakshas, can come.
How dare ye approach me who am the brightest jewel on the diadem of
Kuvera?'
"Hearing these words of the Gandharva, Arjuna said, 'Blockhead, whether
it be day, night, or twilight, who can bar others from the ocean, the
sides of the Himalayas, and this river? O ranger of the skies, whether
the stomach be empty or full, whether it is night or day, there is no
special time for anybody to come to the Ganga--that foremost of all
rivers. As regards ourselves endued with might, we care not when we
disturb thee. Wicked being, those who are weak in fighting worship thee.
This Ganga, issuing out of the golden peaks of Himavat, falleth into the
waters of the ocean, being distributed into seven streams. They who drink
the waters of these seven streams, viz., Ganga, Yamuna, Saraswati,
Vitashtha, Sarayu, Gomati, and Gandaki, are, cleansed of all their sins.
O Gandharva, this sacred Ganga again, flowing through the celestial
region is called there the Alakananda, It hath again in the region of the
Pitris become the Vaitarani, difficult of being crossed by sinners, and,
Krishna-Dwaipayana himself hath said so. The auspicious and celestial
river, capable of leading to heaven (them that touch its waters), is free
from all dangers. Why dost thou then desire to bar us from it? This act
of thine is not in consonance with eternal virtue. Disregarding thy
words, why shall we not touch the sacred waters of the Bhagirathi free
from all dangers and from which none can bar us?'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of Arjuna, Angaraparna
became inflamed with wrath and drawing his bow to a circle began to shoot
his arrows like venomous snakes at the Pandavas. Then Dhananjaya, the son
of Pandu, wielding a good shield and the torch he held in his hand,
warded off all those arrows and addressing the Gandharva again said, 'O
Gandharva, seek not to terrify those that are skilled in weapons, for
weapons hurled at them vanish like froth. I think, O Gandharva, that ye
are superior (in prowess) to men; therefore shall I fight with thee,
using celestial weapons and not with any crooked means. This fiery weapon
(that I shall hurl at thee), Vrihaspati the revered preceptor of Indra,
gave unto Bharadwaja, from whom it was obtained by Agnivesya, and from
Agnivesya by my preceptor, that foremost of Brahmanas, Drona, who gave it
away to me.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Saying these words, the Pandava wrathfully
hurled at the Gandharva that blazing weapon made of fire which burnt the
Gandharva's chariot in a trice. Deprived of consciousness by the force of
that weapon, the mighty Gandharva was falling, head downward, from his
chariot. Dhananjaya seized him by the hair of his head adorned with
garlands of flowers and thus dragged the unconscious Gandharva towards
his brothers. Beholding this, that Gandharva's wife Kumbhinasi, desirous
of saving her husband, ran towards Yudhishthira and sought his
protection. The Gandharvi said, 'O exalted one, extend to me thy
protection! O, set my husband free! O lord, I am Kumbhinasi by name, the
wife of this Gandharva, who seeketh thy protection!' Beholding her (so
afflicted), the mighty Yudhishthira addressed Arjuna and said, 'O slayer
of foes, O child, who would slay a foe who hath been vanquished in fight,
who hath been deprived of fame, who is protected by a woman, and who hath
no prowess?' Arjuna replied, saying, 'Keep thou thy life, O Gandharva! Go
hence, and grieve not I Yudhishthira, the king of the Kurus, commandeth
me to show thee mercy.'
"The Gandharva replied, 'I have been vanquished by thee, I shall,
therefore, abandon my former name Angaraparna (the blazing vehicle). In
name alone, O friend, I should not be boastful when my pride in my
strength hath been overcome: I have been fortunate in that I have
obtained thee; O Arjuna, that wielder of celestial weapons! I like to
impart to thee the power of (producing) illusions which Gandharvas alone
have. My excellent and variegated chariot hath been burnt by means of thy
fiery weapon. I who had formerly been called after my excellent chariot
should now be called after my burnt chariot. The science of producing
illusions that I have spoken of was formerly obtained by me by ascetic
penances. That science I will today impart to the giver of my life-thy
illustrious self! What good luck doth he not deserve who, after
overcoming a foe by his might, giveth him life when that foe asketh for
it? This science is called Chakshushi. It was communicated by Manu unto
Soma and by Soma unto Viswavasu, and lastly by Viswavasu unto me.
Communicated by my preceptor, that science, having come unto me who am
without energy, is gradually becoming fruitless. I have spoken to thee
about its origin and transmission. Listen now to its power! One may see
(by its aid) whatever one wisheth to see, and in whatever way he liketh
(generally or particularly). One can acquire this science only after
standing on one leg for six months. I shall however, communicate to thee
this science without thyself being obliged to observe any rigid vow. O
king, it is for this knowledge that we are superior to men. And as we are
capable of seeing everything by spiritual sight, we are equal to the
gods. O best of men, I intend to give thee and each of thy brothers a
hundred steeds born in the country of the Gandharvas. Of celestial colour
and endued with the speed of the mind, those horses are employed in
bearing the celestial, and the Gandharvas. They may be lean-fleshed but
they tire not, nor doth their speed suffer on that account. In days of
yore the thunderbolt was created for the chief of the celestials in order
that he might slay (the Asura) Vritra with it. But hurled at Vritra's
head it broke in a thousand pieces. The celestials worship with reverence
those fragments of the thunderbolt. That which is known in the three
worlds as glory is but a portion of the thunderbolt. The hand of the
Brahmana with which he poureth libations on the sacrificial fire, the
chariot upon which the Kshatriya fighteth, the charity of the Vaisya, and
the service of the Sudra rendered unto the three other classes, are all
fragments of the thunderbolt. It hath been said that horses, forming as
they do a portion of the Kshatriya's chariot, are, on that account,
unslayable. Again horses which form a portion of the Kshatriya's chariot,
are the offspring of Vadava. Those amongst them that are born in the
region of the Gandharvas can go everywhere and assume any hue and speed
at the will of their owners. These horses of mine that I give thee will
always gratify thy wishes."
"On hearing these words of the Gandharva, Arjuna said, 'O Gandharva, if
from satisfaction for having obtained thy life at my hands in a situation
of danger, thou givest me thy science, and these horses, I would not
accept thy gift.' The Gandharva replied, saying, 'A meeting with an
illustrious person is ever a source of gratification; besides thou hast
given me my life. Gratified with thee, I will give thee my science. That
the obligation, however, may not all be on one side, I will take from
thee, O Vibhatsu, O bull in Bharata's race, thy excellent and eternal
weapon of fire!'
"Arjuna said, 'I would accept thy horses in exchange for my weapon. Let
our friendship last for ever. O friend, tell us for what we human beings
have to stand in fear of the Gandharvas. Chastisers of foes that we are
and virtuous and conversant with the Vedas, tell us, O Gandharva, why in
travelling in the night-time we have been censured by thee.'
"The Gandharva said, 'Ye are without wives (though ye have completed the
period of study). Ye are without a particular Asrama (mode of life).
Lastly, ye are out without a Brahmana walking before, therefore, ye sons
of Pandu, ye have been censured by me. The Yakshas, Rakshasas,
Gandharvas, Pisachas, Uragas and Danavas, are possessed of wisdom and
intelligence, and acquainted with the history of the Kuru race. O hero, I
have heard too from Narada and other celestial Rishis about the good
deeds of your wise ancestors. I myself, too, while roaming over the whole
earth bounded by her belt of seas, have witnessed the prowess of thy
great race. O Arjuna, I have personal knowledge of thy preceptor, the
illustrious son of Bharadwaja, celebrated throughout the three worlds for
his knowledge of the Vedas and the science of arms. O tiger in Kuru's
race, O son of Pritha, I also know Dharma, Vayu, Sakra, the twin Aswins,
and Pandu,--these six perpetuators of Kuru race,--these excellent
celestials and human progenitors of you all. I also know that you five
brothers are learned and high-souled, that ye are foremost of all
wielders of weapons, that ye are brave and virtuous and observant of
vows. Knowing that your understanding and hearts are excellent and your
behaviour faultless, I have yet censured you. For, O thou of Kuru's race,
it behoveth no man endued with might of arms to bear with patience any
ill usage in the sight of his wife. Especially as, O son of Kunti, our
might increaseth during the hours of darkness, accompanied by my wife I
was filled with wrath. O best of vow-observing men, I have, however, been
vanquished by thee in battle. Listen to me as I tell thee the reasons
that have led to my discomfiture. The Brahmacharya is a very superior
mode of life, and as thou art in that mode now, it is for this, O Partha,
that I have been defeated by thee in battle. O chastiser of foes, if any
married Kshatriya fight with us at night, he can never escape, with life.
But, O Partha, a married Kshatriya, who is sanctified with Brahma, and
who hath assigned the cares of his State to a priest, might vanquish! all
wanderers in the night. O child of Tapati, men should therefore, ever
employ learned priests possessing self-command for the acquisition of
every good luck they desire. That Brahmana is worthy of being the king's
priest who is learned in the Vedas and the six branches thereof, who is
pure and truthful, who is of virtuous soul and possessed of self-command.
The monarch becometh ever victorious and finally earneth heaven who hath
for his priest a Brahmana conversant with the rules of morality, who is a
master of words, and is pure and of good behaviour. The king should
always select an accomplished priest in order to acquire what he hath not
and protect what he hath. He who desireth his own prosperity should ever
be guided by his priest, for he may then obtain ever the whole earth
surrounded by her belt of seas. O son of Tapati, a king, who is without a
Brahmana, can never acquire any land by his bravery or glory of birth
alone. Know, therefore, O perpetuator of Kuru's race, that the kingdom
lasteth for ever in which Brahmanas have power.'"
