SECTION XXXIV
"Bhishma said, 'One should always offer the most reverent worship unto
the Brahmanas. They have Soma for their king, and they it is who confer
happiness and misery upon others. They, O king, should always be
cherished and protected as one cherishes and protects one's own sires and
grandsires, and should be adored with bows and gifts of food and
ornaments and other articles of enjoyment, as also with such things as
they may desire. The peace and happiness of the kingdom flow from such
respect shown to the Brahmanas even as the peace and happiness of all
living creatures flow from Vasava, the chief of the celestials. Let
Brahmanas of pure behaviour and Brahma-effulgence be born in a kingdom.
Kshatriyas also that are splendid car-warriors and that are capable of
scorching all foes, should be desired (amongst those that settle in a
kingdom). This was said unto me by Narada. There is nothing higher, O
king, than this, viz., the act of causing a Brahmana possessed of good
birth, having a knowledge of morality and righteousness, and steadfast in
the observance of excellent vows, to take up his residence in one's
mansion. Such an act is productive of every kind of blessing. The
sacrificial offerings given unto Brahmanas reach the very deities who
accept them. Brahmanas are the sires of all creatures. There is nothing
higher than a Brahmana. Aditya, Chandramas, Wind, Water, Earth, Sky and
the points of the compass, all enter the body of the Brahmana and take
what the Brahmana eats.[257] In that house where Brahmanas do not eat,
the Pitris refuse to eat. The deities also never eat in the house of the
wretch who hates the Brahmanas. When the Brahmanas are gratified, the
Pitris also are gratified. There is no doubt in this. They that give away
the sacrificial butter unto the Brahmanas become themselves gratified (in
this and the other world). Such men never meet with destruction. Verily,
they succeed in attaining to high ends. Those particular offerings in
sacrifices with which one gratifies the Brahmanas go to gratify both the
Pitris and the deities. The Brahmana is the cause of that sacrifice
whence all created things have sprung. The Brahmana is acquainted with
that from which this universe has sprung and unto which, when apparently
destroyed, it returns. Indeed the Brahmana knows the path that leads to
Heaven and the other path that leads to the opposite place. The Brahmana
is conversant with what has happened and what will happen. The Brahmana
is the foremost of all two-legged beings. The Brahmana, O chief of the
Bharatas, is fully conversant with the duties that have been laid down
for his order. Those persons that follow the Brahmanas are never
vanquished. Departing from this world, they never meet with destruction.
Indeed victory is always theirs. Those high-souled persons,--indeed,
those persons that have subdued their souls,--who accept the words that
fall from the lips of the Brahmanas, are never vanquished. Victory always
becomes theirs.[258] The energy and might of those Kshatriyas who scorch
everything with their energy and might become neutralised when they
encounter the Brahmanas. The Bhrigus conquered the Talajanghas. The son
of Angiras conquered the Nipas. Bharadwaja conquered the Vitahavyas as
also the Ailas. O chief of Bharata's race. Although all these Kshatriyas
were capable of using diverse kinds of arms, yet the Brahmanas named,
owning only black deer skins for their emblems, succeeded in conquering
them effectually. Bestowing the Earth upon the Brahmanas and illuminating
both the worlds by the splendour of such a deed, one should accomplish
acts through which one may succeed in attaining to the end of all
things.[259] Like fire concealed within wood, everything that is said or
heard or read in this world, lies ensconced in the Brahmana. In this
connection is cited the old history of the conversation between Vasudeva
and the Earth, O chief of Bharata's race!'
"Vasudeva said, 'O mother of all creatures, O auspicious goddess, I
desire to ask thee for a solution of this doubt of mine. By what act does
a man leading the domestic mode of life succeed in cleansing all his
sins?'
"The Earth said, 'One should serve the Brahmanas. This conduct is
cleansing and excellent. All the impurities destroyed of that man who
serves the Brahmanas with reverence. From this (conduct) arises
prosperity. From this arises fame. From this springs forth intelligence
or knowledge of the soul. A Kshatriya by this conduct, becomes a mighty
car-warrior and a scorcher of foes and succeeds in acquiring great fame.
Even this is what Narada said unto me, viz., that one should always
revere a Brahmana that is well-born, of rigid vows and conversant with
the scriptures, if one desires every kind of prosperity. That man really
grows in prosperity who is applauded by the Brahmanas, who are higher
than those that are regarded superior to all men high or low. That man
who speaks ill of the Brahmanas soon meets with discomfiture, even as a
clod of unbaked earth meets with destruction when cast into the sea.
After the same manner, all acts that are hurtful to the Brahmanas are
sure to bring about discomfiture and ruin. Behold the dark spots on the
Moon and the salt waters of the ocean. The great Indra had at one time
been marked all over with a thousand sex-marks. It was through the power
of the Brahmanas that those marks became altered into as so many eyes.
Behold, O Mahadeva how all those things took place. Desiring fame and
prosperity and diverse regions of beautitude in the next world, a person
of pure behaviour and soul should, O slayer of Madhu, live in obedience
to the dictates of the Brahmanas.'[260]
"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of the goddess Earth, the slayer
of Madhu, O thou of Kuru's race, exclaimed,--Excellent, Excellent--and
honoured the goddess in due form. Having heard this discourse between the
goddess Earth and Madhava, do thou, O son of Pritha, always, with rapt
soul, worship all superior Brahmanas. Doing this, thou shalt verily
obtain what is highly beneficial for thee!"'
