
SECTION CLXXXV
"Arjuna asked, 'O Gandharva, thou art acquainted with everything. Tell
us, therefore, which Veda-knowing Brahmana is worthy to be appointed as
our priest.'
"The Gandharva replied, 'There is in these woods a shrine of the name of
Utkochaka. Dhaumya, the younger brother of Devala is engaged there in
ascetic penances. Appoint him, if ye desire, your priest."
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then Arjuna, highly pleased with everything that had
happened, gave unto that Gandharva, his weapon of fire with befitting
ceremonies. And addressing him, the Pandava also said, 'O thou best of
Gandharvas, let the horses thou givest us remain with thee for a time.
When the occasion cometh, we will take them from thee. Blest be thou.'
Then the Gandharva and the Pandavas, respectfully saluting each other,
left the delightful banks of the Bhagirathi and went wheresoever they
desired. Then, O Bharata, the Pandavas going to Utkochaka, the sacred
asylum of Dhaumya installed Dhaumya as their priest. And Dhaumya, the
foremost of all conversant with the Vedas, receiving them with presents
of wild fruits and (edible) roots, consented to become their priest. And
the Pandavas with their mother forming the sixth of the company, having
obtained that Brahmana as their priest regarded their sovereignty and
kingdom as already regained and the daughter of the Panchala king as
already obtained in the Swayamavara. And those bulls of the Bharata race,
having obtained the master Dhaumya as their priest, also regarded
themselves as placed under a powerful protector. And the high-souled
Dhaumya, acquainted with the true meaning of the Vedas and every rule of
morality, becoming the spiritual preceptor of the virtuous Pandavas, made
them his Yajamanas (spiritual disciples). And that Brahmana, beholding
those heroes endued with intelligence and strength and perseverance like
unto the celestials, regarded them as already restored, by virtue of
their own accomplishments to their sovereignty and kingdom. Then those
kings of men, having had benedictions uttered upon them by that Brahmana,
resolved to go, accompanied by him, to the Swayamvara of the Princess of
Panchala.'"
