SECTION XV
"The blessed Krishna said, 'Bowing my head with great joy unto that mass
of energy and effulgence, I said these words unto the great Deity, with a
heart filled with gladness,--Firmness in virtue, the slaughter of foes in
battle, the highest fame, the greatest might, devotion to Yoga, thy
adjacence, and hundreds upon hundreds of children, these are the boons I
solicit of thee,--So be it,--said Sankara repeating the words I had
uttered. After this, the mother of the universe, the upholders of all
things, who cleanses, all things, viz., the spouse of Sarva, that vast
receptacle of penances said with a restrained soul these words unto
me,--'The puissant Mahadeva has granted thee, O sinless one, a son who
shall be named Samva. Do thou take from me also eight boons which thou
choosest. I shall certainly grant them to thee.--Bowing unto her with a
bend of my head, I said unto her, O son of Pandu,--I solicit from thee
non-anger against the Brahmanas, grace of my father, a hundred sons, the
highest enjoyments, love for my family, the grace of my mother, the
attainment of tranquillity and peace, and cleverness in every act!'
"Uma said, 'It shall be even so, O thou that art possessed of prowess and
puissance equal to that of a celestial. I never say what is untrue. Thou
shalt have sixteen thousand wives. Thy love for them and theirs also for
thee shall be unlimited. From all thy kinsmen also, thou shalt receive
the highest affection. Thy body too shall be most beautiful. Seven
thousand guests will daily feed at thy palace.'
"Vasudeva continued, 'Having thus granted me boons both the god and the
goddess, O Bharata, disappeared there and then with their Ganas, O elder
brother of Bhima. All those wonderful facts I related fully, O best of
kings, to that Brahmana of great energy, viz., Upamanyu (from whom I had
obtained the Diksha before adoring Mahadeva). Bowing down unto the great
God, Upamanyu said these words to me.'
"Upamanyu said, 'There is no deity like Sarva. There is no end or refuge
like Sarva. There is none that can give so many or such high boons. There
is none that equal him in battle.'"
