SECTION LXXXIX
"Bhishma continued, 'Listen to me, O Yudhishthira, as I tell thee what
those optional Sraddhas are that should be performed under the different
constellations and that were first spoken of by Yama unto king
Sasavindu.[402] That man who always performs the Sraddha under the
constellation Krittika is regarded as performing a sacrifice after
establishing the sacred fire. Such a person, freed from fear, ascends to
heaven with his children. He that is desirous of children should perform
the Sraddha under the constellation Rohini, while he that is desirous of
energy should do it under the constellation Mrigasiras. By performing the
Sraddha under the constellation Ardra, a man becomes the doer of fierce
deeds. A mortal, by performing the Sraddha under Punarvasu, makes such
again by agriculture. The man that is desirous of growth and advancement
should perform the Sraddha under Pushya. By doing it under the
constellation Aslesha one begets heroic children. By doing it under the
Maghas one attains to pre-eminence among kinsmen. By doing it under the
prior Phalgunis, the doer of it becomes endued with good fortune. By
doing the Sraddha under the later Phalgunis one attains to many children;
while by performing it under Hasta, one attains to the fruition of one's
wishes. By performing it under the constellation Chitra one obtains
children endued with great beauty. By doing it under the constellation
Swati, one makes much profit by trade. The man that desires children
acquires the fruition of his wish by performing the Sraddha under the
constellation Visakha. By doing it under Anuradha one becomes a king of
kings.[403] By making offerings in honour of the Pitris under the
constellation Jyeshtha with devotion and humility, one attains to
sovereignty, O foremost one of Kuru's race. By doing the Sraddha under
Mula one attains to health, and by doing it under the prior Ashadha, one
acquires excellent fame. By performing it under the later Ashadha one
succeeds in roving over the whole world, freed from every sorrow. By
doing it under the constellation Abhijit one attains to high knowledge.
By doing it under Sravana one, departing from this world, attains to a
very high end. The man that performs the Sraddha under the constellation
Dhanishtha becomes the ruler of a kingdom. By doing it under the
constellation presided over by Varuna (viz., Satabhisha), one attains to
success as a physician. By performing the Sraddha under the constellation
of the prior Bhadrapada one acquires large property in goats and sheep;
while by doing it under the later Bhadrapada one acquires thousands of
kine. By performing the Sraddha under the constellation Revati one
acquires much wealth in utensils of white brass and copper. By doing it
under Aswini one acquires many steeds, while under Bharani one attains to
longevity. Listening to these ordinances about the Sraddha, king
Sasavindu acted accordingly, and succeeded in easily subjugating and
ruling the whole earth.'"
