SECTION XXXV
"Bhishma said, 'O blessed king, Brahmana, by birth alone, becomes an
object of adoration with all creatures and are entitled, as guests, to
eat the first portion of all cooked food.[261] From them flow all the
great objects of life (viz., Righteousness and Wealth and Pleasure and
Emancipation). They are the friends of all creatures in the universe.
They are again the mouths of the deities (for food poured into their
mouths is eaten by the deities). Worshipped with reverence, they wish us
prosperity by uttering words fraught with auspiciousness. Disregarded by
our foes, let them be enraged with these, and let them wish evil unto
those detractors of theirs, uttering words fraught with severe curses. In
this connection, persons conversant with ancient history repeat the
following verses sung of old respecting how in ancient times the Creator,
after having created the Brahmanas, ordained their duties.--A Brahmana
should never do anything else than what has been ordained for him.
Protected, they should protect others. By conducting themselves in this
way, they are sure to attain to what is mightily advantageous for them.
By doing those acts that are ordained for them, they are sure to obtain
Brahma-prosperity. Ye shall become the exemplars of all creatures, and
reins for restraining them. A Brahmana possessed of learning should never
do that which is laid down for the Sudras. By doing such acts, a Brahmana
loses merit[262]. By Vedic study he is sure to obtain prosperity and
intelligence and energy and puissance competent to scorch all things, as
also glory of the most exalted kind. By offering oblations of clarified
butter unto the deities, the Brahmanas attain to high blessedness and
become worthy of taking the precedence of even children in the matter of
all kinds of cooked food, and endued with Brahma-prosperity.[263] Endued
with faith that is fraught with compassion towards all creatures, and
devoted to self-restraint and the study of the Vedas, ye shall attain to
the fruition of all your wishes. Whatever things exist in the world of
men, whatever things occur in the region of the deities, can all be
achieved acquired with the aid of penances and knowledge and the
observance of vows and restraints. I have thus recited to thee, O sinless
one, the verses that were sung by Brahma himself. Endued with supreme
intelligence and wisdom, the Creator himself ordained this, through
compassion for the Brahmanas. The puissance of those among them that are
devoted to penances is equal to the might of kings. They are verily
irresistible, fierce, possessed of the speed of lightning, and
exceedingly quick in what they do. There are amongst them those that are
possessed of the might of lions and those that are possessed of the might
of tigers. Some of them are endued with the might of boars, some with
that of the deer, and some with that of crocodiles. Some there are
amongst them whose touch resembles that of snakes of virulent poison, and
some whose bite resembles that of sharks. Some amongst them are capable
of compassing by speech alone the destruction of those that are opposed
to them; and some are competent to destroy by a glance only of their
eyes. Some, amongst them, as already said, are like snakes of virulent
poison, and some of them are possessed of very mild dispositions. The
dispositions, O Yudhisthira, of the Brahmanas, are of diverse kinds. The
Mekalas, the Dravidas, the Lathas, the Paundras, the Konwasiras, the
Saundikas, the Daradas, the Darvas, the Chauras, the Savaras, the
Varvaras, the Kiratas, the Yavanas, and numerous other tribes of
Kshatriyas, have become degraded into the status of Sudras through the
wrath of Brahmanas. In consequence of having disregarded the Brahmanas,
the Asuras have been obliged to take refuge in the depths of the ocean.
Through the grace of the Brahmanas, the deities have become denizens of
the happy regions of Heaven. The element of space or ether is incapable
of being touched. The Himavat mountains are incapable of being moved from
their site. The current of Ganga is incapable of being resisted by a dam.
The Brahmanas are incapable of being subjugated. Kshatriyas are incapable
of ruling the Earth without cultivating the good will of the Brahmanas.
The Brahmanas are high-souled beings. They are the deities of the very
deities. Do thou always worship them with gifts and obedient services:
if, indeed, thou wishest to enjoy the sovereignty of the whole Earth with
her belt of seas. The energy and might of Brahmanas, O sinless one,
become abated in consequence of the acceptance of gift. Thou shouldst
protect thy race. O king, from those Brahmanas that do not desire to
accept gifts!'"[264]
(Anusasana Parva Continued in Volume XI)
 SECTION XXXVI
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old history of the
discourse between Sakra and Samvara. Do thou listen to it, O
Yudhishthira. Once upon a time Sakra, assuming the guise of an ascetic
with matted locks on his head and body smeared with ashes all over, rode
on an ugly car and repaired to the presence of the Asura Samvara.'
"Sakra said, 'Through what conduct, O Samvara, hast thou been able to get
at the head of all individuals of thy race? For what reason do all people
regard thee as superior? Do thou tell me this truly and in detail.'
"Samvara said, 'I never cherish any ill-feelings towards the Brahmanas.
Whatever instructions they impart I accept with unquestioning reverence.
When the Brahmanas are engaged in interpreting the scriptures, I listen
to them with great happiness. Having heard their interpretations I never
disregard them. Nor do I ever offend against the Brahmanas in any way. I
always worship those Brahmanas that are endued with intelligence. I
always seek information from them. I always worship their feet.
Approaching me with confidence, they always address me with affection and
enquire after my welfare. If they ever happen to be heedless, I am always
heedful. If they happen to sleep, I always remain wakeful. Like bees
drenching the cells of the comb with honey, the Brahmanas, who are my
instructors and rulers, always drench me with the nectar of knowledge--me
that am always devoted to the path pointed out by the scriptures, that am
devoted to the Brahmanas, and that am perfectly free from malice or evil
passion. Whatever they say with cheerful hearts, I always accept aided by
memory and understanding. I am always careful of my own faith in them and
I always think of my own inferiority to them. I always lick the nectar
that dwells at the end of their tongue, and it is for this reason that I
occupy a position far above that of all others of my race like the Moon
transcending all the stars. The scriptural interpretations which fall
from the lips of the Brahmanas and listening to which every wise man acts
in the world, constitute nectar on earth and may also be likened to eyes
of remarkable excellence.[265] Witnessing the encounter between the
deities and the Asuras in days of old, and understanding the puissance of
the instructions that fell from the Brahmanas, my father became filled
with delight and wonder.[266] Beholding the puissance of high-souled
Brahmanas, my sire asked Chandramas the question, 'How do the Brahmanas
attain to success?
'Soma said, 'The Brahmanas become crowned with success through their
penances. Their strength consists in speech. The prowess of persons
belonging to the kingly order resides in their arms. The Brahmanas,
however, have speech for their weapons. Undergoing the discomforts of a
residence in the abode of his preceptor, the Brahmana should study the
Vedas or at least the Pranava. Divesting himself of wrath and renouncing
earthly attachments, he should become a Yati, viewing all things and all
creatures with equal eyes. If remaining in the abode of his sire he
masters all the Vedas and acquiring great knowledge attains to a position
that should command respect people still condemn him as untravelled or
homekeeping. Like a snake swallowing mice, the earth swallows up these
two, viz., a king that is unwilling to fight and a Brahmana that is
unwilling to leave home for acquiring knowledge.[267] Pride destroys the
prosperity of persons of little intelligence. A maiden, if she conceives,
becomes stained. A Brahmana incurs reproach by keeping at home. Even this
is what my father heard from Soma of wonderful aspect. My father, in
consequence of this, began to worship and reverence the Brahmanas. Like
him, I also worship and adore all Brahmanas of high vows.'
"Bhishma continued, "Hearing these words that fell from the mouth of that
prince of Danavas, Sakra began to worship the Brahmanas, and as a
consequence thereof he succeeded in obtaining the chiefdom of the
deities.'"
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old history of the
