SECTION XVII
"Vasudeva said, 'Concentrating his mind, O Yudhishthira. the regenerate
Rishi Upamanyu, with hands joined together in reverence uttered this
abstract of names (applying to Mahadeva), commencing from the beginning.'
"Upamanyu said, 'I shall adore that great Deity who deserves the
adorations of all creatures, by uttering those names that are celebrated
over all the worlds,--names some of which were uttered by the Grandsire
Brahma, some by the Rishis, and some of which occur in the Vedas and the
Vedangas. Those names have been applied (unto the great Deity) by persons
that are eminent. Those names of him that are, again, true and fraught
with success and are capable of accomplishing all the purposes which the
utterer may have in view, have been applied unto Mahadeva by Tandi after
calling them from the Vedic lore with the aid of his devotion. Indeed,
with those names that have been uttered by many well-known persons of
righteousness and by ascetics conversant with all the spiritual
principles. I shall adore him who is the foremost, who is the first, who
leads to heaven, who is ready to confer benefits upon all creatures, and
who is auspicious. Those names have been heard everywhere in the
universe, having spread from the region of Brahma (where they were
originally invented). All of them are fraught with the element of Truth.
With those names I shall adore him who is Supreme Brahman, who has been
declared (unto the universe) by the Vedas, and who is Eternal. I shall
now tell thee, O chief of Yacht's race those names. Do thou hear them
with rapt attention. Thou art a devoted worshipper of the Supreme Deity.
Do thou worship the illustrious Bhava, distinguishing him above all the
deities. And because thou art devoted to him, I shall therefore, recite
those names in thy hearing. Mahadeva is Eternal Brahman. Persons endued
with Yoga; Yoga's achievements are unable to know in even a hundred
years, the glory and puissance of the great Deity in their entirety.
Verily, the beginning, middle or end of Mahadeva cannot be apprehended by
the very deities. Indeed, when the case is such, who is there O Madhava,
that can recite the attributes of Mahadeva in their entirety? For all
that, I shall through the grace of that illustrious and supreme Deity of
perfect wisdom, extended to me for my devotion to him, recite his
attributes as embodied in an abstract of few words and letters. The
Supreme Lord is incapable of being adored by any one if he does not grant
his permission to the adorer. As regards myself, it is only when I become
fortunate enough to receive his permission that I succeed in adoring him.
I shall indicate only a few names of that great Deity who is without
birth and without destruction, who is the original cause of the universe,
who is endued with the highest Soul, and whose origin is unmanifest.
Hear, O Krishna, a few names, that were uttered by Brahma himself, of
that giver of boons, that adorable deity, that puissant one who has the
universe for his form, and who is possessed of supreme wisdom. These
names that I shall recite are extracted from the ten thousand names that
the great Grandsire had uttered in days of yore, as ghee is extracted
from curds. As gold represents the essence of rocky mountains, as honey
represents the essence of flowers, as Manda represents the extract from
ghee, even so have these names been extracted from and represent the
essence of those ten thousand names that were uttered by Grandsire
Brahma. This abstract of names is capable of cleansing every sin, however
heinous. It possesses the same merit that is attached to the four Vedas.
It should be comprehended with attention by spiritual aspirants and
engraved on the memory. These names fraught with auspiciousness, leading
to advancement, destructive of Rakshasas,[88] and great cleansers should
be imparted to only him that is devoted to the great Lord, to him that
has faith, to him that believes. Unto him that has no faith, him that is
an unbeliever, him that has not subjugated his soul, it should never be
communicated. That creature, O Krishna, who cherishes malice towards the
illustrious Mahadeva who is the original cause of everything, who is the
Supreme Soul, and who is the great Lord, has certainly to go to hell with
all his ancestors before and all his children after him. This abstract of
names that I shall recite to thee is looked upon as Yoga.[89] This is
looked upon as the highest object of meditation. This is that which one
should constantly recite as Japya. This is equivalent to Knowledge. This
is the highest Mystery. If one, even during his last moments, recites it
or hears it recited unto him, one succeeds in attaining to the highest
end. This is holy. This is auspicious, this is fraught with every kind of
benefit. This is the best of all things. Brahma, the Grandsire of all the
universe, having in days of old composed it, assigned to it the foremost
place among all excellent hymns. From that time, this hymn to the
greatness and glory of the high-souled Mahadeva, which is held in the
highest esteem by all the deities, has come to be regarded as the king of
all hymns. This king of all hymns was first conveyed from the region of
Brahman to heaven, the region of the celestials. Tandi then obtained it
from heaven. Hence is it known as the hymn composed by Tandi. From heaven
Tandi brought it down on Earth. It is the most auspicious of all
auspicious things, and is capable of cleansing the heart from all sins
however heinous. O thou of mighty arms, I shall recite to thee that best
of all hymns. This hymn relates to him who is the Veda of the Vedas, and
the most ancient of all ancient objects, to him who is the energy of all
energies, and the penance of all penances; to him who is the most
tranquil of all creatures endued with tranquillity, and who is the
splendour of all splendours; to him who is looked upon as the most
restrained of all creatures that are restrained, and him who is the
intelligence of all creatures endued with intelligence; to him who is
looked upon as the deity of all deities, and the Rishi of all Rishis; to
him who is regarded as the sacrifice of all sacrifices and the most
auspicious of all things fraught with auspiciousness; to him who is the
Rudra of all Rudras and the effulgence of all things endued with
effulgence; to him who is the Yogin of all Yogins, and the cause of all
causes; to him from whom all the worlds start into existence, and unto
whom all the worlds return when they cease to exist; to him who is the
Soul of all existent creatures, and who is called Hara of immeasurable
energy. Hear me recite those thousand and eight names of the great Sarva.
Hearing those names, O foremost of all men, thou shalt be crowned with
fruition in respect of all thy wishes,--Om! thou art Immobile, thou art
Fixed, thou art Puissant, thou art Terrible, thou art Foremost, thou art
boon-giving, and thou art Superior.[90] Thou art the Soul of all
creatures, thou art celebrated over all creatures, thou art all things,
thou art the Creator of all, and thou art Bhava."[91] Thou art the bearer
of matted locks on thy head. Thou wearest animal skins for thy vestments.
Thou wearest a crest of matted hair on thy head like the peacock. Thou
art he who has the whole universe for thy limbs.[92] Thou art the Creator
of all things. Thou art Hara in consequence of thy being the destroyer of
all things. Thou art he that has eyes resembling those of the gazelle.
Thou art the destroyer of all creatures. Thou art the supreme enjoyer of
all things. Thou art that Pravritti whence all actions flow. Thou art
that Nivritti or abstention from acts. Thou art observant of fasts and
vows, thou art Eternal, thou art Unchangeable. Thou art he that residest
in crematoria, thou art the possessor of the six well-known attributes of
Lordship and the rest, thou residest in the heart of every creature, thou
art he that enjoys all things with the senses, thou art the grinder of
all sinful creatures.[93] Thou art he that deserves the salutations of
all, thou art of great feats, thou art he that has penances for his
wealth, thou createst all the elements at thy will, thou concealest thy
real nature by putting on the guise of a lunatic. Thou art the Master of
all the worlds and of all living creatures. Thou art of immeasurable
form, thou art of vast body, thou art of the form of Righteousness, thou
art of great fame, thou art of high Soul, thou art the Soul of all
creatures, thou hast the universe for thy form.[94] Thou art of vast jaws
(for thou swallowest the universe when the time comes for the dissolution
of all things). Thou art the protector of all the lokas (the worlds).
Thou art the soul residing in the inner heart and as such devoid of
ahamkara originating from ignorance[95] and is one and undivided; Thou
art anandam (gladness). Thou art he whose car is borne by mules. Thou art
he that protects Jiva from the thunderbolt of rebirth. Thou art adorable.
Thou art obtained by purity and self-restraint and vows. Thou art again
the refuge of all kinds of vows and observances including purity and
self-restraint.[96] Thou art the celestial artificer that is conversant
with every art. Thou art Self-create (for no one has created thee). Thou
art the beginning of all creatures and things. Thou art Hiranyagarbha,
the Creator of all things. Thou art inexhaustible puissance and
felicity.[97] Thou hast a hundred eyes, thou hast eyes of vast power.
Thou art Soma.[98] Thou art he that causest all righteous creatures
assume shapes of glory for shining in the firmament. Thou art Chandramas,
thou art Surya, thou art the planet Saturn, thou art the descending node
(of the moon), thou art the ascending node, thou art Mangala (Mars), and
thou art Vrihaspati (Jupiter) and Sukra (Venus), thou art Vudha (Mercury)
thou art the worshipper of Atri's wife, thou art he who shot his shaft in
wrath at Sacrifice when Sacrifice fled away from him in the form of a
deer. Thou art sinless.[99] Thou art possessed of penances that have
conferred upon thee the power of creating the universe. Thou art
possessed of penances that have rendered thee capable of destroying the
universe. Thou art high minded (in consequence of thy great liberality
towards thy devotees). Thou fulfillest the wishes of all who resign
themselves to thee. Thou art the maker of the year (for it is thou who
settest the wheel of Time revolving, by assuming the form of the sun and
the planets). Thou art Mantra (in the form of Pranava and other sacred
words and syllables). Thou art the authority for all acts (in the form of
the Vedas and the scriptures). Thou art the highest Penance. Thou art
devoted to Yoga. Thou art he who merges himself in Brahman (by
Yoga-abstraction). Thou art the great seed (being the cause of causes).
Thou art the displayer of what is unmanifest in the manifest form in
which the universe exists. Thou art possessed of infinite might. Thou art
he whose seed is gold.[100] Thou art omniscient, (being as thou art all
things and the great knower). Thou art the cause of all things. Thou art
he that has the seed of action (viz., ignorance and desire) for the means
of sojourning from this world to the other and the other to this.[101]
Thou hast ten arms. Thou hast winkless eyes (for thou seest at all
times). Thou hast a blue throat (in consequence of thy bearing in thy
throat the poison that arose upon churning the ocean and which, if not so
borne, was capable of destroying the universe). Thou art the Lord of Uma.
Thou art the origin of all the infinite forms that occur in the universe.
Thou art he whose superiority is due to thyself. Thou art a hero in might
(in consequence of thy having achieved such grand feats as the quick
destruction of the triple city of the Asuras). Thou art inert matter
(which cannot move unless co-existing with the Soul). Thou art all the
tattwas (subjects of enquiry as counted by the Sankhyas). Thou art the
ordainer and ruler of the tattwas. Thou art the chief of those beings
that wait upon thee and are called Ganas.[102] Thou coverest infinite
space.[103] Thou art Kama, the God of Desire. Thou art conversant with
Mantras (in the sense of knowledge being thy penance).[104] Thou art the
highest Mantra for thou art that philosophy which consists in the
ascertainment of the nature and attributes of the soul (and its
differences from the Non-soul). Thou art the cause of the universe (since
all that exists has sprung from thy Soul). Thou art universal destroyer
(for all that ceases to exist becomes merged unto thee who art as the
unmanifest Brahman). Thou bearest in one of thy hands the calabash, and
in another thou holdest the bow; in another hand thou bearest shafts and
in another thou bearest a skull. Thou bearest the thunder-bolt. Thou art
armed with the hundred-killer.[105] Thou art armed with the sword. Thou
wieldest the battle-axe. Thou art armed with the Sula (trident). Thou art
adorable. Thou host the sacrificial ladle in one of thy hands. Thou art
of beautiful form. Thou art endued with abundant energy. Thou givest in
the most liberal measure all that tends to adorn those that are devoted
to thee. Thou wearest a turban on thy head. Thou art of beautiful face.
Thou art he who swells with splendour and puissance. Thou art he that is
humble and modest. Thou art exceedingly tall. Thou art he who has the
senses for thy rays.[106] Thou art the greatest of preceptors. Thou art
Supreme Brahman (being a state of pure felicitous existence).[107] Thou
art he that took the shape of a jackal (for consoling the Brahmana who,
when insulted by a wealthy Vaisya, had resolved to commit suicide). Thou
art he whose object are all crowned with fruition, of themselves and
without waiting for the puissance (derivable from penances). Thou art one
who bears a bald head (as the sign of the mendicant order). Thou art one
who does good to all creatures. Thou art unborn. Thou hast innumerable
forms. Thou bearest all kinds of fragrance on thy person. The matted
locks on thy head had sucked up the river Ganga when it first fell from
heaven (although they again gave out the waters at the earnest
solicitations of king Bhagiratha). Thou art the giver of sovereignty and
lordship.[108] Thou art a Brahmacharin without having ever fallen away
from the rigid vow of continence. Thou art distinguished for thy sexual
continence. Thou always liest on thy back. Thou hast thy abode in
Puissance.[109] Thou hast three matted locks on thy head. Thou art he
that is clad in rags. Thou art Rudra (in consequence of thy fierceness).
Thou art the celestial generalissimo, and thou art all pervading. Thou
art he that moves about during the day. Thou art he that moves about in
the night.[110] Thou art of fierce wrath. Thou art possessed of dazzling
effulgence (born of Vedic study and penances). Thou art the slayer of the
mighty Asura who had come in the form of an infuriate elephant for
destroying thy sacred city of Varanasi. Thou art the slayer of such
Daityas as become the oppressors of the universe. Thou art Kala or Time
which is the universal destroyer. Thou art the supreme ordainer of the
universe. Thou art a mine of excellent accomplishments. Thou art of the
form of the lion and the tiger. Thou art he that is clad in the skin of
an elephant. Thou art the Yogin who deceives Time by transcending its
irresistible influence. Thou art the original sound.[111] Thou art the
fruition of all desires. Thou art he that is adored in four ways.[112]
Thou art a night-wanderer (like Vetala and others). Thou art he that
wanders in the company of spirits. Thou art he that wanders in the
company of ghostly beings. Thou art the Supreme Lord of even Indra and
the other celestials. Thou art he that hast multiplied himself infinitely
in the form of all existent and non-existent things. Thou art the
upholder of both Mahat and all the innumerable combinations of the five
primal elements. Thou art the primeval Ignorance or Tamas that is known
by the name of Rahu. Thou art without measure and hence infinite. Thou
art the supreme End that is attained by the Emancipate. Thou art fond of
dancing. Thou art he that is always engaged in dancing. Thou art he that
causes others to dance. Thou art the friend of the universe. Thou art he
whose aspect is calm and mild. Thou art endued with penances puissant
enough to create and destroy the universe. Thou art he who binds all
creatures with the bonds of thy illusion. Thou art he that transcends
destruction. Thou art he who dwells on the mount Kailasa. Thou
transcendest all bonds and art unattached in respect of all things, like
Space. Thou art possessed of a thousand arms. Thou art victory. Thou art
that perseverance which is the cause of success or victory. Thou art
without idleness or procrastination that interferes with persevering
activity. Thou art dauntless. Thou art fear, Thou art he who put a stop
to Vali's sacrifice.[113] Thou fulfillest the desires of all thy
devotees. Thou art the destroyer of Daksha's sacrifice. Thou art amiable.
Thou art slightly amiable. Thou art exceedingly fierce and robbest all
creatures of their energy. Thou art the slayer of the Asura Vala. Thou
art always cheerful. Thou art of the form of wealth which is coveted by
all. Thou hast never been vanquished.[114] There is none more adorable
than thou. Thou art he who utters deep roars (in the form of Ocean). Thou
art that which is so deep that no one can measure it (because thou art of
the form of space). Thou art he whose puissance and the might of whose
companions and of the bull have never been measured by anybody. Thou art
the tree of the world (whose roots extend upwards and branches hang
downwards). Thou art the banian.[115] Thou art he that sleeps on a human
leaf when the universe, after dissolution, becomes one infinite expanse
of water. Thou art he that shows compassion to all worshippers assuming
as thou listest, the form of Hari or Hara or Ganesa or Arka or Agni or
Wind, etc. Thou art possessed of teeth that are exceedingly sharp (since
thou art competent to chew innumerable worlds even as one munches nuts
and swallows them speedily). Thou art of vast dimensions in respect of
thy forms. Thou art possessed of a mouth that is hast enough to swallow
the universe at once. Thou art he whose troops are adored
everywhere.[116] Thou art he who dispelled all the fears of the deities
when the prince of elephants had to be captured. Thou art the seed of the
universe. Thou art he who has for his vehicle the same bull that forms
again the device on his banner in battle. Thou hast Agni for thy soul.
Thou art Surya who has green steeds yoked unto his car. Thou art the
friend of Jiva. Thou art he that is conversant with the proper time for
the accomplishment of all religious acts. Thou art he unto whom Vishnu
paid his adorations (for obtaining his celebrated discus). Thou art the
sacrifice being in the form of Vishnu. Thou art the ocean. Thou art the
Barabanala Mare's head that ranges within the ocean, ceaselessly
vomitting fire and drinking the saline waters as if they were sacrificial
butter. Thou art Wind, the friend of Agni. Thou art of tranquil soul like
the ocean when at rest and unstirred by the mildest breeze. Thou art Agni
that drinks the libations of clarified butter poured in sacrifices with
the aid of Mantras. Thou art he whom it is difficult to approach. Thou
art he whose effulgence spreads over the infinite universe. Thou art ever
skilful in battle. Thou art well conversant with the time when one should
engage in battle so that victory may be achieved. Thou art that science
which treats of the motions of heavenly bodies.[117] Thou art of the form
of success or victory. Thou art he whose body is Time (for thy body is
never subject to destruction). Thou art a householder for thou wearest a
tuft of hair on thy head Thou art a Sanyasin for thy head is bald. Thou
wearest matted locks on thy head (being, as thou art, a
Vanaprastha).[118] Thou art distinguished for thy fiery rays (for the
effulgent path by which the righteous proceed is identical with thee).
Thou art he that appears in the firmament in the heart encased in the
body of every creature.[119] Thou art he who enters into the cranium
(brain) of every creature. Thou bearest the wrinkles of age. Thou bearest
the bamboo flute. Thou hast also the tabour. Thou bearest the musical
instrument called Tali. Thou hast the wooden vessel used for husking
grain. Thou art he who covers that illusion which covers Yama.[120] Thou
art an astrologer inasmuch as thy understanding is always directed
towards the motion of the wheel of time which is made up of the
luminaries in the firmament. Thou art Jiva whose understanding is
directed to things that are the result of the attributes of Sattwa,
Rajas, and Tamas. Thou art that in which all things merge when
dissolution overtakes them. Thou art stable and fixed, there being
nothing in thee that is subject to change or mutation of any kind. Thou
art the Lord of all creatures. Thy arms extend all over the vast
universe. Thou art displayed in innumerable forms that are but fractions
of thyself. Thou pervadest all things.[121] Thou art he that has no mouth
(for thou enjoyest not the objects of thy own creation). Thou art he who
frees thy creatures from the bonds of the world. Thou art easily
attainable.[122] Thou art he that manifested himself with a golden
mail.[123] Thou art he that appears in the phallic emblem. 'Thou art he
that wanders in the forests in quest of fowls and animals. Thou art he
that wanders over the Earth. Thou art, he that is omnipresent. Thou art
the blare that is produced by all the trumpets blown in the three worlds.
Thou art he that has all creatures for his relatives.[124] Thou art of
the form of a snake (for thou art identical with the mighty Naga named
Sesha). Thou art he that lives in mountain caves (like Jaigishavya), or
any other Yogin. Thou art identical with Guha (the celestial
generalissimo). Thou wearest garlands of flowers. Thou art he who enjoys
the happiness that springs from the possession of worldly objects.[125]
Thou art he from whom all creatures have derived their three states of
birth, existence, and destruction. Thou art he that upholds all things
that exist or occur in the three stages of time viz., the Past, the
Present, and the Future. Thou art he that frees creatures from the
effects of all acts belonging to previous lives as well as those
accomplished in the present life and from all the bonds due to Ignorance
and Desire. Thou art he who is the binder or Asura chiefs. Thou art he
who is the slayer of foes in battle.[126] Thou art that which is
attainable by knowledge alone. Thou art Durvasas. Thou art he who is
waited upon and adored by all the righteous. Thou art he who causes the
fall of even Brahma and the others. Thou art he that gives unto all
creatures the just share of joy and grief that each deserves according to
his own acts. Thou art he that is incomparable. Thou art well conversant
with the shares that are given and appropriated in sacrifices.[127] Thou
residest in every place. Thou wanderest everywhere. Thou art he that has
mean vestments.[128] Thou art Vasava. Thou art immortal. Thou art
identical with the Himavat mountains. Thou art the maker of pure gold.
Thou art without acts. Thou upholdest in thyself the fruits of all acts.
Thou art the foremost of all creatures that are regarded as
upholders.[129] Thou art he that has bloody eyes. Thou art he that has
eyes whose vision extends over the infinite universe. Thou art he that
has a car whose wheels are ever victorious. Thou art he that is possessed
of vast learning. Thou art he that accepts thy devotees for thy servants.
Thou art he that restrains and subjugates thy senses. Thou art he that
acts. Thou wearest clothes whose warp and woof are made of snakes. Thou
art Supreme. Thou art he who is the lowest of the celestials.[130] Thou
art he that is well-grown. Thou ownest the musical instrument called
Kahala. Thou art the giver of every wish. Thou art the embodiment of
grace in all the three stages of Time, viz., the Past, the Present, and
the Future. Thou art possessed of might that is always well spent. Thou
art he who had assumed the form of Valarama (the elder brother of
Krishna). Thou art the foremost of all colleted things, being
Emancipation or the highest of all ends to which creatures attain. Thou
art the giver of all things. Thy face is turned towards all directions,
Thou art he from whom diverse creatures have sprung even as all forms
have sprung from space or are modifications or that primal element. Thou
art he who falls into the pit called body.[131] Thou art he that is
helpless (for, falling into the pit constituted by the body, thou canst
not transcend the sorrow that is thy portion). Thou residest in the
firmament of the heart. Thou art exceedingly fierce in form. Thou art the
Deity called Ansu. Thou art the companion of Ansu and art called Aditya.
Thou art possessed of innumerable rays. Thou art endued with dazzling
effulgence. Thou hast the speed of the Wind.[132] Thou art possessed of
speed that is greater than that of the Wind. Thou art possessed of the
speed of the mind. Thou art Nishachara as thou enjoyest all things, being
invested with Ignorance.[133] Thou dwellest in every body. Thou dwellest
with Prosperity as thy companion. Thou art he that imparts knowledge and
instruction. Thou art he who imparts instruction in utter silence. Thou
art he that observes the vow of taciturnity (for thou instructest in
silence). Thou art he who passes out of the body, looking at the
soul.[134] Thou art he that is well adored. Thou art the giver of
thousands (since the lord of all the treasures derived those treasures of
his from thee). Thou art the prince of birds, (being Garuda the son of
Vinata and Kasyapa). Thou art the friend that renders aid. Thou art
possessed of exceeding effulgence (for thy splendour is like that of a
million suns risen together). Thou art the Master of all created beings.
Thou art he who provokes the appetites. Thou art the deity of Desire.
Thou art of the form of lovely women that are coveted by all. Thou art
the tree of the world. Thou art the Lord of Treasures. Thou art the giver
of fame. Thou art the Deity that distributes unto all creatures the
fruits (in the form of joys and griefs) of their acts. Thou art thyself
those fruits which thou distributest. Thou art the most ancient (having
existed from a time when there was no other existent thing). Thou art
competent to cover with a single footstep of thine all the three worlds.
Thou art Vamana (the dwarf) who deceived the Asura chief Vali (and
depriving him of his sovereignty restored it unto Indra). Thou art the
Yogin crowned with success (like Sanatkumara and others). Thou art a
great Rishi (like Vasishtha and others). Thou art one whose objects are
always crowned with success (like Rishava or Dattatreya). Thou art a
Sanyasin (like Yajnavalkya and others). Thou art he that is adorned with
the marks of the mendicant order. Thou art he that is without such
marks.[135] Thou art he that transcends the usages of the mendicant
order. Thou art he that assures all creatures from every sort of fear.
Thou art without any passions thyself (so that glory and humiliation are
alike to thee). Thou art he that is called the celestial generalissimo.
Thou art that Visakha who took his rise from the body of the celestial
generalissimo when Indra hurled his thunder-bolt at him. Thou art
conversant with the sixty tattwas or heads of enquiry in the universe.
Thou art the Lord of the senses (for these achieve their respective
functions guided by thee). Thou art he that is armed with the
thunder-bolt (and that rives the mountains). Thou art infinite. Thou art
the stupefier of Daitya ranks in the field of battle. Thou art he that
moves his car in circles among his own ranks and that makes similar
circles among the ranks of his foes and who conies back safe and sound
after devastating then. Thou art he that is conversant with the lowest
depth of the world's ocean (in consequence of thy knowledge of Brahman).
Thou art he called Madhu (who has founded the race in which Krishna has
taken his birth). Thou hast eyes whose colour resembles that of honey.
Thou art he that has taken birth after Vrihaspati.[136] Thou art he that
does the acts which Adhyaryus have to do in sacrifices. Thou art he who
is always adored by persons whatever their modes of life. Thou art
devoted to Brahman. Thou wanderest amongst the habitations of men in the
world (in consequence of thy being a mendicant). Thou art he that
pervadest all beings. Thou art he that is conversant with truth. Thou
knowest and guidest every heart. Thou art he that overspreads the whole
universe. Thou art he that collects or stores the good and bad acts of
all creatures in order to award them the fruits thereof Thou art he that
lives during even the night that follows the universal dissolution. Thou
art the protector wielding the bow called Pinaka. Thou residest in even
the Daityas that are the marks at which shootest thy arrows. Thou art the
author of prosperity. Thou art the mighty ape Hanuman that aided Vishnu
in the incarnation of Rama in his expedition against Ravana. Thou art the
lord of those Ganas that are thy associates, Thou art each member of
those diverse Ganas. Thou art he that gladdens all creatures. Thou art
the enhancer of the joys of all.[137] Thou takest away the sovereignty
and prosperity of even such high beings as Indra and others. Thou art the
universal slayer in the form of Death. Thou art he that resides in the
four and sixty Kalas. Thou art very great. Thou art the Grandsire (being
the sire of the great sire of all). Thou art the supreme phallic emblem
that is adored by both deities and Asuras. Thou art of agreeable and
beautiful features. Thou art he who presides over the variety of
evidences and tendencies for action and non-action. Thou art the lord of
vision. Thou art the Lord of Yoga (in consequence of thy withdrawing all
the senses into the heart and combining them together in that place).
Thou art he that upholds the Krita and the other ages (by causing them to
run ceaselessly). Thou art the Lord of seeds (in consequence of thy being
the giver of the fruits of all acts good and bad). Thou art the original
cause of such seeds. Thou actest in the ways that have been pointed out
in the scriptures beginning with those that treat of the Soul. Thou art
he in whom reside might and the other attributes. Thou art the
Mahabharata and other histories of the kind. Thou art the treatises
called Mimansa. Thou art Gautama (the founder of the science of
dialectics). Thou art the author of the great treatise on Grammar that
has been named after the Moon. Thou art he who chastises his foes. Thou
art he whom none can chastise. Thou art he who is sincere in respect of
all his religious acts and observances. Thou art he that becomes obedient
to those that are devoted to thee. Thou art he that is capable of
reducing others to subjection. Thou art he who foments quarrels among the
deities and the Asuras. Thou art he who has created the four and ten
worlds (beginning with Bhu). Thou art the protector and cherisher of all
Beings commencing from Brahma and ending with the lowest forms of
vegetable life (like grass and straw). Thou art the Creator of even the
five original elements. Thou art he that never enjoys anything (for thou
art always unattached). Thou art free from deterioration. Thou art the
highest form of felicity. Thou art a deity proud of his might. Thou art
Sakra. Thou art the chastisement that is spoken of in treatises on
morality and is inflicted on offenders. Thou art of the form of that
tyranny which prevails over the world. Thou art of pure Soul. Thou art
stainless (being above faults of every kind). Thou art worthy of
adoration. Thou art the world that appears and disappears ceaselessly.
Thou art he whose grace is of the largest measure. Thou art he that has
good dreams. Thou art a mirror in which the universe is reflected. Thou
art he that has subjugated all internal and external foes. Thou art the
maker of the Vedas. Thou art the maker of those declarations that are
contained in the Tantras and the Puranas and that are embodied in
language that is human.[138] Thou art possessed of great learning. Thou
art the grinder of foes in battle. Thou art he that resides in the awful
clouds that appear at the time of the universal dissolution. Thou art
most terrible (in consequence of the dissolution of the universe that
thou bringest about). Thou art he who succeeds in bringing all persons
and all things into thy subjection. Thou art the great Destroyer. Thou
art he that has fire for his energy. Thou art he whose energy is mightier
than fire. Thou art the Yuga-fire that consumes all things. Thou art he
that is capable of being gratified by means of sacrificial libations.
Thou art water and other liquids that are poured in sacrifices with the
aid of Mantras. Thou art in the form of the Deity of Righteousness, the
distributor of the fruits that attach to acts good and bad. Thou art the
giver of felicity. Thou art always endued with effulgence. Thou art of
the form of fire. Thou art of the complexion of the emerald. Thou art
always present in the phallic emblem. Thou art the source of blessedness.
Thou art incapable of being baffled by anything in the prosecution of
your objects. Thou art the giver of blessings. Thou art of the form of
blessedness. Thou art he unto whom is given a share of sacrificial
offerings. Thou art he who distributes unto each his share of that is
offered in sacrifices. Thou art endued with great speed. Thou art he that
is dissociated from all things. Thou art he that is possessed of the
mightiest limb. Thou art he that is employed in the act of generation.
Thou art of a dark complexion, (being of the form of Vishnu). Thou art of
a white complexion (being of the form of Samva, the son of Krishna). Thou
art the senses of all embodied creatures. Thou art possessed of vast
feet. Thou hast vast hands. Thou art of vast body. Thou art endued with
wide extending fame. Thou hast a vast head.[139] Thou art of vast
measurements. Thou art of vast vision. Thou art the home of the darkness
of ignorance. Thou art the Destroyer of the Destroyer. Thou art possessed
of vast years. Thou hast vast lips. Thou art he that has vast cheeks.
Thou hast a vast nose. Thou art of a vast throat. Thou hast a vast neck.
Thou art he that tears the bond of body.[140] Thou hast a vast chest.
Thou hast a vast bosom. Thou art the inner soul which resides in all
creatures. Thou hast a deer on thy lap. Thou art he from whom innumerable
worlds hang down like fruits hanging down from a tree. Thou art he who
stretches his lips at the time of the universal dissolution for
swallowing the universe. Thou art the ocean of milk. Thou hast vast
teeth. Thou hast vast jaws. Thou hast a vast bristle.[141] Thou hast hair
of infinite length. Thou hast a vast stomach. Thou hast matted locks of
vast length. Thou art ever cheerful. Thou art of the form of grace. Thou
art of the form of belief. Thou art he that has mountains for his bow (or
weapons in battle). Thou art he that is full of affection to all
creatures like a parent towards his offspring. Thou art he that has no
affection. Thou art unvanquished. Thou art exceedingly devoted to (Yoga)
contemplation.[142] Thou art of the form of the tree of the world.[143]
Thou art he that is indicated by the tree of the world.[144] Thou art
never satiated when eating (because of thy being of the form of fire, for
of all elements, fire is never satiated with the quantity offered it for
consumption). Thou art he that has the Wind for thy vehicle for going
from place to place (in consequence of thy identity with fire). Thou art
he that rangest over hills and little eminences. Thou art he that has his
residence on the mountains of Meru. Thou art the chief of the celestials.
Thou hast the Atharvans for thy head. Thou hast the Samans for thy mouth.
Thou hast the thousand Richs for thy immeasurable eyes. Thou hast the
Yajushes for thy feet and hands.[145] Thou art the Upanishads. Thou art
the entire body of rituals (occurring in the scriptures). Thou art all
that is mobile. Thou art he whose solicitations are never unfulfilled.
Thou art he who is always inclined to grace. Thou art he that is of
beautiful form. Thou art of the form of the good that one does to
another. Thou art that which is dear. Thou art he that always advances
towards thy devotees (in proportion as these advance for meeting thee).
Thou art gold and other precious metals that are held dear by all. Thy
effulgence is like that of burnished gold. Thou art the navel (of the
universe). Thou art he that makes the fruits of sacrifices grow (for the
benefit of those that perform sacrifices to thy glory). Thou art of the
form of that faith and devotion which the righteous have in respect of
sacrifices. Thou art the artificer of the universe. Thou art all that is
immobile (in the form of mountains and other inert objects). Thou art the
two and ten stages of life through which a person passes.[146] Thou art
he that causes fright (by assuming the intermediate states between the
ten enumerated). Thou art the beginning of all things. Thou art he that
unites Jiva with Supreme Brahman through Yoga. Thou art identifiable with
that Yoga which causes such a union between Jiva and Supreme Brahman.
Thou art unmanifest (being the deepest stupefaction). Thou art the
presiding deity of the fourth age (in consequence of thy identity with
lust and wrath and cupidity and other evil passions that flow from that
deity).[147] Thou art eternal Time (because of thy being of the form of
that ceaseless succession of birth and death that goes on in the
universe). Thou art of the form of the Tortoise.[148] Thou art worshipped
by the Destroyer himself. Thou livest in the midst of associates. Thou
admittest thy devotees as members of thy Gana. Thou hast Brahma himself
for the driver of thy car. Thou sleepest on ashes.[149] Thou protectest
the universe with ashes.[150] Thou art he whose body is made of
ashes.[151] Thou art the tree that grants the fruition of all wishes.
Thou art of the form of those that constitute thy Gana. Thou art the
protector of the four and ten regions. Thou transcendent all the regions.
Thou art full, (there being no deficiency). Thou art adored by all
creatures. Thou art white (being pure and stainless). Thou art he that
has his body, speech and mind perfectly stainless. Thou art he who has
attained to that purity of existence which is called Emancipation. Thou
art he who is incapable of being stained by impurity of any kind. Thou
art he who has been attained to by the great preceptors of old. Thou
residest in the form of Righteousness or duly in the four modes of life.
Thou art that Righteousness which is of the form of rites and sacrifices.
Thou art of the form of that skill which is possessed by the celestial
artificer of the universe. Thou art he who is adored as the primeval form
of the universe. Thou art of vast arms. Thy lips are of a coppery hue.
Thou art of the form of the vast waters that are contained in the Ocean.
Thou art exceedingly stable and fixed (being of the form of mountains and
hills). Thou art Kapila. Thou art brown. Thou art all the hues whose
mixture produces white. Thou art the period of life. Thou art ancient.
Thou art recent. Thou art a Gandharva. Thou art the mother of the
celestials in the form of Aditi (or the mother of all things, in the form
of Earth). Thou art Garuda, the prince of birds, born of Vinata by
Kasyapa, otherwise called Tarkshya. Thou art capable of being
comprehended with ease. Thou art of excellent and agreeable speech. Thou
art he that is armed with the battle-axe. Thou art he that is desirous of
victory. Thou art he that assists others in the accomplishment of their
designs.[152] Thou art an excellent friend.[153] Thou art he that bears a
Vina made of two hollow gourds. Thou art of terrible wrath (which thou
displayest at the time of the universal dissolution). Thou ownest for thy
offspring, beings higher than men and deities (viz., Brahma and Vishnu).
Thou art of the form of that Vishnu who floats on the waters after the
universal dissolution. Thou devourest all things with great ferocity.
Thou art he that procreates offspring. Thou art family and race,
continuing from generation to generation. Thou art the blare that a
bamboo flute gives out. Thou art faultless. Thou art he every limb of
whose body is beautiful. Thou art full of illusion. Thou dost good to
others without expecting any return. Thou art Wind. Thou art Fire. Thou
art the bonds of the worlds which bind Jiva. Thou art the creator of
those bonds. Thou art the tearer of such bonds. Thou art he that dwells
with even the Daityas (who are the foes of all sacrifices). Thou dwellest
with those that are the foes of all acts (and that have abandoned all
acts). Thou art of large teeth, and thou art of mighty weapons. Thou art
he that has been greatly censured. Thou art he that stupefied the Rishis
dwelling in the Daruka forest. Thou art he that did good unto even thy
detractors, viz., those Rishis residing in the Daruka forest. Thou art he
who dispels all fears and who dispelling all the fears of those Rishis
gave them Emancipation. Thou art he that has no wealth (in consequence of
his inability to procure even his necessary wearing apparel). Thou art
the lord of the celestials. Thou art the greatest of the gods (in
consequence of thy being adored by even Indra and others that are
regarded as the highest of the celestials). Thou art an object of
adoration with even Vishnu. Thou art the slayer of those that are the
foes of the deities. Thou art he that resides (in the form of the snake
Sesha) in the nethermost region.[154] Thou art invisible but capable of
being comprehended, even as the wind which though invisible is perceived
by every body. Thou art he whose knowledge extends to the roots of
everything and unto whom all things, even in their inner nature, are
known. Thou art the object that is enjoyed by him that enjoys it. Thou
art he among the eleven Rudras who is called Ajaikapat. Thou art the
sovereign of the entire universe. Thou art of the form of all Jivas in
the universe (in consequence of thy being covered by the three well-known
attributes of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas). Thou art he that is not subject
to those three attributes. Thou art he that transcends all attributes and
is a state of pure existence which is incapable of being described with
the aid of any adjective that language can yield. Thou art the prince of
physicians called Dhanwantari. Thou art a comet (in consequence of the
calamities that flow from thee unto the sinful). Thou art the celestial
generalissimo called Skanda. Thou art the king of the Yakshas, called
Kuvera, who is thy inseparable associate and who is the Lord of all
treasures in the world. Thou art Dhatri. Thou art Sakra. Thou art Vishnu.
Thou art Mitra. Thou art Tashtri (the celestial artificer). Thou art the
Pole Star. Thou art he that upholds all things. Thou art he called
Prabhava amongst the Vasus. Thou art the wind which is capable of going
everywhere (being the Sutra-atma that connects all things in the universe
with a thread). Thou art Aryaman. Thou art Savitri. Thou art Ravi. Thou
art that ancient king of great celebrity known by the name of Ushangu.
Thou art he who protects all creatures in diverse ways. Thou art
Mandhatri (because of thy competence to gratify all creatures). Thou art
he from whom all creatures start into life. Thou art he who exists in
diverse form. Thou art he who causes the diverse hues to exist in the
universe. Thou art he who upholds all desires and all attributes (because
of these flowing from thee). Thou art he who has the lotus on thy
navel.[155] Thou art he within whose womb are innumerable mighty
creatures. Thou art of face as beautiful as the moon. Thou art wind. Thou
art fire. Thou art possessed of exceeding might. Thou art endued with
tranquillity of soul. Thou art old. Thou art he that is known with the
aid of Righteousness.[156] Thou art Lakshmi. Thou art the maker of the
field of those actions (by which persons adore the supreme Deity). Thou
art he who lives in the field of action. Thou art the soul of the field
of action. Thou art the medicine or provoker of the attributes of
sovereignty and the others.[157] All things lie in thee (for, as the
Srutis declare, all things becomes one in thee, thyself being of the
nature of that unconsciousness which exhibits itself in dreamless
slumber). Thou art the lord of all creatures endued with life-breaths.
Thou art the god of the gods. Thou art he who is attached to felicity.
Thou art Sat (in the form of cause). Thou art Asat (in the form of
effect). Thou art he who possesses the best of all things. Thou art he
who resides on the mountains of Kailasa. Thou art he who repairs to the
mountains of Himavat. Thou washest away all things besides thee like a
mighty current washing away trees and other objects standing on its
banks. Thou art the maker of Pushkara and other large lakes and pieces of
natural water. Thou art possessed of knowledge of infinite kinds. Thou
art the giver of infinite blessings. Thou art a merchant (who conveys the
goods of this country to that country and brings the goods of that
country to this for the convenience of human beings). Thou art a
carpenter. Thou art the tree (of the world that supplies the timber for
thy axe). Thou art the tree called Vakula (Mimusops Elengi, Linn.) Thou
art the sandal-wood tree (Santalum album, Linn.). Thou art the tree
called Chcchada (Alstonia Scholaris, syn Echitis, Scholaris, Roxb.). Thou
art he whose neck is very strong. Thou art he whose shoulder joint is
vast. Thou art not restless (but endued with steadiness in all thy acts
and in respect of all thy faculties). Thou art the principal herbs and
plants with their produce (in the form of rice and wheat and the other
varieties of grain). Thou art he that grants success upon others in
respect of the objects upon which they bestow their heart. Thou art all
the correct conclusions in respect of both the Vedas and Grammar.[158]
Thou art he who utters leonine roars. Thou art endued with leonine fangs.
Thou ridest on the back of a lion for performing thy journeys. Thou
ownest a car that is drawn by a lion. Thou art he called the truth of
truth.[159] Thou art he whose dish or plate is constituted by the
Destroyer of the universe.[160] Thou art always engaged in seeking the
good of the worlds. Thou art he who rescues all creatures from distress
(and leads them to the felicity of Emancipation). Thou art the bird
called Saranga. Thou art a new (Young) swan. Thou art he who is displayed
in beauty in consequence of the crest thou bearest on thy head (like the
cock or the peacock). Thou art he who protects the place where assemblies
of the wise sit for dispensing justice. Thou art the abode of all
creatures. Thou art the cherisher of all creatures. Thou art Day and
Night (which are the constituent elements of Eternity). Thou art he that
is without fault and therefore, never censured. Thou art the upholder of
all creatures. Thou art the refuge of all creatures. Thou art without
birth. Thou art existent. Thou art ever fruitful. Thou art endued with
Dharana and Dhyana and Samadhi. Thou art the steed Uchchaisravas. Thou
art the giver of food. Thou art he who upholds the life-breaths of living
creatures. Thou art endued with patience. Thou art possessed of
intelligence. Thou art endued with exertion and cleverness. Thou art
honoured by all. Thou art the giver of the fruits of Righteousness and
sin. Thou art the cherisher of the senses (for the senses succeed in
performing their respective functions in consequence of thee that
presidest over them). Thou art the lord of all the luminaries. Thou art
all collections of objects. Thou art he whose vestments are made of
cowhides. Thou art he who dispels the grief of his devotees. Thou hast a
golden arm. Thou art he who protects the bodies of Yogins who seek to
enter their own selves. Thou art he who has reduced to nothingness all
his foes.[161] Thou art he the measure of whose gladness is very great.
Thou art he who achieved victory over the deity of desire that is
irresistible. Thou art he who has subjugated his senses. Thou art the
note called Gandhara in the musical octave. Thou art he who has an
excellent and beautiful home (in consequence of its being placed upon the
delightful mountains of Kailasa). Thou art he who is ever attached to
penances. Thou art of the form of cheerfulness and contentment. Thou art
he called vast or infinite.[162] Thou art he in whose honour the foremost
of hymns has been composed. Thou art he whose dancing is characterised by
vast strides and large leaps. Thou art he who is adored with reverence by
the diverse tribes of Apsaras. Thou art he who owns a vast standard
(bearing the device of the bull). Thou art the mountains of Meru. Thou
art he who roves among all the summits of that great mountain. Thou art
so mobile that it is very difficult to seize thee. Thou art capable of
being explained by preceptors to disciples, although thou art incapable
of being described in words. Thou art of the form of that instruction
which preceptors impart to disciples. Thou art he that can perceive all
agreeable scents simultaneously or at the same instant of time. Thou art
of the form of the porched gates of cities and palaces. Thou art of the
form of the moats and ditches that surround fortified towns and give the
victory to the besieged garrison. Thou art the Wind. Thou art of the form
of fortified cities and towns encompassed by walls and moats. Thou art
the prince of all winged creatures, (being, as thou art, of the form of
Garuda). Thou art he who multiplies the creation by union with the
opposite sexes. Thou art the first of all in respect of virtues and
knowledge. Thou art superior to even him who is the first of all in
virtues and knowledge. Thou transcendest all the virtue and knowledge.
Thou art eternal and immutable as also dependent on thyself. Thou art the
master and protector of the deities and Asuras. Thou art the master and
protector of all creatures. Thou art he who wears a coat of mail. Thou
art he whose arms are competent to grind all foes. Thou art an object of
adoration with even him who is called Suparvan in heaven.[163] Thou art
he who grants the power of bearing or upholding all things.[164] Thou art
thyself capable of bearing all things. Thou art fixed and steady (without
being at all unstable). Thou art white or pure (being, as thou art,
without any stain or blot). Thou bearest the trident that is competent to
destroy (all things).[165] Thou art the grantor of bodies or physical
forms unto those that constantly revolve in the universe of birth and
death. Thou art more valuable than wealth. Thou art the conduct or way of
the righteous (in the form of goodness and courtesy). Thou art he who had
torn the head of Brahma after due deliberation (and not impelled by mere
wrath). Thou art he who is marked with all those auspicious marks that
are spoken of in the sciences of palmistry and phrenology and other
branches of knowledge treating of the physical frame as the indicator of
mental peculiarities. Thou art that wooden bar which is called the Aksha
of a car and, therefore, art thou he who is attached to the car
represented by the body. Thou art attached to all things (in consequence
of thy pervading all things as their soul). Thou art endued with very
great might, being as thou art a hero of heroes. Thou art the Veda. Thou
art the Smritis, the Itihasas, the Puranas, and other scriptures. Thou
art the illustrious deity of every sacred shrine. Thou art he who has the
Earth for his car. Thou art the inert elements that enter into the
composition of every creature. Thou art he who imparts life into every
combination of those inert element. Thou art the Pranava and other sacred
Mantras that instil life into dead matter. Thou art he that casts
tranquil glances. Thou art exceedingly harsh (in consequence of thy being
the destroyer of all things). Thou art he in whom are innumerable
precious attributes and possessions. Thou hast a body that is red. Thou
art he who has all the vast oceans as so many ponds filled for thy
drinking.[166] Thou art the root of the tree of the world. Thou art
exceedingly beautiful and shinest with surpassing grandeur. Thou art of
the form of ambrosia or nectar. Thou art both cause and effect. Thou art
an ocean of penances (being as thou art a great Yogin). Thou art he that
desirous of ascending to the highest state of existence. Thou art he that
has already attained to that state. Thou art he who is distinguished for
the purity of his conduct and acts and observances. Thou art he who
possessed of great fame (in consequence of the Righteousness of his
behaviour). Thou art the ornament of armies (being as thou art of the
form of prowess and courage), Thou art he who is adorned with celestial
ornaments. Thou art Yoga. Thou art he from whom flow eternal time
measured by Yugas and Kalpas. Thou art he who conveys all creatures from
place.[167] Thou art of the form of Righteousness and sin and their
intermixture (such as are displayed in the successive Yugas). Thou art
great and formless. Thou art he who slew the mighty Asura that had
approached against the sacred city of Varanasi in the form of an
infuriate elephant of vast proportions. Thou art of the form of death.
Thou givest to all creatures such fruition of their wishes as accords
with their merits. Thou art approachable. Thou art conversant with all
things that are beyond the ken of the senses. Thou art conversant with
the Tattwas (and therefore, thoroughly fixed). Thou art he who
incessantly shines in beauty. Thou wearest garlands that stretch down
from thy neck to the feet. Thou art that Hara who has the Moon for his
beautiful eye. Thou art the salt ocean of vast expanse. Thou art the
first three Yugas (viz., Krita, Treta, and Dwapara). Thou art he whose
appearance is always fraught with advantage to others. Thou art he who
has three eyes (in the form of the scriptures, the preceptor, and
meditation). Thou art he whose forms are exceedingly subtile (being as
thou art the subtile forms of the primal elements). Thou art he whose
ears are bored for wearing jewelled Kundalas. Thou art the bearer of
matted locks. Thou art the point (in the alphabet) which indicates the
nasal sound. Thou art the two dots i.e., Visarga (in the Sanskrit
alphabet which indicate the sound of the aspirated H). Thou art possessed
of an excellent face. Thou art the shaft that is shot by the warrior for
encompassing the destruction of his foe. Thou art all the weapons that
are used by warriors. Thou art endued with patience capable of bearing
all things. Thou art he whose knowledge has arisen from the cessation of
all physical and mental functions.[168] Thou art he who has become
displayed as Truth in consequence of the cessation of all other
faculties. Thou art that note which, arising from the region called
Gandhara, is exceedingly sweet to the ear. Thou art he who is armed with
the mighty bow (called Pinaka). Thou art he who is the understanding and
the desires that exist in all creatures, besides being the supreme
upholder of all beings. Thou art he from whom all acts flow. Thou art
that wind which rises at the time of the universal dissolution and which
is capable of churning the entire universe even as the staff in the hands
of the dairy-maid churns the milk in the milkpot. Thou art he that is
full. Thou art he that sees all things. Thou art the sound that arises
from slapping one palm against another. Thou art he the palm of whose
hand serves as the dish or plate whence to take his food. Thou art he who
is possessed of an adamantine body. Thou art exceedingly great. Thou art
of the form of an umbrella. Thou art he who has an excellent umbrella.
Thou art well-known to be identical with all creatures. Thou art he who
having put forth three feet covered all the universe with two and wanted
space for the remaining one. Thou art he whose head is bald. Thou art he
whose form is exceedingly ugly and fierce. Thou art he who has undergone
infinite modifications and become all things in the universe. Thou art he
who bears the well-known badge of Sanyasa, viz., the stick. Thou art he
who has a Kunda. Thou art he who is incapable of being attained to by
means of acts. Thou art he who is identical with the green-eyed king of
beasts (viz., the lion). Thou art of the form of all the points of the
compass. Thou art he who is armed with the thunder. Thou art he who has a
hundred tongues. Thou art he who has a thousand feet and thousand
heads.[169] Thou art the lord and chief of the celestials. Thou art he
that is made up of all the gods. Thou art the great Master or preceptor.
Thou art he who has a thousand arms. Thou art he who is competent to
obtain the fruition of every wish. Thou art he whose protection is sought
by every one. Thou art he who is the creator of all the worlds. Thou art
he who is the great cleanser of all from every kind of sin, in the form
of shrines and sacred waters. Thou art he who has three high
Mantras.[170] Thou art the youngest son of Aditi and Kasyapa, (being in
the form of the dwarf who is otherwise known by the name of Upendra and
who beguiled the Asura Vali of his lordship of the three worlds and
restored it to the chief of the celestials). Thou art both black and
tawny (being of the form which is known as Hari-Hara). Thou art the maker
of the Brahmana's rod.[171] Thou art armed with the hundred-killer, the
noose, and the dart. Thou art he that took his birth within the primeval
lotus.
Thou art he who is endued with a vast womb. Thou art he who has the Vedas
in his womb. Thou art he who takes his rise from that infinite waste of
waters which succeeds the dissolution of the universe. Thou art he who is
endued with rays of effulgent light. Thou art the creator of the Vedas.
Thou art he who studies the Vedas. Thou art he who is conversant with the
meaning of the Vedas. Thou art devoted to Brahman. Thou art the refuge of
all persons devoted to Brahman. Thou art of infinite forms. Thou art the
bearer of innumerable bodies. Thou art endued with irresistible
prowess.[172] Thou art the soul or nature that transcends the three
universal attributes (of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas). Thou art the lord of
all Jivas. Thou art endued with the speed of the wind. Thou art possessed
of the fleetness of the mind. Thou art always smeared with sandal-paste.
Thou art the end of the stalk of the primeval lotus.[173] Thou art he who
brought the celestial cow Surabhi down from a superior station to an
inferior one by denouncing a curse upon her.[174] Thou art that Brahma
who was unable to see thy end. Thou art adorned with a large wreath of
Karnikara flowers. Thou art adorned with a diadem of blue gems. Thou art
the wielder of the bow called Pinaka. Thou art the master of that
knowledge which treats of Brahman.[175] Thou art he who has subjugated
his senses by the aid of thy knowledge of Brahman. Thou art he who
bearest Ganga on thy head.[176] Thou art the husband of Uma, the daughter
of Himavat. Thou art mighty (in consequence of thy having assumed the
form of the vast Boar for raising the submerged Earth). Thou art he who
protects the universe by assuming diverse incarnations. Thou art worthy
of adoration. Thou art that primeval Being with the equine head who
recited the Vedas with a thundering voice. Thou art he whose grace is
very great. Thou art the great subjugator. Thou art he who has slain all
his foes (in the form of passions). Thou art both white and tawny (being
as thou art half male and half female).[177] Thou art possessed of a body
whose complexion is like that of gold.[178] Thou art he that is of the
form of pure joy, (being, as thou art, above the five sheathes which the
Jiva consists of, viz., the Anna-maya, the Prana-maya, the Mano-maya, the
Vijnana-maya, and the Ananda-maya ones). Thou art of a restrained soul.
Thou art the foundation upon which rests that Ignorance which is called
Pradhana and which, consisting of the three attributes of Sattwa, Rajas,
and Tamas is the cause whence the universe has sprung. Thou art he whose
faces are turned to every direction.[179] Thou art he who has three eyes
(in the forms of the Sun, the Moon, and Fire). Thou art he who is
superior to all creatures (in consequence of thy righteousness whose
measure is the greatest). Thou art the soul of all mobile beings. Thou
art of the form of the subtile soul (which is incapable of being
perceived). Thou art the giver of immortality in the form of Emancipation
as the fruit of all acts of righteousness achieved by creatures without
the desire of fruits.[180] Thou art the preceptor of even those that are
the gods of the gods. Thou art Vasu, the son of Aditi. Thou art he who is
endued with innumerable rays of light, who brings forth the universe, and
who is of the form of that Soma which is drunk in sacrifices. Thou art
Vyasa, the author of the Puranas and other sacred histories. Thou art the
creations of Vyasa's brain (because of thy being identical with the
Puranas and other sacred histories) both abridged and unabridged. Thou
art the sum total of Jivas. Thou art the Season. Thou art the Year. Thou
art the Month. Thou art the Fortnight. Thou art those sacred Days that
end or conclude these periods. Thou art the Kalas. Thou art the Kashthas.
Thou art the Lavas. Thou art the Matras. Thou art the Muhurtas and Days
and Nights. Thou art the Kshanas.[181] Thou art the soil upon which the
tree of the universe stands. Thou art the seed of all creatures [being of
the form of that Unmanifest Chaitanya (consciousness) endued with Maya or
illusion whence all creatures spring]. Thou art Mahattatwa. Thou art the
sprout of Jiva, (being of the form of Consciousness which springs up
after Mahattatwa). Thou art Sat or Effect. Thou art Asat or Cause. Thou
art Manifest (being seizable by the senses). Thou art the Father. Thou
art the Mother. Thou art the Grandfather. Thou art the door to Heaven
(because of thy identity with Penances). Thou art the door of the
generation of all creatures (because of thy identity with desire). Thou
art the door of Emancipation (because of thy identity with the absence of
Desire which alone can lead to the merging into Brahman). Thou art those
acts of righteousness which lead to the felicity of heaven. Thou art
Nirvana (or that cessation of individual or separate existence which is
Emancipation). Thou art the gladdener (who gives all kinds of joy to
every creature). Thou art that region of Truth (to which they that are
foremost in righteousness attain). Thou art superior to even that region
of Truth which is attainable by the righteous. Thou art he who is the
creator of both the deities and the Asuras. Thou art he who is the refuge
of both the deities and the Asuras. Thou art the preceptor of both the
deities and the Asuras (being as thou art of the form of both Vrihaspati
and Sukra). Thou art he who is ever victorious. Thou art he who is ever
worshipped by the deities and the Asuras. Thou art he who guides the
deities and the Asuras even as the Mahamatra guides the elephant. Thou
art the refuge of all the deities and the Asuras. Thou art he who is the
chief of both the deities and the Asuras (being as thou art of the form
of both India and Virochana). Thou art he who is the leader in battle of
both the deities and the Asuras (being as thou art of the form of
Karttikeya and Kesi, the leaders of the celestial and the Daitya armies).
Thou art he who transcends the senses and shines by himself. Thou art of
the form of the celestial Rishis like Narada and others. Thou art the
grantor of boons unto the deities and Asuras (in the form of Brahman and
Rudra). Thou art he who rules the hearts of the deities and the Asuras.
Thou art he into whom the universe enters (when it is dissolved). Thus
art the refuge of even him who is the ruler of the hearts of both the
deities and the Asuras. Thou art he whose body is made up of all the
deities.[182] Thou art he who has no Being superior to thee of whom to
think. Thou art he who is the inner soul of the deities. Thou art he who
has sprung from his own self. Thou art of the form of immobile things.
Thou art he who covers the three worlds with three steps of his. Thou art
possessed of great learning. Thou art stainless. Thou art he who is freed
from the quality of Rajas. Thou art he who transcends destruction. Thou
art he in whose honour hymns should be sung. Thou art the master of the
irresistible elephant represented by Time. Thou art of the form of that
lord of Tigers who is worshipped in the country of the Kalingas.[183]
Thou art he who is called the lion among the deities (in consequence of
the pre-eminence of thy prowess). Thou art he who is the foremost of men.
Thou art endued with great wisdom. Thou art he who first takes a share of
the offerings in sacrifice. Thou art imperceptible. Thou art the
sum-total of all the deities. Thou art he in whom penances predominate.
Thou art always in excellent Yoga. Thou art auspicious. Thou art armed
with the thunder-bolt. Thou art the source whence the weapons called
Prasas have taken their origin. Thou art he whom thy devotees attain to
in diverse ways. Thou art Guha (the celestial generalissimo). Thou art
the supreme limit of felicity.[184] Thou art identical with thy creation.
Thou art he who rescues thy creatures from death (by granting them
Emancipation). Thou art the cleanser of all including Brahma himself.
Thou art of the form of bulls and other horned animals. Thou art he who
is fond of mountain summits. Thou art the planet Saturn. Thou art Kuvera,
the chief of the Yakshas. Thou art complete faultlessness. Thou art he
who inspires gladness. Thou art all the celestials united together. Thou
art the cessation of all things. Thou art all the duties that appertain
to all the modes of life. Thou art he who has an eye on his forehead.
Thou art he who sports with the universe as his marble ball. Thou art of
the form of deer. Thou art endued with the energy that is of the form of
knowledge and penance. Thou art the lord of all immobile things (in the
form of Himavat and Meru). Thou art he who has subjugated his senses by
various regulations and vows. Thou art he whose objects have all been
fulfilled. Thou art identical with Emancipation. Thou art different from
him whom we worship. Thou hast truth for thy penances. Thou art of a pure
heart. Thou art he who presides over all vows and fasts (in consequence
of thy being the giver of their fruits). Thou art the highest (being of
the form of Turiya). Thou art Brahman. Thou art the highest refuge of the
devotees. Thou art he who transcends all bonds (being Emancipate). Thou
art freed from the linga body. Thou art endued with every kind of
prosperity. Thou art he who enhances the prosperity of thy devotees. Thou
art that which is incessantly undergoing changes.'
"I have thus, 'O Krishna, hymned the praises of the illustrious Deity by
reciting his names in the order of their importance. Who is there that
can hymn the praises of the lord of the universe, that great Lord of all
who deserves our adorations and worship and reverence, whom the very gods
with Brahma at their head are unable to praise and whom the Rishis also
fail to sing? Aided, however, by my devotion to him, and having received
his permission, I have praised that Lord of sacrifices, that Deity of
supreme puissance, that foremost of all creatures endued with
intelligence. By praising with these names that enhance one's
auspiciousness of the great lord of blessedness, a worshipper of devoted
soul and pure heart succeeds in attaining to his own self. These names
constitute a hymn that furnishes the best means of attaining to Brahman.
With the aid of this hymn one is sure to succeed in attaining to
Emancipation. Rishis and the deities all praise the highest deity by
uttering this hymn. Hymned by persons of restrained soul Mahadeva becomes
gratified with those that hymn his praises so. The illustrious deity is
always full of compassion towards his devotees. Endued with omnipotence,
he it is that gives Emancipation to those that worship him. So also, they
among men that are foremost, that are possessed of faith and devotion
hear and recite for others and utter with reverence the praises of that
highest and eternal Lord viz. Isana, in all their successive lives and
adore him in thought, word, and deed, and adoring him thus at all times,
viz. when they are lying or seated or walking or awake or opening the
eyelids or shutting them, and thinking of him repeatedly, become objects
of reverence with all their fellowmen and derive great gratification and
exceeding joy. When a creature becomes cleansed of all his sins in course
of millions of births in diverse orders of being, it is then that
devotion springs up in his heart for Mahadeva. It is through good luck
alone that undivided devotion to Bhava who is the original cause (of the
universe) fully springs up in the heart of one that is conversant with
every mode of worshipping that great Deity.[185] Such stainless and pure
devotion to Rudra, that has singleness of purpose and that is simply
irresistible in its course, is seldom to be found among even the deities,
and never among men. It is through the grace of Rudra that such devotion
arises in the hearts of human beings. In consequence of such devotion,
men, identifying themselves wholly with Mahadeva, succeed in attaining to
the highest success. The illustrious Deity who is always inclined to
extend his grace towards them that seek him with humility, and throw
themselves with their whole soul upon him rescues them from the world.
Except the great Deity who frees creatures from rebirth, all other gods
constantly nullify the penances of men, for men have no other source of
puissance that is as great as these.[186] It was even thus Tandi of
tranquil soul, resembling Indra himself in splendour, praised the
illustrious Lord of all existent and non-existent things,--that great
Deity clad in animal skins. Indeed, Brahma had sung this hymn in the
presence of Sankara. Thou art a Brahmana (being conversant with Brahman
and devoted to those that are conversant with Brahman). Thou shalt,
therefore, comprehend it well. This is cleansing, and washes away all
sins. This confers Yoga and Emancipation and heaven and contentment. He
who recites this hymn with undivided devotion to Sankara succeeds in
attaining to that high end which is theirs that are devoted to the
doctrines of the Sankhya philosophy. That worshipper who recites this
hymn daily for one year with singleness of devotion succeeds in obtaining
the end that he desires. This hymn is a great mystery. It formerly
resided in the breast of Brahma the Creator. Brahma imparted it unto
Sakra. Sakra imparted unto Mrityu. Mrityu imparted it unto the Rudras.
From the Rudras Tandi got it. Indeed Tandi acquired it in the region of
Brahman as the reward of his severe austerities. Tandi communicated it to
Sukra, and Sukra of Bhrigu's race communicated it to Gautama. Gautama in
his turn, O descendant of Madhu, communicated it to Vaivaswata-Manu. Manu
communicated it unto Narayana of great intelligence, numbered among the
Sadhyas and held exceedingly dear by him. The illustrious Narayana,
numbered among the Sadhyas and possessed of glory that knows no
diminution, communicated it to Yama. Vaivaswat Yama communicated it to
Nachiketa. Nachiketa, O thou of Vrishni's race, communicated to
Markandeya. From Markandeya, O Janarddana, I obtained it as the reward of
my vows and fasts. To thee, O slayer of foes, I communicate that hymn
unheard by others. This hymn leads to heaven. It dispels disease and
bestows long life. This is worthy of the highest praise, and is
consistent with the Vedas.'
"Krishna continued, 'That person, O Partha, who recites this hymn with a
pure heart observing the vow of Brahmacharyya, and with his senses under
control, regularly for one whole year, succeeds in obtaining the fruits
of a horse-sacrifice. Danavas and Yakshas and Rakshasas and Pisachas and
Yatudhanas and Guhyakas and snakes can do no injury to him.'"
