SECTION VII
"Yudhishthira said, 'O the best of Bharata's race and the foremost of
great men, I wish to know what the fruits are of good deed. Do thou
enlighten me on this point.'"
"Bhishma said, 'I shall tell thee what thou hast asked. Do thou, O
Yudhishthira, listen to this which constitutes the secret knowledge of
the Rishis. Listen to me as I explain what the ends, long coveted, are
which are attained by men after death. Whatever actions are performed by
particular corporeal beings, the fruits thereof are reaped by the doers
while endued with similar corporeal bodies; for example, the fruits of
actions done with mind are enjoyed at the time of dreams, and those of
actions performed physically are enjoyed in the working state physically.
In whatever states creatures perform good or evil deeds, they reap the
fruits thereof in similar states of succeeding lives. No act done with
the aid of the five organs of sensual perception, is ever lost. The five
sensual organs and the immortal soul which is the sixth, remain its
witnesses. One should devote one's eye to the service of the guest and
should devote one's heart on the same; one should utter words that are
agreeable; one should also follow and worship (one's guest). This is
called Panchadakshin Sacrifice, (the sacrifice with five gifts). He who
offers good food to the unknown and weary travellers fatigued by a long
journey, attains to great merit. Those that use the sacrificial platform
as their only bed obtain commodious mansions and beds (in subsequent
births). Those that wear only rags and barks of trees for dress, obtain
good apparel and ornaments in next birth. One possessed of penances and
having his soul on Yoga, get vehicles and riding animals (as the fruit of
their renunciation in this life). The monarch that lies down by the side
of the sacrificial fire, attains to vigour and valour. The man who
renounces the enjoyment of all delicacies, attains to prosperity, and he
that abstains from animal food, obtains children and cattle, He who lies
down with his head downwards, or who lives in water, or who lives
secluded and alone in the practice of Brahmacharya, attains to all the
desired ends. He who offers shelter to a guest and welcomes him with
water to wash his feet as also with food, light and bed, attains to the
merits of the sacrifice with the five gifts. He who lays himself down on
a warrior's bed on the battle-field in the posture of a warrior, goes to
those eternal regions where all the objects of desire are fulfilled. A
man, O king, attains to riches that makes charitable gifts. One secures
obedience to one's command by the vow of silence, all the enjoyments of
life by practice of austerities, long life by Brahmacharya, and beauty,
prosperity and freedom from disease by abstaining from injury to others.
Sovereignty falls to the lot of those that subsist on fruits and roots
only. Residence in heaven is attained by those that live on only leaves
of trees. A man, O king, is said to obtain happiness, by abstention from
food. By confining one's diet to herbs alone, one becomes possessed of
cows. By living on grass one attains to the celestial regions. By
foregoing all intercourse with one's wife and making ablutions three
times during the day and by inhaling the air only for purposes of
subsistence, one obtains the merit of a sacrifice. Heaven is attained by
the practice of truth, nobility of birth by sacrifices. The Brahmana of
pure practices that subsists on water only, and performs the Agnihotra
ceaselessly, and recites the Gayatri, obtains a kingdom. By abstaining
food or by regulating it, one attains to residence in heaven. O king, by
abstaining from all but the prescribed diet while engaged in sacrifices,
and by making pilgrimage for twelve years, one attains to a place better
than the abodes reserved for heroes. By reading all the Vedas, one is
instantly liberated from misery, and by practising virtue in thought, one
attains to the heavenly regions. That man who is able to renounce that
intense yearning of the heart for happiness and material enjoyments,--a
yearning that is difficult of conquest by the foolish and that doth not
abate with the abatement of bodily vigour and that clings like a fatal
disease unto him,--is able to secure happiness. As the young calf is able
to recognise its dam from among a thousand cows, so does the previous
acts of a man pursue him (in all his different transformations). As the
flowers and fruits of a tree, unurged by visible influences, never miss
their proper season, so does Karma done in a previous existence bring
about its fruits in proper time. With age, man's hair grows grey, his
teeth become loose; his eyes and ears too become dim in action; but the
only thing that does not abate is his desire for enjoyments. Prajapati is
pleased with those acts that please one's father, and the Earth is
pleased with those acts that please one's mother, and Brahma is adored
with those acts that please one's preceptor. Virtue is honoured by him
who honours these three. The acts of those that despise these three do
not avail them.'"
"Vaisampayana said, 'The princes of Kuru's race became filled with wonder
upon listening to this speech of Bhishma. All of them became pleased in
mind and overpowered with joy. As Mantras applied with a desire to win
victory, or the performance of the Shoma sacrifice made without proper
gifts, or oblations poured on the fire without proper hymns, become
useless and lead to evil consequences, even so sin and evil results flow
from falsehood in speech. O prince, I have thus related to thee this
doctrine of the fruition of good and evil acts, as narrated by the Rishis
of old. What else dost thou wish to hear?"
 SECTION VIII
"Yudhishthira said, 'Who are deserving of worship? Who are they unto whom
one may bow? Who are they, O Bharata, unto whom thou wouldst bend thy
head? Who, again, are they whom thou likest? Tell me all this, O prince.
What is that upon which thy mind dwells when affliction overwhelms thee?
Do thou discourse to me on what is beneficial here, that is, in this
region of human beings, as also hereafter.'"[10]
"Bhishma said, 'I like those regenerate persons whose highest wealth is
Brahman, whose heaven consists in the knowledge of the soul, and whose
penances are constituted by their diligent study of the Vedas. My heart
yearns after those in whose race persons, young and old diligently bear
the ancestral burthens without languishing under them. Brahmanas
well-trained in several branches of knowledge, self-controlled,
mild-speeched, conversant with the scriptures, well-behaved, possessed of
the knowledge of Brahman and righteous in conduct, discourse in
respectable assemblies like flights of swans.[11] Auspicious, agreeable,
excellent, and well-pronounced are the words, O Yudhishthira, which they
utter with a voice as deep as that of the clouds. Fraught with happiness
both temporal and spiritual, such words are uttered by them in the courts
of monarchs, themselves being received with honour and attention and
served with reverence by those rulers of men. Indeed, my heart yearns
after them who listen to the words uttered in assemblies or the courts of
kings by persons endued with knowledge and all desirable attributes, and
are respected by others. My heart, O monarch, always yearns after them
who, for the gratification of Brahmanas, O Yudhishthira, give unto them,
with devotion, food that is well-cooked and clean and wholesome. It is
easy to fight in battle, but not so to make a gift without pride or
vanity. In this world, O Yudhishthira, there are brave men and heroes by
hundreds. While counting them, he that is a hero in gifts should be
regarded as superior, O amiable one, if I had been even a vulgar
Brahmana, I would have regarded myself as very great, not to speak of one
born in a good Brahmana family endued with righteousness of conduct, and
devoted to penances and learning. There is no one, O son of Pandu, in
this world that is dearer to me than thou, O chief of Bharata's race but
dearer to me than thou are the Brahmanas. And since, O best of the Kurus,
the Brahmanas are very much dearer to me than thou, it is by that truth
that I hope to go to all those regions of felicity which have been
acquired by my sire Santanu. Neither my sire, nor my sire's sire, nor any
one else connected with me by blood, is dearer to me than the Brahmanas.
I do not expect any fruit, small or great, from my worship of the
Brahmanas (for I worship them as deities because they are deserving of
such worship).[12] In consequence of what I have done to the Brahmanas in
thought, word, and deed, I do not feel any pain now (even though I am
lying on a bed of arrows). People used to call me as one devoted to the
Brahmanas. This style of address always pleased me highly. To do good to
the Brahmanas is the most sacred of all sacred acts. I behold many
regions of beautitude waiting for me that have reverentially walked
behind the Brahmanas. Very soon shall I repair to those regions for
everlasting time, O son. In this world, O Yudhishthira, the duties of
women have reference to and depend upon their husbands. To a woman,
verily, the husband is the deity and he is the highest end after which
she should strive. As the husband is to the wife, even so are the
Brahmanas unto Kshatriyas. If there be a Kshatriya of full hundred years
of age and a good Brahmana child of only ten years, the latter should be
regarded as a father and the former as a son, for among the two, verily,
the Brahmana is superior. A woman in the absence of her husband, takes
his younger brother for her lord; even so the Earth, not having obtained
the: Brahmana, made the Kshatriya her lord. The Brahmanas should be
protected like sons and worshipped like sires or preceptors. Indeed, O
best of the Kurus, they should be waited upon with reverence even as
people wait with reverence upon their sacrificial or Homa fires. The
Brahmanas are endued with simplicity and righteousness. They are devoted
to truth. They are always engaged in the good of every creature. Yet when
angry they are like snakes of virulent poison. They should, for these
reasons, be always waited upon and served with reverence and humility.
One should, O Yudhishthira, always fear these two, viz. Energy and
Penances. Both these should be avoided or kept at a distance. The effects
of both are speedy. There is the superiority, however, of Penances, viz.,
that Brahmanas endued with Penances, O monarch, can, if angry, slay the
object of their wrath (regardless of the measure of Energy with which
that object may be endued). Energy and Penances, each of the largest
measure, become neutralised if applied against a Brahmana that has
conquered wrath. If the two,--that is, Energy and Penances,--be set
against each other, then destruction would overtake both but not
destruction without, a remnant, for while Energy, applied against
Penances, is sure to be destroyed without leaving a remnant. Penances
applied against Energy cannot be destroyed completely.[13] As the
herdsman, stick in hand, protects the herd, even so should the Kshatriya
always protect the Vedas and the Brahmanas. Indeed, the Kshatriya should
protect all righteous Brahmanas even as a sire protects his sons. He
should always have his eye upon the house of the Brahmanas for seeing
that their means of subsistence may not be wanting.'"
