SECTION LXVIII
"Yudhishthira said, 'Do thou discourse to me once again, O grandsire,
upon the merits attaching to gifts of sesame and of lamps for lighting
darkness, as also of food and robes.'
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection, O Yudhishthira, is recited the
narrative of the discourse that took place in ancient times between a
Brahmana and Yama. In the country lying between the rivers Ganga and
Yamuna, at the foot of the hills called Yamuna, there was a large town
inhabited by Brahmanas. The town was celebrated under the name of
Parnasala and was very delightful in appearance, O king. A large number
of learned Brahmanas lived in it. One day, Yama, the ruler of the dead,
commanded a messenger of his, who was clad in black, endued with
blood-red eyes and hair standing erect, and possessed of feet, eyes, and
nose all of which resembled those of a crow, saying, 'Go thou to the town
inhabited by Brahmanas and bring hither the person known by the name of
Sarmin and belonging by birth to the race of Agastya. He is intent on
mental tranquillity and possessed of learning. He is a preceptor engaged
in teaching the Vedas and his practices are well-known. Do not bring me
another person belonging to the same race and living in the same
neighbourhood. This other man is equal unto him I want, in virtues,
study, and birth. With respect to children and conduct, this other
resembles the intelligent Sarmin. Do thou bring the individual I have in
view. He should be worshipped with respect (instead of being dragged
hither with irreverence).' The messenger having come to the place, did
the very reverse of what he had been bidden to do. Attacking that person,
he brought him who had been forbidden by Yama to be brought. Possessed of
great energy, Yama rose up at the sight of the Brahmana and worshipped
him duly. The king of the dead then commanded his messenger, saying, 'Let
this one be taken back, and let the other one be brought to me.' When the
great judge of the dead said these words, that Brahmana addressed him and
said, 'I have completed my study of the Vedas and am no longer attached
to the world. Whatever period may yet remain of my mortal existence, I
wish to pass, dwelling even here, O thou of unfading glory![346]
"Yama said, 'I cannot ascertain the exact period, ordained by Time, of
one's life, and hence, unurged by Time, I cannot allow one to take up
one's residence here. I take note of the acts of righteousness (or
otherwise) that one does in the world. Do thou, O learned Brahmana of
great splendour return immediately to thy abode. 'I ell me what also is
in thy mind and what I can do for thee, O thou of unfading glory!'
"The Brahmana said, 'Do thou tell me what those acts are by accomplishing
which one may earn great merit. O best of all beings, thou art the
foremost of authorities (on the subject) even in the three worlds.'
"Yama said, 'Do thou hear, O regenerate Rishi, the excellent ordinances
regarding gifts. The gift of sesame seeds is a very superior one. It
produces everlasting merit. O foremost of regenerate ones, one should
make gifts of as much sesame as one can. By making gifts of sesame every
day, one is sure to attain the fruition of one's every wish. The gift of
sesame at Sraddhas is applauded. Verily the gift of sesame is a very
superior one. Do thou make gifts of sesame unto the Brahmanas according
to the rites ordained in the scriptures. One should on the day of the
full moon of the month of Vaisakha, make gilts of sesame unto the
Brahmanas. They should also be made to eat and to touch sesame on every
occasion that one can afford. They that are desirous of achieving what is
beneficial to them should, with their whole souls, do this in their
houses.[347] Without doubt, men should similarly make gifts of water and
establish resting places for the distribution of drinking water.[348] One
should cause tanks and lakes and wells to be excavated. Such acts are
rare in the world, O best of regenerate persons! Do thou always make
gifts of water. This act is fraught with great merit. O best of
regenerate persons, thou shouldst establish resting places along the
roads for the distribution of water. After one has eaten, the gift unto
one should especially be made of water for drink.'
"Bhishma continued, 'After Yama had said these words unto him, the
messenger who had borne him from his abode conveyed him back to it. The
Brahmana, on his return, obeyed the instructions he had received. Having
thus conveyed him back to his abode the messenger of Yama fetched Sarmin
who had really been sought by Yama. Taking Sarmin unto him, he informed
his master. Possessed of great energy, the judge of the dead worshipped
that righteous Brahmana, and having conversed with him a while dismissed
him for being taken back to his abode. Unto him also Yama gave the same
instructions. Sarmin, too, coming back into the world of men, did all
that Yama had said. Like the gift of water, Yama, from a desire of doing
good to the Pitris, applauds the gift of lamps to light dark places.
Hence, the giver of a lamp for lighting a dark place is regarded as
benefiting the Pitris. Hence, O best of the Bharatas, one should always
give lamps for lighting dark spots. The giving of lamps enhances the
visual power of the deities, the Pitris, and one's own self.[349] It has
been said, O king, that the gift of gems is a very superior gift. The
Brahmana, who, having accepted a gift of gems, sells the same for
performing a sacrifice, incurs no fault. The Brahmana, who, having
accepted a gift of gems makes a gift of them unto Brahmanas. acquires
inexhaustible merit himself and confers inexhaustible merit upon him from
whom he had originally received them. Conversant with every duty Manu
himself has said that he, who, observant of proper restraints, earns
makes a gift of gems unto a Brahmana observant of proper restraints earns
inexhaustible merit himself and confers inexhaustible merit upon the
recipient. The man who is content with his own wedded wife and who makes
a gift of robes, earns an excellent complexion and excellent vestments
for himself. I have told thee, O foremost of men, what the merits are
that attach to gifts of kine, of gold, and the sesame agreeably to
deserve precepts of the Vedas and the scriptures One should marry and
raise offspring upon one's wedded wives. Of all acquisitions, O son of
Kuru's race, that of male issue is regarded as the foremost.'"
 SECTION LXIX
"Yudhishthira said, 'Do thou, O foremost one of Kuru's race, discourse
unto me once again of the excellent ordinance regarding gifts, with
especial reference, O thou of great wisdom, to the gift of earth. A
Kshatriya should make gifts of earth unto a Brahmana of righteous deeds.
Such a Brahmana should accept the gift with due rites. None else,
however, than a Kshatriya is competent to make gifts of earth. It behoves
thee now to tell me what these objects are that persons of all classes
are free to bestow if moved by the desire of earning merit. Thou shouldst
also tell me what has been said in the Vedas on this subject.'
"Bhishma said, 'There are three gifts that go by the same name and that
are productive of equal merits. Indeed, these three confer the fruition
of every wish. The three objects whose gifts are of such a character are
kine, earth, and knowledge.[350] That person who tells his disciple words
of righteous import drawn from the Vedas acquires merit equal to that
which is won by making gifts of earth and kine. Similarly are kine
praised (as objects of gifts). There is no object of gift higher than
they. Kine are supposed to confer merit immediately. They are also, O
Yudhishthira, such that a gift of them cannot but lead to great merit.
Kine are the mothers of all creatures. They bestow every kind of
happiness. The person that desires his own prosperity should always make
gifts of kine. No one should kick at kine or proceed through the midst of
kine. Kine are goddesses and homes of auspiciousness. For this reason,
they always deserve worship. Formerly, the deities, while tilling the
earth whereon they performed a sacrifice, used the goad for striking the
bullocks yoked to the plough. Hence, in tilling earth for such a purpose,
one may, without incurring censure or sin, apply the goad to bullocks. In
other acts, however, bullocks should never be struck with the goad or the
whip When kine are grazing or lying down no one should annoy them in any
way. When the cows are thirsty and they do not get water (in consequence
of any one obstructing their access to the pool or tank or river), they,
by merely looking at such a person, can destroy him with all his
relatives and friends. What creatures can be more sacred than kine when
with the very dung of kine altars whereon Sraddhas are performed in
honour of the Pitris, or those whereon the deities are worshipped, are
cleansed and sanctified? That man, who, before eating himself gives every
day, for a year, only a handful of grass unto a cow belonging to another,
is regarded as undergoing a vow or observance which bestows the fruition
of every wish. Such a person ac-quires children and fame and wealth and
prosperity, and dispels all evils and dreams.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'What should be the indications of those kine that
deserve to be given away? What are those kine that should be passed over
in the matter of gifts? What should be the character of those persons
unto whom kine should be given? Who, again, are those unto whom kine
should not be given?
"Bhishma said, 'A cow should never be given unto one that is not
righteous in behaviour, or one that is sinful, or one that is covetous or
one that is untruthful in speech, or one that does not make offerings
unto the Pitris and deities. A person, by making a gift of ten kine unto
a Brahmana learned in the Vedas, poor in earthly wealth, possessed of
many children, and owning a domestic are, attains to numerous regions of
great felicity. When a man performs any act that is fraught with merit
assisted by what he has got in gift from another, a portion of the merit
attaching to that act becomes always his with whose wealth the act has
been accomplished. He that procreates a person, he that rescues a person,
and he that assigns the means of sustenance to a person are regarded as
the three sires. Services dutifully rendered to the preceptor destroys
sin. Pride destroys even great fame. The possession of three children
destroys the reproach of childlessness, and the possession of ten kine
dispels the reproach of poverty. Unto one that is devoted to the Vedanta,
that is endued with great learning, that has been filled with wisdom,
that has a complete control over his senses, that is observant of the
restraints laid down in the scriptures, that has withdrawn himself from
all worldly attachments, unto him that says agreeable words unto all
creatures, unto him that would never do an evil act even when impelled by
hunger, unto one that is mild or possessed of a peaceful disposition,
unto one that is hospitable to all guests,--verily unto such a Brahmana
should a man, possessed of similar conduct and owning children and wives,
assign the means of sustenance. The measure of merit that attaches to the
gift of kine unto a deserving person is exactly the measure of the sin
that attaches to the act of robbing a Brahmana of what belongs to him.
Under all circumstances should the spoliation of what belongs to a
Brahmana be avoided, and his spouses kept at a distance.'"
