SECTION XXXI
"Yudhishthira said, 'What men, O chief of Bharata's race, are worthy of
reverent homage in the three worlds? Tell me this in detail verily. I am
never satiated with hearing thee discourse on these topics.'
discourse between Narada and Vasudeva. Beholding Narada on one occasion
worshipping many foremost of Brahmanas with joined hands, Kesava
addressed him saying, Whom dost thou worship? Whom amongst these
Brahmanas, O holy one dost thou worship with so great reverence? If it is
a matter that I can heard of, I then wish to hear it. Do, O foremost of
righteous men, tell me this!'[251]
"Narada said, 'Hear, O Govinda, as to who those are whom I am
worshipping, O grinder of foes. Who else is there in this world that so
much deserves to hear this? I worship the Brahmanas, O puissant one, who
constantly worship Varuna and Vayu and Aditya and Parjanya and the deity
of Fire, and Sthanu and Skanda and Lakshmi and Vishnu and the Brahmanas,
and the lord of speech, and Chandramas, and the Waters and Earth and the
goddess Saraswati. O tiger of Vrishni's race, I always worship those
Brahmanas that are endued with penances, that are conversant with the
Vedas, that are always devoted to Vedic study, and that are possessed of
high worth. O puissant one, I bow down my head unto those persons who are
freed from boastfulness, who discharge, with an empty stomach, the rites
in honour of the deities, who are always contented with what they have
and who are endued with forgiveness. I worship them, O Yadava, that are
performers of sacrifices, that are of a forgiving disposition, and self
restrained, that are masters of their own senses, that worship truth and
righteousness, and that give away land and kine unto good Brahmanas.[252]
I bow unto them, O Yadava, that are devoted to the observance of
penances, that dwell in forests, that subsist upon fruits and roots, that
never store anything for the morrow, and that are observant of all the
acts and rites laid down in the scriptures. I bow unto them, O Yadava,
that feed and cherish their servants, that are always hospitable to
guests, and that eat only the remnants of what is offered to the deities.
I worship them that have become irresistible by studying the Vedas, that
are eloquent in discoursing on the scriptures, that are observant of the
vow of Brahmacharyya, and that are always devoted to the duties of
officiating at the sacrifices of others and of teaching disciples. I
worship them that are endued with compassion towards all creatures, and
that study the Vedas till noon (i.e. till their backs are heated by the
sun). I bow unto them, O Yadava, that strive to obtain the grace of their
preceptors, that labour in the acquisition of their Vedas, that are firm
in the observance of vows, that wait, with dutiful obedience, upon their
preceptors and seniors, and that are free from malice and envy. I bow
unto them, O Yadava, that are observant of excellent vows, that practice
taciturnity, that have knowledge of Brahman, that are firm in truth, that
are givers of libations of clarified butter and oblations of meat. I bow
to them, O Yadava, that subsist upon eleemosynary alms, that are
emaciated for want of adequate food and drink, that have lived in the
abodes of their preceptors, that are averse to and destitute of all
enjoyments, and that are poor in the goods of this Earth. I bow unto
them, O Yadava, that have no affection for things of this Earth, that
have no quarrels to wage with others, that do not clothe themselves, that
have no wants, that have become irresistible through the acquisition of
the Vedas, that are eloquent in the exposition of righteousness, and that
are utterers of Brahma, I bow unto them that are devoted to the practice
of the duty of compassion towards all creatures, that are firm in the
observance of truth, that are self-restrained, and that are peaceful in
their behaviour. I bow unto them, O Yadava, that are devoted to the
worship of deities and guests, that are observant of the domestic mode of
life, and that follow the practice of pigeons in the matter of their
subsistence.[253] I always bow unto those persons whose aggregate of
three exists, without being weakened, in all their acts, and who are
observant of truth and righteous behaviour,[254] I bow unto them, O
Kesava, that are conversant with Brahma, that are endued with knowledge
of the Vedas, that are attentive to the aggregate of three, that are free
from cupidity, and that are righteous in their behaviour. I bow unto
them, O Madhava, that subsist upon water only, or upon air alone, or upon
the remnants of the food that is offered to deities and guests, and that
are observant of diverse kinds of excellent vows. I always worship them
that have no spouses (in consequence of the vow of celibacy they
observe), that have spouses and the domestic fire (in consequence of the
domestic mode of life they lead), that are the refuge of the Vedas, and
that are the refuge of all creatures in the universe (in consequence of
the compassion they feel towards them). I always bow unto those Rishis, O
Krishna, that are the creators of the universe, that are the elders of
the universe, that are the eldest members of the race or the family, that
are dispellers of the darkness of ignorance, and that are the best of all
persons in the universe (for righteousness of behaviour and knowledge of
the scriptures). For these reasons, do thou also, O scion of Vrishni's
race, worship every day those regenerate persons of whom I speak.
Deserving as they are of reverent worship, they will when worshipped,
confer happiness on thee, O sinless one. Those persons of whom I speak
are always givers of happiness in this world as well as in the next.
Reverenced by all, they move about in this world, and if worshipped by
thee are sure to grant thee happiness. They who are hospitable to all
persons that come unto them as guests, and who are always devoted to
Brahmanas and kine, as also to truth (in speech and behaviour), succeed
in crossing all calamities and obstacles. They who are always devoted to
peacefulness of behaviour, as also they who are freed from malice and
envy, and they who are always attentive to the study of the Vedas,
succeed in crossing all calamities and obstacles. They who bow unto all
the deities (without showing a preference for any and thereby proving
their tolerance), they who betake themselves to one Veda as their refuge,
they who are possessed of faith and are self-restrained, succeed in
crossing all calamities and obstacles. They who worship the foremost of
Brahmanas with reverence and are firm in the observance of excellent vows
and practise the virtue of charity, succeed in crossing all calamities
and obstacles. They who are engaged in the practice of penances, they who
are always observant of the vow of celibacy, and they whose souls have
been cleansed by penances, succeed in crossing all calamities and
obstacles. They who are devoted to the worship of the deities and guests
and dependants, as also of the Pitris, and they who eat the remnant of
the food that is offered to deities, Pitris, guests and dependants,
succeed in crossing all calamities and obstacles. They who, having
ignited the domestic fire, duly keep it burning and worship it with
reverence and they who have duly poured libations (to the deities) in
Soma-sacrifices, succeed in crossing all calamities and obstacles. They
who behave as they should towards their mothers and fathers and
preceptors and other seniors even as thou, O tiger among the Vrishnis,
dost behave, succeed in crossing all calamities and obstacles--Having
said these words, the celestial Rishi ceased speaking.'
"Bhishma continued. 'For these reasons, do thou also, O son of Kunti,
always worship with reverence the deities, the Pitris, the Brahmanas, and
guests arrived at thy mansion and as the consequence of such conduct thou
art sure to attain to a desirable end!'"
