SECTION LXXII
"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast, O grandsire, discoursed to me the topic
of gifts of kine in speaking of the Rishi Nachiketa Thou hast also
impliedly discoursed, O puissant one, on the efficacy and pre-eminence of
that act. Thou hast also told me, O grandsire of great intelligence, of
the exceedingly afflicting character of the calamity that overtook the
high-souled king Nriga in consequence of a single fault of his. He had to
dwell for a tong time at Dwaravati (in the form of a mighty lizard) and
how Krishna became the cause of his rescue from that miserable plight. I
have, however, one doubt. It is on the subject of the regions of kine. I
desire to hear, in detail, about those regions which are reserved for the
residence of persons that make gifts of kine.'
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is recited the old narrative of the
discourse between Him who sprang from the primeval lotus and him who
performed a hundred sacrifices.'
"Sakra said, 'I see, O Grandsire, that those who are residents of the
region of kine transcend by their resplendence the prosperity of the
denizens of heaven and pass them by (as beings of an inferior station).
This has raised a doubt in my mind. Of what kind, O holy one, are the
regions of kine? Tell me all about them, O sinless one! Verily, what is
the nature of those regions that are inhabited by givers of kine? I wish
to know this of what kind are those regions? What fruits do they bring?
What is the highest object there which the denizens thereof succeeds in
winning? What are its virtues? How also do men, freed from every kind of
anxiety, succeed in going to those regions? For what period does the
giver of a cow enjoy the fruits that are borne by his gift? How may
persons make gifts of many kine and how may they make gifts of a few
kine? What are the merits attaching to gifts of many kine and what those
that attach to gifts of a few only? How also do persons become givers of
kine without giving any kine in reality? Do thou tell me all this. How
does one making gifts of even many kine, O puissant lord, become the
equal of one that has made gift of only a few kine? How also does one who
make gifts of only a few kine succeed in becoming the equal of one who
has made gifts of many kine? What kind or Dakshina is regarded as
distinguished for pre-eminence in the matter of gifts of kine? It
behoveth thee, O holy one, to discourse unto me on all this agreeably to
truth.'"
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is recited the old narrative of the
