SECTION LXXX
"Vasishtha said, 'Kine are yielders of ghee and milk. They are the
sources of ghee and they have sprung from ghee. They are rivers of ghee,
and eddies of ghee. Let kine ever be in my house! Ghee is always my
heart. Ghee is even established in my navel. Ghee is in every limb of
mine. Ghee resides in my mind. Kine are always at my front. Kine are
always at my rear. Kine are on every side of my person. I live in the
midst of kine!--Having purified oneself by touching water, one should,
morning and evening, recite these Mantras every day. By this, one is sure
to be cleansed of all the sins one may commit in course of the day. They
who make gifts of a thousand kine, departing from this world, proceed to
the regions of the Gandharvas and the Apsaras where there are many
palatial mansions made of gold and where the celestial Ganga, called the
current of Vasu, runs. Givers of a thousand kine repair thither where run
many rivers having milk for their water, cheese for their mire, and curds
for their floating moss. That man who makes gifts of hundreds of
thousands of kine agreeably to the ritual laid down in the scriptures,
attains to high prosperity (here) and great honours in Heaven. Such a man
causes both his paternal and maternal ancestors to the tenth degree to
attain to regions of great felicity, and sanctifies his whole race. Kine
are sacred. They are the foremost of all things in the world. They are
verily the refuge of the universe. They are the mothers of the very
deities. They are verily incomparable. They should be dedicated in
sacrifices. When making journeys, one should proceed by their right
(i.e., keeping them to one's left). Ascertaining the proper time, they
should be given away unto eligible persons. By giving away a Kapila cow
having large horns, accompanied by a calf and a vessel of white brass for
milking her, and covered with a piece of cloth, one succeeds in entering,
freed from fear, the palace of Yama that is so difficult to enter. One
should always recite this sacred Mantra, viz.,--Kine are of beautiful
form. Kine are of diverse forms. They are of universal form. They are the
mothers of the universe. O, let kine approach me!--There is no gift more
sacred than the gift of kine. There is no gift that produces more blessed
merit. There has been nothing equal to the cow, nor will there be
anything that will equal her. With her skin, her hair, her horns, the
hair of her tail, her milk, and her fat,--with all these together,--the
cow upholds sacrifice. What thing is there that is more useful than the
cow? Bending my head unto her with reverence, I adore the cow who is the
mother of both the Past and the Future, and by whom the entire universe
of mobile and immobile creatures is covered. O best of men, I have thus
recited to thee only a portion of the high merits of kine. There is no
gift in this world that is superior to the gift of trine. There is also
no refuge in this world that is higher than kine.'
"Bhishma continued, 'That high-souled giver of land (viz., king Saudasa),
thinking these words of the Rishi Vasishtha to be foremost in point of
importance, then made gifts of a very large number of kine unto the
Brahmanas, restraining his senses the while, and as the consequence of
those gifts, the monarch succeeded in attaining to many regions of
felicity in the next world.'"[378]
