SECTION LVIII
"Yudhishthira said, 'I desire, O chief of the Bharatas, to hear from thee
what the rewards are which are attached, O best of the Kurus, to the
planting of trees and the digging of tanks.'
"Bhishma said, 'A piece of land that is agreeable to the sight, fertile,
situate in the midst of delightful scenes adorned with diverse kinds of
metals, and inhabited by all sorts of creatures, is regarded as the
foremost of sports. A particular portion of such land should be selected
for digging a tank. I shall tell thee, in due order, about the different
kinds of tanks. I shall also tell thee what the merits also are that
attach to the digging of tanks (with the view of drawing water for the
benefit of all creatures). The man who causes a tank to be dug becomes
entitled to the respect and worship of the three worlds. A tank full of
water is as agreeable and beneficial as the house of a friend. It is
gratifying to Surya himself. It also contributes to growth to the
deities. It is the foremost of all things that lead to fame (with respect
to the person who causes it to be excavated). The wise have said that the
excavation of a tank contributes to the aggregate of three,
Righteousness, Wealth and Pleasure. A tank is said to be properly
excavated, if it is made on a piece of land that is inhabited by
respectable persons. A tank is said to be subservient to all the four
purposes of living creatures. Tanks, again, are regarded as constituting
the excellent beauty of a country. The deities and human beings and
Gandharvas and Pitris and Uragas and Rakshasas and even immobile
beings--all resort to a tank full of water as their refuge. I shall,
therefore, tell thee what the merits are that have been said by great
Rishis to be attached to tanks, and what the rewards are that are
attainable by persons that cause them to be excavated. The wise have said
that that man reaps the merit of an Agnihotra sacrifice in whose tank
water is held in the season of the rains. The high reward in the world
that is reaped by the person who makes a gift of a thousand kine is won
by that man in whose tank water is held in the season of autumn. The
person in whose tank water occurs in the cold season acquires the merit
of one who performs a sacrifice with plentiful gifts of gold. That person
in whose tanks water occurs in the season of dew, wins, the wise have
said, the merits of an Agnishtoma sacrifice. That man in whose well-made
tank water occurs in the season of spring acquires the merit of the
Atiratra sacrifice. That man in whose tank water occurs in the season of
summer acquires, the Rishis say, the merits that attach to a
horse-sacrifice. That man rescues all his race in whose tank kine are
seen to allay their thirst and from which righteous men draw their water.
That man in whose tank kine slake their thirst as also other animals and
birds, and human beings, acquires the merits of a horse-sacrifice.
Whatever measure of water is drunk from one's tank and whatever measure
is taken therefrom by others for purposes of bathing, all become stored
for the benefit of the excavator of the tank and he enjoys the same for
unending days in the next world. Water, especially in the other world, is
difficult to obtain, O son. A gift of drink produces eternal happiness.
Make gifts of sesame here. Make gifts of water. Do thou also give lamps
(for lighting dark places.) While alive and awake, do thou sport in
happiness with kinsmen. These are acts which thou shalt not be able to
achieve in the other world.[315] The gift of drink, O chief of men, is
superior to every other gift. In point of merit it is distinguished above
all other gifts. Therefore, do thou make gifts of water. Even thus have
the Rishis declared what the high merits of the excavation of tanks are I
shall now discourse to thee on the planting of trees. Of immobile objects
six classes have been spoken of. They are Vrikshas, Gulmas, Latas,
Vallis, Twaksaras, and Trinas of diverse kinds.[316] These are the
several kinds of vegetables. Listen now to the merit that attaches to
their planting. By planting trees one acquires fame in the world of men
and auspicious rewards in the world hereafter. Such a man is applauded
and reverenced in the world of the Pitris. Such a man's name does not
perish even when he becomes a citizen of the world of deities. The man
who plants trees rescues the ancestors and descendants of both his
paternal and maternal lines. Do thou, therefore, plant trees, O
Yudhishthira! The trees that a man plants become the planter's children.
There is no doubt about this. Departing from this world, such a man
ascends to Heaven. Verily many eternal regions of bliss become his. Trees
gratify the deities by their flowers; the Pitris by their fruits; and all
guests and strangers by the shadow they give. Kinnaras and Uragas and
Rakshasas and deities and Gandharvas and human beings, as also Rishis,
all have recourse to trees as their refuge. Trees that bear flowers and
fruits gratify all men. The planter of trees is rescued in the next world
by the trees he plants like children rescuing their own father.
Therefore, the man that is desirous of achieving his own good, should
plant trees by the side of tanks and cherish them like his own children.
The trees that a man plants are, according to both reason and the
scriptures, the children of the planter. That Brahmana who excavates a
tank, and he that plants trees, and he that performs sacrifices, are all
worshipped in heaven even as men that are devoted to truthfulness of
speech. Hence one should cause tanks to be excavated and trees to be
planted, worship the deities in diverse sacrifices, and speak the truth.'"
