SECTION LIV
"Bhishma said, 'When that night passed away, the high-souled king Kusika
awoke and went through his morning rites. Accompanied by his wife he then
proceeded towards that wood which the Rishi had selected for his
residence. Arrived there, the monarch saw a palatial mansion made
entirely of gold. Possessed of a thousand columns each of which was made
of gems and precious stones, it looked like an edifice belonging to the
Gandharvas.[308] Kusika beheld in every part of that structure evidences
of celestial design. And he beheld hills with delightful valleys, and
lakes with lotuses on their bosom; and mansions full of costly and
curious articles, and gateways and arches, O Bharata. And the king saw
many open glades and open spots carpeted with grassy verdure, and
resembling level fields of gold. And he saw many Sahakaras adorned with
blossoms, and Ketakas and Uddalakas, and Dhavas and Asokas, and
blossoming Kundas, and Atimuktas. And he saw there many Champakas and
Tilakas and Bhavyas and Panasas and Vanjulas and Karnikaras adorned with
flowers. And the king beheld many Varanapushpas and the creepers called
Ashtapadika all clipped properly and beautifully.[309] And the king
beheld trees on which lotuses of all varieties bloomed in all their
beauty, and some of which bore flowers of every season. And he noticed
also many mansions that looked like celestial cars or like beautiful
mountains. And at some places, O Bharata, there were tanks and lakes full
of cool water and at others were those that were full of warm or hot
water. And there were diverse kinds of excellent seats and costly beds,
and bedsteads made of gold and gems and overlaid with cloths and carpets
of great beauty and value. Of comestible there were enormous quantities,
well-dressed and ready for use. And there were talking parrots and
she-parrots and Bhringarajas and Kokilas and Catapatras with Koyashtikas
and Kukkubhas, and peacocks and cocks and Datyuhas and Jivajivakas and
Chakoras and monkeys and swans and Sarasas and Chakravakas.[310] Here and
there he beheld bevies of rejoicing Apsaras and conclaves of happy
Gandharvas, O monarch. And he beheld other Gandharvas at other places
rejoicing with their dear spouses. The king sometimes beheld these sights
and sometimes could not see them (for they seemed to disappear from
before his eyes). The monarch heard also melodious strains of vocal music
and the agreeable voices of preceptors engaged in lecturing to their
disciples on the Vedas and the scriptures. And the monarch also heard the
harmonious cackle of the geese sporting in the lakes. Beholding such
exceedingly wonderful sights, the king began to reflect inwardly, saying,
'Is this a dream? Or is all this due to an aberration of my mind? Or, is
it all real? O, I have, without casting off my earthly tenement, attained
to the beatitude of heaven! This land is either the sacred country of the
Uttara-Kurus, or the abode, called Amaravati, of the chief of the
celestials! O, what are these wonderful sights that I behold!' Reflecting
in this strain, the monarch at last saw that foremost of Rishis. In that
palace of gold (endued) with columns (made) of jewels and gems, lay the
son of Bhrigu stretched on a costly and excellent bed. With his wife by
his side the king approached with a delighted heart the Rishi as he lay
on that bed. Chyavana, however, quickly disappeared at this, with the bed
itself upon which he lay. The king then beheld the Rishi at another part
of those woods seated on a mat made of Kusa grass, and engaged in
mentally reciting some high Mantras. By his Yoga-power, even thus did
that Brahmana stupefy the king. In a moment that delightful wood, those
bevies of Apsaras, those bands of Gandharvas, those beautiful trees,--all
disappeared. The bank of the Ganga became as silent as usual, and
presented the old aspect of its being covered with Kusa grass and
ant-hills. King Kusika with his wife having beheld that highly wonderful
sight and its quick disappearance also, became filled with amazement.
With a delighted heart, the monarch addressed his wife and said unto her,
'Behold, O amiable one, the various agreeable scenes and sights,
occurring nowhere else, which we two have just witnessed! All this is due
to the grace of Bhrigu's son and the puissance of his penances. By
penances all that becomes attainable which one cherishes in one's
imagination. Penances are superior to even the sovereignty over the three
worlds. By penances well-performed, emancipation itself may be achieved.
Behold, the puissance of the high-souled and celestial Rishi Chyavana
derived from his penances. He can, at his pleasure, create even other
worlds (than those which exist). Only Brahmanas are born in this world to
attain to speech and understanding and acts that are sacred. Who else
than Chyavana could do all this? Sovereignty may be acquired with ease.
But the status of a Brahmana is not so attainable. It was through the
puissance of a Brahmana that we were harnessed to a car like well-broken
animals!' These reflections that passed through the king's brain became
known to Chyavana. Ascertaining the king's thoughts, the Rishi addressed
him and said, 'Come hither quickly!' Thus addressed, the king and the
queen approached the great ascetic, and, bending their heads, they
worshipped him who deserved worship. Uttering a benediction upon the
monarch, the Rishi, possessed of great intelligence, O chief of men,
comforted the king and said, 'Sit down on that seat!' After this, O
monarch, the son of Bhrigu, without guile or insincerity of any kind,
gratified the king with many soft words, and then said, 'O king, thou
hast completely subjugated the five organs of action and the five organs
of knowledge with the mind as their sixth. Thou hast for this come out
unscathed from the fiery ordeal I had prepared for thee. I have been
properly honoured and adored, O son, by thee, O foremost of all persons
possessed of speech. Thou hast no sin, not even a minute one, in thee!
Give me leave, O king, for I shall now proceed to the place I came from.
I have been exceedingly pleased with thee, O monarch! Do thou accept the
boon I am ready to give.'
"Kusika said, 'In thy presence, O holy one, I have stayed like one
staying in the midst of a fire. That I have not yet, O chief of Bhrigu's
race been consumed, is sufficient! Even this is the highest boon that has
been obtained, O delighter of Bhrigu! That thou hast been gratified by
me, O Brahmana, and that I have succeeded in rescuing my race from
destruction, O sinless one, constitute in my case the best boons. This I
regard, O learned Brahmana, as a distinct evidence of thy grace. The end
of my life has been accomplished. Even this is what I regard the very end
of my sovereignty. Even this is the highest fruit of my penances![311]
If, O learned Brahmana, thou hast been pleased with me, O delighter of
Bhrigu, then do thou expound some doubts which are in my mind!'
