SECTION XXXIX
"Yudhishthira said, 'All men, O king, in this world, are seen to attach
themselves to women, overcome by the illusion that is created by the
divine Being. Similarly, women too are seen to attach themselves to men.
All this is seen taking place everywhere in the world. On this subject a
doubt exists in my mind. Why, O delighter of the Kurus, do men (when
women are stained with so many faults) still attach themselves to women?
Who, again, are those men with whom women are highly pleased and who are
they with whom they are displeased? It behoveth thee, O chief of men, to
explain to me how men are capable of protecting women? While men take
pleasure in women and sport with them, women, it seems, are engaged in
deceiving men. Then, again, if a man once falls into their hands, it is
difficult for him to escape from them. Like kine ever seeking pastures
new women seek new men one after another. That illusion which the Asura
Samvara possessed, that illusion which the Asura Namuchi possessed, that
illusion which Vali or Kumbbinasi had, the sum total thereof is possessed
by women. If man laughs, women laugh. If man weeps, they weep. If the
opportunity requires, they receive the man that is disagreeable to them
with agreeable words. That science of policy which the preceptor of the
Asuras knew, that science of policy which the preceptor of the
celestials, Vrihaspati, knew, cannot be regarded to be deeper or more
distinguished for subtility than what woman's intelligence naturally
brings forth. Verily how can women, therefore, be restrained by men? They
make a lie appear as truth, and a truth appear as a lie. They who can do
this,--I ask, O hero,--how can they be ruled by persons of the opposite
sex? It seems to me that Vrihaspati and other great thinkers, O slayer of
foes, evolved the science of policy from observation of the
understandings of women. Whether treated by men with respect or with
disdain, women are seen to turn the heads and agitate the hearts of
men.[272] Living creatures, O thou of mighty arms, are virtuous. Even
this is what has been heard by us. (How then, can this be consistent with
fact)? For treated with affection and respect or otherwise, women
(forming a fair portion of living creatures) are seen to deserve censure
for their conduct towards men.[273] This great doubt fills my mind, viz.,
when their behaviour is such, what man is there that can restrain them
within the bounds of righteousness? Do thou explain this to me, O highly
blessed scion of Kuru's race! It behoves thee to tell me, O chief of
Kuru's race, whether women are truly capable of being restrained within
the bonds prescribed by the scriptures or whether any one before our time
did really succeed in so restraining them.'"
