SECTION XVI
(Anugita Parva)
"Janamejaya said, "When the high-souled Kesava and Arjuna after slaying
their enemies repaired to the assembly rooms, what conversation, O
regenerate one, took place between them?'
Vaisampayana said, "The son of Pritha (Arjuna), having recovered his own
kingdom, joyously spent his time, without doing anything else, in the
company of Krishna, his heart filled with delight, in that palace of
celestial beauty. One day, those two listlessly proceeded to a particular
part of the palace that looked, O king, like a veritable portion of
Heaven. Themselves filled with delight, they were then surrounded by
their relatives and attendents. Pandu's son, Arjuna, filled with joy in
the company of Krishna, surveyed that delightful mansion, and then
addressed his companion, saying, 'O--mighty-armed one, thy greatness
became known to me upon the approach of the battle. O son of Devaki, thy
form also, as the Lord of the universe, then became known to me! What thy
holy self said unto me at that time, O Kesava, through affection, has all
been forgotten by me, O chief of men, in consequence of the fickleness of
my mind. Repeatedly, however, have I been curious on the subject of those
truths. Thou again, O Madhava, wilt repair to Dwaraka soon.'
Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by him, Krishna of mighty energy,
that foremost of speakers, embraced Phalguna and replied unto him as
follows.
'Vasudeva said, 'I made thee listen to truths that are regarded as
mysteries. I imparted to thee truths that are eternal. Verily, I
discoursed to thee on Religion in its true form and on all the eternal
regions. It is exceedingly disagreeable to me to learn that thou didst
not, from folly, receive what I imparted. The recollection of all that I
told thee on that occasion will not come to me now. Without doubt, O son
of Pandu, thou art destitute of faith and thy understanding is not good.
It is impossible for me, O Dhananjaya, to repeat, in detail, all that I
said on that occasion. That religion (about which I discoursed to thee
then) is more than sufficient for understanding Brahma. I cannot
discourse on it again in detail. I discoursed to thee on Supreme Brahma,
having concentrated myself in Yoga. I shalt now, however, recite to thee
an old history upon the same topic. O foremost of all persons, observant
of duty, listen to everything I now say, so that, with an understanding
adapted to my teaching, thou mayst succeed in attaining to the highest
end. O chastiser of foes, on one occasion, a Brahmana came to us from the
regions of Heaven. Of irresistible energy, he came from the regions of
the Grandsire. He was duly reverenced by us. Listen. O son of Pritha,
without yielding to scruples of any kind, to what he, O chief of
Bharata's race, said, in answer to our enquiries, agreeably to heavenly
forms.'
The Brahmana said, That which thou askest me, O Krishna, connected with
the religion of Moksha (Emancipation), led by thy compassion for all
creatures (and not for thy own good),--that, indeed, which destroys all
delusion, O thou that art possessed of supreme puissance[6] I shall now
tell thee duly, O slayer of Madhu. Do thou listen with concentrated
attention as I discourse to thee, O Madhava. A Brahmana of the name of
Kasyapa, possessed of penances and the foremost of all persons conversant
with duties, came to a certain other Brahmana who had become conversant
with all the mysteries of religion.[7] Indeed, the latter had mastered
all the knowledge which the scriptures teach respecting the departure and
reappearance of beings and possessed that direct knowledge of all things
which Yoga gives. He was well skilled in the truths of all topics
relating to the world. He had mastered the truth about pleasure and pain.
He knew the truth about birth and death, and understood the distinctions
between merit and demerit. He was a beholder of the ends attained to by
embodied creatures high and low in consequence of their acts. He lived
like one emancipated from the world. Crowned with ascetic success and
possessed of perfect tranquillity of soul, he had all his senses under
complete control. He seemed to blaze with the resplendence of Brahma and
was capable of going everywhere at will. He knew the science of
disappearing at will from before the eyes of all. He used to rove in the
company of invisible Siddhas and celestial musicians. He used to sit and
converse with them on some spot retired from the bustle of humanity. He
was as unattached to all things as the wind. Kasyapa having heard of him
truly, desired to see him. Possessed of intelligence, that foremost of
all Brahmanas, approached the sage. Himself possessed of penances,
Kasyapa, moved by the desire of acquiring merit, fell, with a rapt heart,
at the feet of the sage when he had seen all those wonderful attributes.
Filled with wonder at the sight of those extraordinary accomplishments,
Kasyapa began to wait upon that foremost of all Brahmanas, with the
dutiful reverence of a disciple waiting upon his preceptor and succeeded
in propitiating him. By his devotion, O scorcher of foes, rendering to
hint the obedience due from a disciple to a preceptor, Kasyapa gratified
that Brahmana who possessed all these accomplishments and was endued,
besides, with scriptural learning and excellent conduct. Gratified with
Kasyapa, that Brahmana one day addressed him cheerfully and spoke as
follows, with an eye to the highest success. Listen to those words, O
Janarddana, as I repeat them.
"--'The ascetic crowned with success said,'--By diverse acts, O son, as
also by the aid of merit, mortal creatures attain to diverse ends here
and residence in Heaven. Nowhere is the highest happiness; nowhere can
residence be eternal. There are repeated falls from the highest regions
acquired with such sorrow. In consequence of my indulgence in sin, I had
to attain to diverse miserable and inauspicious ends, filled as I was
with lust and wrath, and deluded by cupidity. I have repeatedly undergone
death and rebirth. I have eaten diverse kinds of food, I have sucked at
diverse breasts. I have seen diverse kinds of mothers, and diverse
fathers dissimilar to one another. Diverse kinds of happiness have been
mine and diverse kinds of misery, O sinless one. On diverse occasions
have I been separated from what was agreeable and united with what was
disagreeable. Having earned wealth with great toil I have had to put up
with its loss. Insults and excessive misery I have received from king and
relatives. Mental and physical pain, of great severity, have been mine.
Humiliations I have undergone, and death and immurement under
circumstances of great severity. Falls into Hell have been mine, and
great tortures in the domains of Yama. Decrepitude and diseases have
repeatedly assailed me, and calamities, as frequent, in copious measure.
In this world I have repeatedly undergone all those afflictions that flow
from a perception of all pairs of opposites. After all this, one day,
overwhelmed with sorrow, blank despair came upon me. I took refuge in the
Formless. Afflicted as I was with great distress, I gave up the world
with all its joys and sorrows.[8] Understanding then this path, I
exercised myself in it in this world. Afterwards, through tranquillity of
soul, I attained to this success that thou seest. I shall not have to
come to this world again (after my departure hence). Verily, till I
attain to absorption into eternal Brahman, till, in fact, the final
dissolution of the universe, I shall look on those happy ends that will
be mine, and on those beings that constitute this universe.[9] Having
acquired this excellent success, I shall, after departing from this
world, proceed, to what is above it (i.e., Satyaloka) and thence to what
is higher (i.e., absorption into Brahman). Verily, I shall attain to the
condition, which is unmanifest aspect of Brahman. Let no doubt be thine
as regards this. O scorcher of foes, I shall not return to this world of
mortal creatures. O thou of great wisdom, I have become gratified with
thee. Tell me what I shall do for thee. The time has come for the
accomplishment of that purpose for which thou hast come hither. Verily, I
know that object for which thou hast sought me. I shall soon depart from
this world. Hence it is that I have given thee this hint. O thou of great
wisdom and experience, I have been highly gratified with thee for thy
behaviour. Do thou question me. I shall discourse on what is beneficial
to thee, agreeably to thy desire. I think thy intelligence is great.
Indeed, I applaud it much, for it was with the aid of that intelligence
that thou wert able to recognise me. Surely, O Kasyapa, thou art
possessed of great intelligence.'
follows.
follows.
