SECTION CXVIII
"Vyasa said, 'It is in consequence of a meritorious act, O worm, that
thou, though born in the intermediate order of being, art not stupefied.
That act is mine, O worm, in consequence of which thou art not
stupefied.[527] In consequence of the puissance of my penances, I am able
to rescue a being of demerit by granting him a sight only of my person.
There is no stronger might than the might that attaches to penances, I
know, O worm, that thou hast taken birth in the order of worms through
the evil acts of thy past life. If, however, thou thinkest of attaining
to righteousness and merit, thou mayst again attain to it. Deities as
well as beings crowned with ascetic success, enjoy or endure the
consequence of acts done by them in this field of action. Amongst men
also, when acts of merit are performed, they are performed from desire of
fruit (and not with disregard for fruit). The very accomplishment that
one seeks to acquire are sought from desire of the happiness they will
bring.[528] Learned or ignorant (in a former life) the creature that is,
in this life, destitute of speech and understanding and hands and feet,
is really destitute of everything.[529] He that becomes a superior
Brahmana adores, while alive, the deities of the sun and the moon,
uttering diverse sacred Mantras. O worm, thou shalt attain to that state
of existence. Attaining to that status, thou wilt enjoy all the elements
converted into articles of enjoyment. When thou hast attained to that
state, I shall impart to thee Brahma. Or, if thou wishest, I may place
thee in any other status!' The worm, agreeing to the words of Vyasa, did
not leave the road, but remained on it. Meanwhile, the large vehicle
which was coming in that direction came to that spot.[530] Torn to pieces
by the assault of the wheels, the worm gave up his life-breath. Born at
last in the Kshatriya order through the grace of Vyasa of immeasurable
puissance, he proceeded to see the great Rishi. He had, before becoming a
Kshatriya, to pass through diverse orders of being, such as hedgehog and
Iguana and boar and deer and bird, and Chandala and Sudra and Vaisya.
Having given an account of his various transformations unto the
truth-telling Rishi, and remembering the Rishi's kindness for him, the
worm (now transformed into a Kshatriya) with joined palms fell at the
Rishi's feet and touched them with his head.'
"The worm said, 'My present status is that high one which is coveted by
all and which is attainable by the possession of the ten well-known
attributes. Indeed, I who was formerly a worm have thus attained to the
status of a prince. Elephants of great strength, decked with golden
chains, bear me on their backs. Unto my cars are yoked Kamvoja steeds of
high mettle. Numerous vehicles, unto which are attached camels and mules,
bear me. With all my relatives and friends I now eat food rich with meat.
Worshipped by all, sleep, O highly blessed one, on costly beds in
delightful rooms into which disagreeable winds cannot blow. Towards the
small hours of every night, Sutas and Magadhas and encomiasts utter my
praises even as the deities utter the agreeable praises of Indra, their
chief. Through the grace of thyself that art firm in truth and endued
with immeasurable energy, I who was before a worm have now become a
person of the royal order. I bow my head to thee, O thou of great wisdom.
Do thou command me as to what I should do now. Ordained by the puissance
of thy penances, even this happy status hath now become mine!'
"Vyasa said, 'I have today been worshipped by thee, O king, with diverse
words expressive of reverence. Transformed into a worm, thy memory had
become clouded. That memory has again appeared. The sin thou committed in
a former life has not yet been destroyed,--that sin, viz., which was
earned by thee while thou wert a Sudra covetous of wealth and cruel in
behaviour and hostile to the Brahmanas. Thou wert able to obtain a sight
of my person. That was an act of merit to thee while thou wert a worm. In
consequence of thy having saluted and worshipped me thou shalt rise
higher, for, from the Kshatriya order thou shalt rise to the status of a
Brahmana, if only thou castest off thy life-breaths on the field of
battle for the sake of kine or Brahmanas. O prince, enjoying much
felicity and performing many sacrifices with copious presents, thou shalt
attain to heaven and transformed into eternal Brahma, thou wilt have
perfect beatitude. Those that take birth in the intermediate order (of
animals) become (when they rise) Sudras. The Sudra rises to the status of
the Vaisya; and the Vaisya to that of the Kshatriya. The Kshatriya who
takes pride in the discharge of the duties of his order, succeeds in
attaining to the status of a Brahmana. The Brahmana, by following a
righteous conduct, attains to heaven that is fraught with great
felicity.'"
