SECTION XVII
"Vasudeva said, touching the feet of that sage, the Brahmana asked him
some questions that were exceedingly difficult to answer. That foremost
of all righteous persons then discoursed on those duties that were
referred to.
'Kasyapa said, 'How does the body dissolve away, and how is another
acquired? How does one become emancipated after passing through a
repeated round of painful rebirths? Enjoying Prakriti for sometime, how
does Jiva cast off the particular body (which Prakriti gives)? How does
Jiva, freed from the body, attain to what is different from it (viz.,
Brahman)? How does a human being enjoy (and endure the fruits of) the
good and bad acts done by him? Where do the acts exist of one that is
devoid of body?[10]
'The Brahmana said,--Thus urged by Kasyapa, the emancipated sage answered
those questions one after another. Do thou listen to me, O scion of the
Vrishi race, as I recite to thee the answers he made.'
'--The Emancipated sage said, 'Upon the exhaustion of those acts capable
of prolonging life and bringing on fame which are done in a particular
body that Jiva assumes, the embodied Jiva, with the span of his life
shortened, begins to do acts hostile to life and health. On the approach
of destruction, his understanding turns away from the proper course. The
man of uncleansed soul, after even a correct apprehension of his
constitution and strength and of the season of both his own life and of
the year, begins to eat at irregular intervals and to eat such food as is
hostile to him.[11] At such a time he indulges in practices that are
exceedingly harmful. He sometimes eats excessively and sometimes abstains
altogether from food. He eats bad food or bad meat or takes bad drinks,
or food that has been made up of ingredients incompatible with one
another. He eats food that is heavy in excess of the measure that is
beneficial, or before the food previously taken has been digested. He
indulges in physical exercise and sexual pleasure in excess of the due
measure, or through avidity for work, suppresses the urgings of his
corporeal organism even when they become pronounced. Or, he takes food
that is very juicy, or indulges in sleep during daytime. Food that is not
properly digested, of itself excites the faults, when the time comes.[12]
From such excitement of the faults in his body, he gets disease ending in
death itself. Sometimes the person engages in perverse or unnatural acts
like hanging (for bringing about his death). Through these causes the
living body of the creature dissolves away. Understand correctly the
manner as I declare it to thee.[13] Urged on by the Wind which becomes
violent, the heat in the body, becoming excited and reaching every part
of the body one after another, restrains all the (movements of the) vital
breaths. Know truly that excited all over the body, the heat becomes very
strong, and pierces every vital part where life may be said to reside. In
consequence of this, Jiva, feeling great pain, quickly takes leave of its
mortal casement. Know, O foremost of regenerate persons, that when the
vital parts of the physical organism become thus afflicted, Jiva slips
away from the body, overwhelmed with great pain. All living creatures are
repeatedly afflicted with birth and death. It is seen, O chief of
Brahmanas, that the pain which is felt by a person when casting off his
bodies is like what is felt by him when first entering the womb or when
issuing out of it. His joints become almost dislocated and he derives
much distress from the waters (of the womb).[14] Urged on by (another)
violent wind, the wind that is in the body becomes excited through cold,
and dissolves away the union of matter (called the body) into its
respective elements numbering five.[15] That wind which resides in the
vital breaths called Prana and Apana occurring within this compound of
the five primal elements, rushes upwards, from a situation of distress,
leaving the embodied creature. It is even thus that the wind leaves the
body. Then is seen breathlessness. The man then becomes destitute of
heat, of breath, of beauty, and of consciousness. Deserted by Brahman
(for Jiva is Brahman), the person is said to be dead. By those ducts
through which he perceives all sensuous objects, the bearer of the body
no longer perceives them. It is the eternal Jiva who creates in the body
in those very duets the life-breaths that are generated by food. The
elements gathered together become in certain parts firmly united. Know
that those parts are called the vitals of the body. It is said so in the
Sastras. When those vital parts are pierced, Jiva, rising up, enters the
heart of the living creature and restrains the principle of animation
without any delay. The creature then, though still endued with the
principle of consciousness, fails to know anything. The vital parts being
all overwhelmed, the knowledge of the living creature becomes overwhelmed
by darkness. Jiva then, who has been deprived of everything upon which to
stay, is then agitated by the wind. He then, deeply breathing a long and
painful breath, goes out quickly, causing the inanimate body to tremble.
Dissociated from the body, Jiva, however, is surrounded by his acts. He
becomes equipped on every side with all his auspicious acts of merit and
with all his sins. Brahmanas endued with knowledge and equipped with the
certain conclusions of the scriptures, know him, from indications, as to
whether he is possessed of merit or with its reverse. Even as men
possessed of eyes behold the fire-fly appearing and disappearing amid
darkness, men possessed of the eye of knowledge and crowned with success
of penances, behold, with spiritual vision, Jiva as he leaves the body,
as he is reborn, and as he enters the womb. It is seen that Jiva has
three regions assigned to him eternally. This world where creatures dwell
is called the field of action. Accomplishing acts good or bad, all
embodied creatures attain to the fruits thereof. In consequence of their
own acts, creatures acquire even here superior or inferior enjoyments.
Doers of evil deeds here, in consequence of those acts of theirs, attain
to Hell. This condition of sinking with head downwards, in which
creatures are cooked, is one of great misery. It is such that a rescue
therefrom is exceedingly difficult. Indeed; one should strive hard for
saving oneself from this misery. Those regions where creatures dwell when
they ascend from this world I shall now declare truly. Do thou listen to
me with attention. By listening to what I say, thou shalt attain to
firmness of understanding and a clear apprehension of (good and bad)
acts. Know that even those are the regions of all creatures of righteous
deeds, viz., the stellar worlds that shine in the firmament, the lunar
disc, and the solar disc as well that shines in the universe in its own
light. Upon the exhaustion, again, of their merits, they fall away from
those regions repeatedly. There, in Heaven itself, is distinction of
inferior, superior, and middling felicity. There, in Heaven itself, is
discontent at sight of prosperity more blazing than one's own. Even these
are the goals which I have mentioned in detail. I shall, after this,
discourse to you on the attainment by Jiva of the condition of residence
in the womb. Do thou hear me, with concentrated attention, O regenerate
one, as I speak to thee!'
