SECTION CXXVII
"Vibhavasu (otherwise called Surya) said, 'There are two offerings. One
of those consists of a palmful of water and the other called Akshata
consists of rice-grains with ghee. One should, on the day of the full
moon, stand facing that bright orb and make unto him the two offerings
mentioned, viz., a palmful of water and the rice-grains with ghee called
Akshata. The man who presents these offerings is said to adore his sacred
fire. Verily, he is regarded as one that has poured libations on the
three (principal) fires. That man of little understanding who cutteth
down a large tree on the day of the new moon, becomes stained with the
sin of Brahmanicide. By killing even a single leaf one incurs that sin.
That foolish man who chews a tooth-brush on the day of the new moon is
regarded as injuring the deity of the moon by such an act. The Pitris of
such a person become annoyed with him.[553] The deities do not accept the
libations poured by such a man on days of the full moon and the new moon.
His Pitris become enraged with him, and his race and the family become
extinct.'
"Sree said, 'That sinful house, in which eating and drinking vessels and
seats and beds lie scattered, and in which women are beaten, the deities
and Pitris leave in disgust. Verily, without accepting the offerings made
unto them by the owners of such houses, the deities and the Pitris fly
away from such a sinful habitation.'
"Angiras said, 'The offspring of that man increase who stands every night
for a full year under a Karanjaka tree with a lamp for lighting it, and
holds besides in his hand the roots of the Suvarchala plant.'[554]
"Gargya said, 'One should always do the duties of hospitality to one's
guests. One should give lamps in the hall or shed where sacrifices are
performed. One should avoid sleep during the day, and abstain from all
kinds of flesh or food. One should never injure kine and Brahmanas. One
should always recite names of the Pushkara lakes and the other sacred
waters. Such a course of duty, is the foremost. Even this constitutes a
high religion with its mysteries. If observed in practice, it is sure to
produce great consequences. If a person performs even a hundred
sacrifices, he is doomed to see the exhaustion of the merits attaching to
the libations poured therein. The duties, however, which I have mentioned
are such that when observed by a person endued with faith, their merit
becomes inexhaustible. Listen now to another high mystery concealed from
the view of many. The deities do not accept the libations (poured upon
the fire) on the occasion of Sraddhas and rites in their honour or on the
occasion of those rites that are performable on ordinary lunar days or on
the especially sacred days of the full moon and the new moon, if they
behold a woman in her season of impurity or one that is the daughter of a
mother afflicted with leprosy. The Pitris of the man who allows such a
woman to come near the place where the Sraddha is being performed by him,
do not become gratified with him for thirteen years. Robed in raiment of
white, and becoming pure in body and mind, one should invite Brahmanas
and cause them to utter their benedictions (when one performs the
Sraddha). On such occasions one should also recite the Bharata. It is by
observing all these that the offerings made at Sraddhas become
inexhaustible.'
"Dhaumya said, 'Broken utensils, broken bedsteads, cocks and, dogs, as
also such trees as have grown within the dwelling houses, are all
inauspicious objects. In a broken utensil is Kali himself, while in a
broken bedstead is loss of wealth. When a cock or a dog is in sight, the
deities do not eat the offerings made to them. Under the roots of a tree
scorpions and snakes undoubtedly find shelter. Hence, one should never
plant a tree within one's abode.'[555]
"Jamadagni said, 'That man whose heart is not pure is sure to go to Hell
even if he adores the deities in a Horse-sacrifice or in a hundred
Vajapeya sacrifices, or if he undergoes the severest austerities with
head downmost. Purity of heart is regarded as equal to sacrifices and
Truth. A very poor Brahmana, by giving only a Prastha of powdered barley
with a pure heart unto a Brahmana, attained to the region of Brahman
himself. This is a sufficient proof (of the importance of purity of
heart).'"
