SECTION XCIX
"Yudhishthira said, 'I have, O chief of the Bharatas, heard what the
merits are that are won by presenters of flowers and incense and lights.
I have heard thee speak also of the merits that attach to a due
observance of the ordinances in respect of the presentation of the Vali.
It behoveth thee, O grandsire, to discourse unto me once more on this
subject. Indeed, tell me, O sire, once more of the merits of presenting
incense and lights. Why are Valis offered on the ground by persons
leading the domestic mode of life?'
discourse between Nahusha and Agastya and Bhrigu. The royal sage Nahusha,
O monarch, possessed of wealth of penances, acquired the sovereignty of
Heaven by his own good deeds. With restrained senses, O king, he dwelt in
Heaven, engaged in doing diverse acts of both human and celestial nature.
From that high-souled monarch flowed diverse kinds of human acts and
diverse kinds of celestial acts also, O chief of men. The diverse rites
with respect to the sacrificial fire, the collection of sacred fuel and
of Kusa grass, as also of flowers, and the presentation of Vali
consisting of food adorned with fried paddy (reduced to powder), and the
offer of incense and of light,--all these, O monarch, occurred daily in
the abode of that high-souled king while he dwelt in heaven. Indeed,
though dwelling in heaven, he performed the sacrifice of Japa (or silent
recitation) and the sacrifice of meditation. And, O chastiser of foes,
Nahusha, although he had become the chief of the deities, yet worshipped
all the deities, as he used to do in days of yore, with due rites and
ceremonies. Some time after, Nahusha realised his position as the chief
of all the deities. This filled him with pride. From that time all his
acts (of the kind spoken of) were suspended. Filled with arrogance in
consequence of the boon he had received from all the deities, Nahusha
caused the very Rishis to bear him on their shoulders. In consequence,
however, of his abstention from all religious acts, his energy began to
sustain a diminution. The time was very long for which Nahusha filled
with pride, continued to employ the foremost of Rishis, possessed of
wealth of penances, as the bearers of his vehicles. He caused the Rishis
to discharge by turns his humiliating work. The day came when it was
Agastya's turn to bear the vehicles, O Bharata. At that time, Bhrigu,
that foremost of all persons conversant with Brahma, repaired to the
presence of Agastya while the latter was seated in his asylum, and
addressing him, said, 'O great ascetic, why should we patiently put up
with such indignity inflicted on us by this wicked-souled Nahusha who has
become the chief of the deities?'
"Agastya said, 'How can I succeed in cursing Nahusha, O great Rishi? It
is known to thee how the boon-giving (Brahman) himself has given Nahusha
the best of boons! Coming to heaven, the boon that Nahusha solicited was
that whoever would come within the range of his vision would, deprived of
all energy, come within his sway. The self-born Brahman granted him even
this boon, and it is for that reason that neither thyself nor I have been
able to consume him. Without doubt, is for this reason that none else
amongst the foremost of Rishis has been able to consume or hurl him down
from his high position, Formerly, O Lord, nectar was given by Brahman to
Nahusha for quaffing. For that reason also we have become powerless
against him. The supreme deity, it seems, gave that boon to Nahusha for
plunging all creatures into grief. That wretch among men behaves most
unrighteously towards the Brahmanas. O foremost of all speakers, do thou
tell us what should be done in view of the situation. Without doubt, I
shall do what thou wilt advise.'
"Bhrigu said, 'It is at the command of the Grandsire that I have come to
thee with the view of counteracting the puissance of Nahusha who is
possessed of great energy but who has been stupefied by fate. That
exceedingly wicked-souled wight who has become the chief of the deities
will today yoke thee to his car. With the aid of my energy I shall today
hurl him down from his position as Indra in consequence of his having
transcended all restraints! I shall today, in thy very sight,
re-establish the true Indra in his position--him, viz., who has performed
a hundred horse-sacrifices,--having hurled the wicked-souled and sinful
Nahusha from that seat! That unrighteous chief of the deities will today
insult thee by a kick, in consequence of his understanding being
afflicted by fate and for bringing about his own downfall. Incensed at
such an insult I shall today curse that sinful wretch, that enemy of the
Brahmanas, that has transcended all restraints, saying, 'Be thou
transformed into a snake!' In the very sight, O great ascetic, I shall
today hurl down on the earth the wicked-souled Nahusha who shall be
deprived of all energy in consequence of the cries of 'Fie' that will be
uttered from all sides.[445] Verily, I shall hurl down Nahusha today,
that wight of unrighteous deeds, who has, besides, been stupefied by
lordship and power. I shall do this, if it be acceptable to thee, O
ascetic! Thus addressed by Bhrigu, Mitravaruna's son Agastya of unfading
puissance and glory, became highly gratified and freed from every
anxiety.'"
