SECTION V
"Yudhishthira said, 'O best of speakers, how that king became so
powerful? And how, O twice-born one, did he obtain so much gold? And
where now, O reverend sire, is all his wealth? And, O ascetic, how can we
secure the same?'
"Vyasa thereupon said,--'As the numerous offspring of the Prajapati
Daksha, the Asuras and the Celestials challenged each other (to
encounter), so in the same way Angira's sons, the exceedingly energetic
Vrihaspati and the ascetic, Samvarta, of equal vows, challenged each
other, O king. Vrihaspati began to worry Samvarta again and again. And
constantly troubled by his elder brother, he, O Bharata, renouncing his
riches, went to the woods, with nothing to coyer his body save the open
sky.[4] (At that time), Vasava having vanquished and destroyed the
Asuras, and obtained the sovereignty of the celestial regions had
appointed as his priest Angira's eldest son, that best of Brahmanas,
Vrihaspati. Formerly Angira was the family-priest of king Karandhama.
Matchless among men in might, prowess and character; powerful like unto
Satakratu, righteous souled and of rigid vows, O king, he had vehicles,
and warrior, and many adherents, and superb and costly bedsteads,
produced through dint of meditation by the breath of his mouth. And by
his native virtues, the monarch had brought all the princes under his
sway. And having lived as long as he desired, he ascended to the heaven
in his corporal embodiment. And his son named Avikshit--conqueror of
foes,--righteous like unto Yayati, brought all the Earth under his
dominion. And both in merit and might the king resembled his sire. He had
a son named Marutta, endowed with energy, and resembling Vasava himself.
This earth clad in oceans; felt herself drawn towards him. He always[5]
used to defy the lord of the celestials; and O son of Pandu, Vasava also
defied Marutta. And Marutta,--master of Earth--was pure and possessed of
perfections. And in spite of his striving, Sakra could not prevail over
him. And incapable of controlling him, he riding on the horse, along with
the celestials summoning Vrihaspati, spoke to him thus, 'O Vrihaspati, if
thou wishest to do what is agreeable to me, do not perform priestly
offices for Marutta on behalf of the deities or the ancestral Manes. I
have, O Vrihaspati, obtained the sovereignty of the three worlds, while
Marutta is merely the lord of the Earth. How, O Brahmana, having acted as
priest unto the immortal king of the celestials, wilt thou unhesitatingly
perform priestly function unto Marutta subject to death? Good betide
thee! Either espouse my side or that of the monarch, Marutta or forsaking
Marutta, gladly come over to me.--Thus accosted by the sovereign of the
celestials, Vrihaspati, reflecting for a moment, replied unto the king of
the immortals. Thou art the Lord of creatures, and in thee are the worlds
established, And thou hast destroyed Namuchi, Viswarupa and Vala. Thou, O
hero, alone encompassest the highest prosperity of the celestials, and, O
slayer of Vala, thou sustainest the earth as well as the heaven. How, O
foremost of the celestials, having officiated as thy priest, shall I, O
chastiser of Paka, serve a mortal prince. Do thou listen to what I say.
Even if the god of fire cease to cause heat and warmth, or the earth
change its nature, or the sun ceases to give light, I shall never deviate
from the truth (that I have spoken).
Vaisampayana continued,--'On hearing this speech from Vrihaspati Indra
became cured of his envious feelings, and then praising him he repaired
to his own mansion.'
SECTION VI
"Vyasa said, 'The ancient legend of Vrihaspati and the wise Marutta is
cited in this connection. On hearing of the compact made by Angira's son
Vrihaspati with the lord of the gods (Indra), king Marutta made the
necessary preparations for a great sacrifice. The eloquent grandson of
Karandhama, (Marutta) having conceived the idea of a sacrifice in his
mind, went to Vrihaspati and addressed him thus, 'O worshipful ascetic, I
have intended to perform the sacrifice which thou didst propose to me
once on a previous occasion and in accordance with thy instructions, and
I now desire to appoint thee as officiating priest in this sacrifice, the
materials whereof have also been collected by me.--O excellent one, thou
art our family priest, therefore do thou take those sacrificial things
and perform the sacrifice thyself.'
Vrihaspati said, 'O lord of the earth, I do not desire to perform thy
sacrifice. I have been appointed as priest by the Lord of the gods
(Indra) and I have promised to him to act as such.'
Marutta said, 'Thou art our hereditary family priest, and for this reason
I entertain great regard for thee, and I have acquired the right of being
assisted at sacrifices by thee, and therefore it is meet that thou
shouldst officiate as priest at my sacrifice.'
Vrihaspati said, 'Having, O Marutta, acted as priest to the Immortals,
how can I act as such to mortal men, and whether thou dost depart hence
or stay, I tell thee, I have ceased to act as priest to any but the
Immortals. O thou of mighty arms, I am unable to act as thy priest now.
And according to thy own desire, thou canst appoint any one as thy priest
who will perform thy sacrifice.'
Vyasa said, 'Thus told, king Marutta became confused with shame, and
while returning home with his mind oppressed by anxiety, he met Narada on
his way. And that monarch on seeing the divine Rishi Narada stood before
him with due salutation, with his hands clasped together. Then Narada
addressing him thus said,--O royal sage, thou seemest to be not
well-pleased in thy mind; is all well with thee? Where hast thou been, O
sinless one, and whence the cause of this thy mental disquietude? And, O
king, if there be no objection to thy telling it to me, do thou, O best
of kings, disclose (the cause of thy anxiety) to me, so that, O prince, I
may allay the disquietude of thy mind with all my efforts.'
Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by the great Rishi Narada, king
Marutta informed him of the rebuff he had received from his religious
preceptor.'
Marutta said, 'Seeking for a priest to officiate at my sacrifice, I went
to that priest of the Immortals, Vrihaspati, the son of Angira, but he
did not choose to accept my offer. Having met with this rebuff from him,
I have no desire to live any longer now, for by his abandoning me thus, I
have, O Narada, become contaminated with sin.'
Vyasa said, 'Thus told by that king, Narada, O mighty prince, made this
reply to him with words which seemed to revive that son of Avikshit.'
Narada said, 'The virtuous son of Angira, Samvarta by name is wandering
over all the quarters of the earth in a naked state to the wonder of all
creatures; do thou, O prince, go to him. If Vrihaspati does not desire to
officiate at thy sacrifice, the powerful Samvarta, if pleased with thee,
will perform thy sacrifice.'
Marutta said, 'I feel as if instilled with new life, by these thy words,
O Narada, but O the best of speakers, do thou tell me where I can find
Samvarta, and how I can remain by his side, and how I am to act so that
he may not abandon me, for I do not desire to live if I meet with a
rebuff from him also.'
Narada said, 'Desirous of seeing Maheswara, O prince, he wanders about at
his pleasure in the city of Varanasi, in the garb of a mad man. And
having reached the gate of that city, thou must place a dead body
somewhere near it, and the man who shall turn away on seeing the corpse,
do thou, O prince, know that man to be Samvarta, and knowing him, do thou
follow his footsteps wheresoever that powerful man chooses to go and
finding him (at length) in a lonely place thou must seek his protection
with thy hands clasped together in supplication to him. And if he
enquires of thee as to the person who has given thee the information
about his own self, do thou tell him that Narada has informed thee about
Samvarta. And if he should ask thee to follow me, thou must tell him
without any hesitation, that I have entered into the fire.'
Vyasa said, 'Having signified his assent to the proposal of Narada, that
royal sage after duly worshipping him, and taking his permission,
repaired to the city of Varanasi, and having reached there, that famous
prince did as he had been told, and remembering the words of Narada, he
placed a corpse at the gate of the city. And by coincidence, that
Brahmana also entered the gate of the city at the same time. Then on
beholding the corpse, he suddenly turned away. And on seeing him turn
back, that prince, the son of Avikshit followed his footsteps with his
hands clasped together, and with the object of receiving instruction from
him. And then finding him in a lonely place, Samvarta covered the king
with mud and ashes and phlegm and spittle. And though thus worried and
oppressed by Samvarta, the king followed that sage with his hands clasped
together in supplication and trying to appease him. At length overcome
with fatigue, and reaching the cool shade of a sacred fig tree with many
branches, Samvarta desisted from his course and sat himself to rest.'
SECTION VII
"Samvarta said, 'How hast thou come to know me, and who has referred thee
to me, do thou tell this to me truly, if thou wishest me to do what is
good to thee. And if thou speak truly, thou shalt attain all the objects
of thy desire, and shouldst thou tell a lie, thy head shall be riven in a
hundred pieces.'
Marutta said, 'I have been told by Narada, wandering on his way, that
thou art the son of our family-priest, and this (information) has
inclined my mind (towards thee), with exquisite satisfaction.'
Samvarta said, 'Thou hast told this to me truly. He (Narada) knows me to
be a performer of sacrifices. Now tell me where is Narada living at
present.'
Marutta said, 'That prince of celestial saints (Narada) having given me
this information about thee, and commended me to thy care, has entered
into the fire.'
Vyasa said, 'Hearing these words from the king (Marutta) Samvarta was
highly gratified, and he said (addressing Marutta). 'I too am quite able
to do all that.' Then, O prince, that Brahmana, raving like a lunatic,
and repeatedly scolding Marutta with rude words, again accosted him thus,
'I am afflicted with a cerebral disorder, and, I always act according to
the random caprices of my own mind. Why art thou bent upon having this
sacrifice performed by a priest of such a singular disposition? My
brother is able to officiate at sacrifices, and he has gone over to
Vasava (Indra), and is engaged in performing his sacrifices, do thou
therefore have thy sacrifice performed by him. My elder brother has
forcibly taken away from me all my household goods and mystical gods, and
sacrificing clients, and has now left to me only this physical body of
mine, and, O son of Avikshit, as he is worthy of all respect from me, I
cannot by any means officiate at thy sacrifice, unless with his
permission. Thou must therefore go to Vrihaspati first, and taking his
permission thou canst come back to me, if thou hast any desire to perform
a sacrifice, and then only shall I officiate at thy sacrifice.'
Marutta said, 'Do thou listen to me, O Samvarta, I did go to Vrihaspati
first, but desiring the patronage of Vasava, he did not wish to have me
as his sacrificer. He said, 'Having secured the priesthood of the
Immortals, I do not desire to act for mortals, and, I have been forbidden
by Sakra (Indra) to officiate at Marutta's sacrifice, as he told me that
Marutta having become lord of the earth, was always filled with a desire
to rival him.' And to this thy brother assented by saying to the Slayer
of Vala (Indra),--Be it so. Know thou, O best of ascetics, that as he had
succeeded in securing the protection of the Lord of the Celestials, I
repaired to him with gratified heart, but he did not agree to act as my
priest. And thus repulsed, I now desire to spend all I possess, to have
this sacrifice performed by thee, and to outstrip Vasava by the merit of
thy good offices. As I have been repulsed by Vrihaspati for no fault of
mine, I have now no desire, O Brahmana, to go to him to seek his aid in
this sacrifice."
Samvarta said, 'I can certainly, O king, accomplish all that thou
desirest, if only thou agree to do all that I shall ask thee to do, but I
apprehend that Vrihaspati and Purandara (Indra) when they will learn that
I am engaged in performing thy sacrifice, will be filled with wrath, and
do all they can to injure thee. Therefore, do thou assure me of thy
steadfastness, so as to ensure my coolness and constancy, as otherwise.
if I am filled with wrath against thee, I shall reduce (destroy) thee and
thy kindred to ashes."
Marutta said, 'If ever I forsake thee, may I never attain the blessed
regions as long as the mountains shall exist, and the thousand-rayed sun
continue to emit heat: if I forsake dice, may I never attain true wisdom,
and remain for ever addicted to worldly (material) pursuits."
Samvarta said, "Listen, O son of Avikshit, excellent as it is the bent of
thy mind to perform this act, so too, O king, have I in my mind the
ability to perform the sacrifice, I tell thee, O king, that thy good
things will become imperishable, and that thou shalt lord it over Sakra
and the Celestials with Gandharvas. For myself, I have no desire to amass
wealth or sacrificial presents, I shall only do what is disagreeable to
both Indra and my brother, I shall certainly make thee attain equality
with Sakra, and I tell thee truly that I shall do what is agreeable to
thee."
SECTION VIII
"Samvarta said, "There is a peak named Munjaban on the summits of the
Himalaya mountains, where the adorable Lord of Uma (Mahadeva) is
constantly engaged in austere devotional exercises. There the mighty and
worshipful god of great puissance, accompanied by his consort Uma, and
armed with his trident, surrounded by wild goblins of many sorts,
pursuing his random wish or fancy, constantly resides in the shade of
giant forest trees, or in the caves, or on the rugged peaks of the great
mountain. And there the Rudras, the Saddhyas, Viswedevas, the Vasus,
Yama, Varuna, and Kuvera with all his attendants, and the spirits and
goblins, and the two Aswins, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the Yakshas, as
also the celestial sages, the Sun-gods, as well as the gods presiding
over the winds, and evil spirits of all sorts, worship the high-souled
lord of Uma, possessed of diverse characteristics. And there, O king, the
adorable god sports with the wild and playful followers of Kuvera,
possessed of weird and ghostly appearances. Glowing with its own
splendour, that mountain looks resplendent as the morning sun. And no
creature with his natural eyes made of flesh, can ever ascertain its
shape or configuration, and neither heat nor cold prevails there, nor
doth the sun shine nor do the winds blow. And, O king, neither doth
senility nor hunger, nor thirst, nor death, nor fear afflict any one at
that place. And, O foremost of conquerors, on all sides of that mountain,
there exist mines of gold, resplendent as the rays of the sun. And O
king, the attendants of Kuvera, desirous of doing good to him, protect
these mines of gold from intruders, with uplifted arms. Hie thee thither,
and appease that adorable god who is known by the names of Sarva, Bedha,
Rudra, Sitikantha, Surapa, Suvarcha, Kapardi, Karala, Haryyaksha, Varada,
Tryaksha, Pushnodantabhid, Vamana, Siva, Yamya, Avyaktarupa, Sadvritta,
Sankara, Kshemya, Harikesa, Sthanu, Purusha, Harinetra, Munda, Krishna,
Uttarana, Bhaskara, Sutirtha, Devadeva, Ranha, Ushnishi, Suvaktra,
Sahasraksha, Midhvan, Girisa, Prasanta, Yata, Chiravasa, Vilwadanda,
Siddha, Sarvadandadhara, Mriga, Vyadha, Mahan, Dhanesa, Bhava, Vara,
Somavaktra, Siddhamantra, Chakshu, Hiranyavahu, Ugra, Dikpati, Lelihana,
Goshtha, Shiddhamantra, Vrishnu, Pasupati, Bhutapati, Vrisha,
Matribhakta, Senani, Madhyama, Sruvahasta, Yati, Dhanwi, Bhargava, Aja,
Krishnanetra, Virupaksha, Tikshnadanshtra, Tikshna, Vaiswanaramukha,
Mahadyuti, Ananga, Sarva, Dikpati, Bilohita, Dipta, Diptaksha, Mahauja,
Vasuretas, Suvapu, Prithu, Kritivasa, Kapalmali, Suvarnamukuta, Mahadeva,
Krishna, Tryamvaka, Anagha, Krodhana, Nrisansa, Mridu, Vahusali, Dandi,
Taptatapa, Akrurakarma, Sahasrasira, Sahasra-charana, Swadha-swarupa,
Vahurupa, Danshtri, Pinaki, Mahadeva, Mahayogi, Avyaya, Trisulahasta,
Varada, Tryamvaka, Bhuvaneswara, Tripuraghna, Trinayana, Trilokesa,
Mahanja, Sarvabhuta-prabhava, Sarvabhuta-dharana, Dharanidhara, Isana,
Sankara, Sarva, Siva, Visveswara, Bhava, Umapati, Pasupati, Viswarupa,
Maheswara, Virupaksha, Dasabhuja, Vrishavadhwaja, Ugra, Sthanu, Siva,
Rudra, Sarva, Girisa, Iswara, Sitakantha, Aja, Sukra, Prithu, Prithuhara,
Vara, Viswarupa, Virupaksha, Vahurupa, Umapati, Anangangahara, Hara,
Saranya, Mahadeva, Chaturmukha. There bowing unto that deity, must thou
crave his protection. And thus, O prince, making thy submission to that
high-souled Mahadeva of great energy, shalt thou acquire that gold. And
the men who go there thus, succeed in obtaining the gold. Thus
instructed, Marutta, the son of Karandhama, did as he was advised. And
made superhuman arrangements for the performance of his sacrifice. And
artisans manufactured vessels of gold for that sacrifice. And Vrihaspati
too, hearing of the prosperity of Marutta, eclipsing that of the gods,
became greatly grieved at heart, and distressed at the thought that his
rival Samvarta should become prosperous, became sick at heart, and the
glow of his complexion left him, and his frame became emaciated. And when
the lord of the gods came to know that Vrihaspati was much aggrieved, he
went to him attended by the Immortals and addressed him thus."
SECTION IX
"Indra said, "Dost thou, O Vrihaspati, sleep in peace, and are thy
servants agreeable to thee, dost thou seek the welfare of the gods, and
do the gods, O Brahmana, protect thee?"
Vrihaspati said, "I do sleep in peace in my bed. O Lord of the gods, and
my servants are to my liking and I always seek the welfare of the gods,
and they cherish me well."
Indra said, "Whence then is this pain, mental or physical, and why art
thou pale and altered in appearance (complexion) at present? Tell me, O
Brahmana, who those people are, who have caused thee pain, so that I may
kill them all."
Vrihaspati said, "O Indra, I have heard that Marutta will perform a great
sacrifice at which exquisite presents will be given by him (to Brahmanas)
and that at his sacrifice Samvarta will act as the officiating priest,
and therefore do I desire that he may not officiate as priest at that
sacrifice."
Indra said, "Thou, O Brahmana, hast attained all the object of thy desire
when thou hast become the excellent priest of the gods, versed in all the
sacred hymns, and hast overreached the influence of death and dotage,
what can Samvarta do to thee now?"
Vrihaspati said, "Prosperity of a rival is always painful to one's
feelings, and for this reason too, thou dost with try attendant gods
persecute the Asuras with their with and kin, and kill the most
prosperous among them; hence, O Lord of the gods, am I changed in
appearance at the thought that my rival is prospering, therefore, O
Indra, do thou, by all means, restrain Samvarta and king Marutta."
Indra turning to Agni said, "Do thou, O Jataveda, following my direction,
go to king Marutta to present Vrihaspati to him, and say unto him that
this Vrihaspati will officiate at his sacrifice and make him immortal."
Agni said, "I shall presently, O adorable one, repair thither as thy
messenger, to present Vrihaspati to king Marutta; and to make Indra's
words true, and to show respect to Vrihaspati, Agni departed."
Vyasa said, "Then the high-souled fire-god went on his errand,
devastating all the forests and trees, like unto the mighty wind, roaring
and revolving at random at the end of the winter season."
Marutta said, "Behold! I find the fire-god come in his own embodiment,
this day, therefore do thou, O Muni, offer him a seat and water, and a
cow, and water for washing the feet."
Agni said, "I accept thy offerings of water, seat, and water for washing
the feet, O sinless one, do thou know me as the messenger of Indra, come
to thee, in accordance with his directions."
Marutta said, "O Fire-god, is the glorious Lord of the Celestials happy,
and is he pleased with us, and are the other gods loyal to him? Do thou
enlighten me duly on all these points."
Agni said, "O lord of the earth, Sakra is perfectly happy, he is pleased
with thee, and wishes to make thee free from senility, and all the other
gods are loyal to him. Do thou, O king, listen to the message of the Lord
of the Celestials. And the object for which he has sent me to thee is to
present Vrihaspati to Marutta. O prince, let this priest (of the
Celestials) perform thy sacrifice, and make thee, who art only a mortal,
attain immortality."
Marutta said, "This twice-born Brahmana Samvarta will perform my
sacrifice, and I pray to Vrihaspati, that he having acted as priest to
Mahendra (Indra), it does not look well for him now to act as priest to
mortal men."
Agni said, "If this Vrihaspati officiate as thy priest, then shalt thou
by the blessings of Devaraja (Indra) attain the highest region in the
celestial mansion and attaining fame shalt thou certainly conquer the
heavenly region. And, O lord of men, if Vrihaspati act as thy priest,
thou shalt be able to conquer all the regions inhabited by men, and the
heavenly regions, and all the highest regions created by Prajapati and
even the entire kingdom of the gods."
Samvarta said, "Thou must never come again thus to present Vrihaspati to
Marutta: for know, O Pavaka, (Agni) if thou dost, I losing my temper,
will burn thee with my fierce evil eyes."
Vyasa said, "Then Agni apprehending destruction by fire, and trembling
like the leaves of the Aswattha tree (Ficus religiosa), returned to the
gods, and the high-souled Sakra seeing that carrier of oblations (Agni)
in the company of Vrihaspati said as follows:
Indra said, "O Jataveda (Agni), didst thou go to present Vrihaspati to
Marutta according to my direction? What did that sacrificing king say
unto thee and did he accept my message?"
Agni said, "Thy message was not acceptable by Marutta and when urged by
me, he clasping the hands of Vrihaspati, repeatedly said, that Samvarta
would act as his priest. And he also observed that he did not desire to
attain the worldly and the heavenly regions and all the highest regions
of Prajapati, and that if he were so minded, he would accept the terms of
Indra."
Indra said, "Do thou go back to that king and meeting him, tell him these
words of mine, full of significance, and if he obey them not, I shall
strike him with my thunderbolt."
Agni said, "Let this king of the Gandharvas repair thither as thy
messenger, O Vasava, for, I am afraid to go thither myself. Know, O
Sakra, that highly incensed Samvarta, used to ascetic practices, told me
these words in a rage. 'I shall burn thee with my fierce evil eyes if
thou on any account come again here to present Vrihaspati to king
Marutta.'"
Sakra said, "O Jataveda, it is thou who dost burn all other things and
there is none else who can reduce thee to ashes. All the world is afraid
to come in contact with thee. O carrier of oblations, these words of
thine are worthy of no credence."
Agni said, "Thou, O Sakra, hast encompassed the dominion of the heaven
and the earth and the firmament by the might of thy own arms, but even
thus how could Vritra (of old) wrest from thee the sovereignty of the
celestial regions?"
Indra said, "I can reduce my foes to submission and can even reduce the
size of a mountain to an atom, if I will it. But, O Vahnni, as I do not
accept the libation of Soma if offered by a foe, and as I do not strike
the weak with my thunderbolt, Vritra seemed to triumph over me for a
time. But who among mortals can live in peace by creating feud with me. I
have banished the Kalakeyas to the earth, and removed the Danavas from
heaven, and have terminated the existence of Prahlada in heaven. Can
there be any man who can live in peace by provoking my enmity?"
Agni said, "Dost thou, O Mahendra, remember that in olden times when the
sage Chyavana officiated at the sacrifice of Saryati with the twin gods
Aswins and himself appropriated the Soma offering alone, thou wert filled
with wrath, and when bent upon preventing Saryati's sacrifice, thou didst
violently strike Chyavana with thy thunderbolt? But that Brahmana, O
Purandara, giving way to passion, was able by the power of his devotions
to seize and hold fast by hand with thy thunder-bolt in it. And in a
rage, he again created a terrible looking enemy of thine, the Asura named
Mada assuming all shapes, on beholding whom thou didst shut thine eyes
with fear, whose one huge jaw was placed on earth, and the other extended
to the celestial regions, and who looked terrible with his thousand sharp
teeth extending over a hundred Yojanas, and had four prominent ones
thick-set, and shining like a pillar of silver, and extending over two
hundred Yojanas. And when grinding his teeth he pursued thee with his
terrible and uplifted pike with the object of killing thee. Thou on
beholding that terrible monster, presented a (pitiful) spectacle to all
the by-standers. Then, O slayer of Danavas, overcome with fear of the
monster, with thy hands clasped in supplication, thou didst seek the
protection of the great sage. The might of Brahmanas, O Sakra, is greater
than that of the Kshatriyas. None are more powerful than Brahmanas and
knowing duly, as I do, the power of Brahmanas, I do not, O Sakra, desire
to come in conflict with Samvarta."
SECTION V
"Indra said, "Even so it is; the might of Brahmanas is great and there
are none more powerful than Brahmanas, but I can never bear with
equanimity the insolent pride of Avikshita's son, and so shall I smite
him with my thunderbolt. Therefore, O Dhritarashtra, do thou according to
my direction repair to king Marutta attended by Samvarta, and deliver
this message to him--'Do thou, O prince, accept Vrihaspati as thy
spiritual preceptor, as otherwise, I shall strike thee with my terrific
thunderbolt.'"
Vyasa said, "Then Dhritarashtra betook himself to that monarch's court
and delivered this message to him from Vasava."
Dhritarashtra said, "O lord of men, know that I am Dhritarashtra the
Gandharva, come here with the object [of] delivering to thee the message
of Indra. Do thou, O lion among kings, listen to the words which the
high-souled lord of all the worlds meant for thee,--That one of
incomprehensible achievements (Indra) only said this much, 'Do thou
accept Vrihaspati as thy officiating priest for the sacrifice, or if thou
do not comply with my request, I shall strike thee with my terrific
thunderbolt.'"
Marutta said, "Thou, O Purandara, the Viswadevas, the Vasus and the
Aswins ye all know, that in this world there is no escape from the
consequences of playing false to a friend; it is a great sin like unto
that of murdering a Brahman. Let Vrihaspati (therefore) officiate as
priest to that Mahendra the supreme Deva (god), the highest one wielding
the thunderbolt, and O prince, Samvarta will act as my priest, as neither
his (Indra's) words, nor thine commend themselves to me."
The Gandharva said, "Do thou, O lion among princes, listen to the
terrible war-cry of Vasava roaring, in the heavens. Assuredly, and openly
will Mahendra hurl his thunderbolt at thee. Do thou therefore be-think
thyself of thy good, for this is the time to do it."
Vyasa said, "Thus accosted by Dhritarashtra, and hearing the roar of
howling Vasava, the king communicated this intelligence to Samvarta
steadfast in devotion and the highest of all virtuous men."
Marutta said, "Verily this rain-cloud floating in the air indicates that
Indra must be near at present, therefore, O prince of Brahmanas, I seek
shelter from thee. Do thou, O best of Brahmanas, remove this fear of
Indra from my mind. The Wielder of the thunderbolt is coming encompassing
the ten directions of space with his terrible and superhuman refulgence
and my assistants at this sacrificial assembly have been overcome with
fright.
Samvarta said, "O lion among kings, thy fear of Sakra will soon be
dispelled, and I shall soon remove this terrible pain by means of my
magic lore (incantation); be calm and have no fear of being overpowered
by India. Thou hast nothing to fear from the god of a hundred sacrifices.
I shall use my staying charms, O king, and the weapons of all the gods
will avail them not. Let the lightening flash in all the directions of
space, and the winds entering into the clouds pour down the showers amid
the forests and the waters deluge the heavens and the flashes of
lightning that are seen will avail not. Thou hast nothing to fear, let
Vasava pour down the rains and plast his terrific thunderbolt where he
will, floating among the watery masses (clouds) for thy destruction, for
the god Vahnni (Agni) will protect thee in every way, and make thee
attain all the objects of thy desire."
Marutta said, "This appalling crash of the thunderbolt together with the
howling of the winds, seem terrible to my ears and my heart is afflicted
again and again, O Brahmana, and my peace of mind is gone at present."
Samvarta said, "O king, the feat in thy mind from this terrible
thunderbolt will leave thee presently. I shall dispel the thunder by the
aid of the winds, and setting aside all fear from thy mind, do thou
accept a boon from me according to thy heart's desire, and I shall
accomplish it for thee."
Marutta said, "I desire, O Brahmana, that Indra all on a sudden should
come in person at this sacrifice, and accept the oblation offered to him,
and that all the other gods also come and take their own shares of the
offerings and accept the libations of Soma offered to them."
Samvarta said, "I have by the power of my incantations attracted Indra in
person to this sacrifice. Behold, O monarch, Indra coming with his
horses, and worshipped by the other gods hastening to this sacrifice."
Then the lord of the Devas attended by the other gods and riding in his
chariot drawn by the most excellent steeds, approached the sacrificial
altar of that son of Avikshit and drank the Soma libations of that
unrivalled monarch. And king Marutta with his priest rose to receive
Indra coming with the host of gods and well-pleased in mind, he welcomed
the lord of the Devas with due and foremost honours according to the
Sastras.
Samvarta said, "Welcome to thee, O Indra, by thy presence here, O learned
one, this sacrifice has been made grand. O slayer or Vala and Vritra. do
thou again quaff this Soma juiced produced by me today.'
Marutta said, "Do thou look with kindness upon me, I bow unto thee, O
Indra, by thy presence, my sacrifice has been perfected, and my life too
blessed with good results. O Surendra, this excellent Brahmana, the
younger brother of Vrihaspati is engaged in performing my sacrifices."
Indra said. "I know thy priest, this highly energetic ascetic, the
younger brother of Vrihaspati, at whose invitation I have come to this
sacrifice. I am, O monarch, well-pleased with thee and my resentment
against thee hath been destroyed."
Samvarta said, "If, O prince of the Devas, thou art pleased with us, do
thou thyself give all the directions for this sacrifice, and O Surendra,
thyself ordain the sacrificial portions (for the gods), so that, O god,
all the world may know that it hath been done by thee."
Vyasa said, "Thus accosted by the son of Angira, Sakra himself gave
directions to all the gods to erect the hall of assembly, and a thousand
well-furnished excellent rooms looking grand as in a picture, and
speedily to complete the staircase massive and durable, for the ascent of
the Gandharvas and Apsaras and to furnish that portion of the sacrificial
ground reserved for the dance of the Apsaras, like unto the palace of
Indra in the heaven. O king, thus directed, the renowned dwellers of
heaven speedily fulfilled the directions of Sakra. And then, O king,
Indra well-pleased and adored, thus said to king Marutta,--O prince, by
associating with thee at this sacrifice, thine ancestors who have gone
before thee, as well as the other gods have been highly gratified and
have accepted the oblations offered by thee. And now, O king, let the
foremost of regenerate beings offer on the sacrificial altar a red bull
appertaining to the Fire-god and a sacred and duly consecrated blue bull
with a variegated skin, appertaining to the Viswedevas. Then, O king, the
sacrificial ceremony grew in splendour, wherein the gods themselves
collected the food, and Sakra, the lord of the gods, possessed of horses,
and worshipped by the Brahmanas, became an assistant at the sacrifice.
And then the high-souled Samvarta ascending the altar, and looking
radiant as the second embodiment of the blazing fire, loudly addressing
the gods with complaisance, offered oblations of clarified butter to the
fire with incantation of the sacred hymns. And then the slayer of Vala
first drank the Soma juice, and then the assembly of other gods drank
Soma. And then in happiness and with the king's permission they returned
home and well-pleased and delighted. Then that monarch, the slayer of his
enemies, with a delighted heart, placed heaps of gold on diverse spots,
and distributing the immense wealth to the Brahmanas, he looked glorious
like Kuvera, the god of wealth. And with a buoyant heart, the king filled
his treasury with different kinds of wealth, and with the permission of
his spiritual preceptor, he returned (to his kingdom) and continued to
rule the entire realm extending to the borders of the sea. So virtuous in
this world was that king, at whose sacrifice such an enormous quantity of
gold vas collected, and now, O prince, thou must collect that gold and
worshipping the gods with due rites, do thou perform this sacrifice."
Vaisampayana continued, "Then the Pandava prince Yudhishthira was
delighted on hearing this speech of the son of Satyavati (Vyasa), and
desirous of performing his sacrifice with those riches, he held repeated
consultations with his ministers."
