SECTION XXI
"The Brahmana said, 'In this connection is cited the following ancient
story. Do thou understand, of what kind the institution is of the ten
Hotris (sacrificing priests). The ear, the skin, the two eyes, the
tongue, the nose, the two feet, the two hands, the genital organ, the
lower duct, and speech,--these, O beautiful one, are the ten sacrificing
priests. Sound and touch, colour and taste, scent, speech, action,
motion, and the discharge of vital seed, of urine and of excreta, are the
ten libations. The points of the compass, Quarters, Wind, Sun, Moon,
Earth, Fire, Vishnu, Indra, Prajapati, and Mitra,--these, O beautiful
one, are the ten (sacrificial) fires. The ten organs (of knowledge and
action) are the sacrificing priests. The libations, O beautiful one, are
ten. The objects of the senses are the fuel that are cast into these ten
fires,[54] as also the mind, which is the ladle, and the wealth (viz.,
the good and bad acts of the sacrificer). What remains is the pure,
highest knowledge. We have heard that all this universe was well
differentiated (from Knowledge). All objects of knowledge are Mind.
Knowledge only perceives (i.e., discovers the Mind without being attached
to it). The knower (or Jiva), encased in subtle form, lives within the
gross body that is produced by the vital seed. The bearer of the body is
the Garhapatya fire. From that is produced another. Mind is the Ahavaniya
fire. Into it is poured the oblation. From that was produced the Veda (or
Word); (then was born Mind); Mind (desirous of creation) sets itself on
the Veda (or the Word). Their arises form (or colour) undistinguished by
particular colours. It runs towards the Mind.'"[55]
"The Brahmana's wife said, 'Why did Word first arise and why did Mind
arise afterwards, seeing that Word starts into existence after having
been thought upon by Mind? Upon that authority can it be said that Mati
(Prana) takes refuge in Mind. Why, again, in dreamless slumber, though
separated from Mind, does not Prana apprehend (all objects)? What is that
which restrains it then?'"[56]
"The Brahmana said, 'The Apana breath, becoming the lord (i.e., bringing
the Prana under its control), in consequence of such lordship over it,
makes it identical with itself. That restrained motion of the Prana
breath (which for the time becomes identical with that of the Apana) has
been said to be the motion of the mind. Hence the mind is dependent upon
Prana, not Prana upon the mind. Therefore, in dreamless slumber, upon the
disappearance of mind, Prana does not disappear. But since thou askest me
a question about word and mind, I shall, therefore, relate to thee a
discourse between them. Both Word and Mind, repairing to the Soul of
matter,[57] asked him,--Do thou say who amongst us is superior. Do thou,
O puissant one, dispel our doubt.--On that occasion, the holy one made
this answer.--The mind undoubtedly (is superior). Unto him Word said,--'I
yield to thee the fruition of all thy desires!'[58]
"The Brahmana said, 'Know that I have two minds, immovable and movable.
That which is immovable is, verily, with me; the movable is in your
dominion.[59] That mind is verily called movable which, in the form of
Mantra, letter, or voice, is referable to your dominion. Hence, thou art
superior (to the other mind which concerns itself with only the external
world). But since, coming of thy own accord, O beautiful one, thou
enterest into the engagement (about the fruition of all wishes),
therefore, filling myself with breath, I utter thee.[60] The goddess Word
used always to dwell between Prana and Apana. But, O blessed one, sinking
into Apana, though urged upwards, in consequence of becoming dissociated
from Prana, she ran to Prajapati and said,--Be gratified with me, O holy
one.--The Prana appeared, once more fostering Word. Hence, Word,
encountering deep exhalation, never utters anything. Word always flows as
endued with utterance or unendued with it.[61] Amongst those two, Word
without utterance is superior to Word with utterance. Like a cow endued
with excellent milk, she (Word without utterance) yields diverse kinds of
meaning. This one always yields the Eternal (viz., Emancipation),
speaking of Brahman. O thou of beautiful smiles, Word is a cow, in
consequence of her puissance which is both divine and not divine. Behold
the distinction of these two subtle forms of Word that flow.'"[62]
"The Brahmana's wife said, 'What did the goddess of Word then say, in
days of old, when, though impelled by the Wish to speak, Speech could not
come out?'"
"The Brahmana said, 'The Word that is generated in the body by Prana,
then attains to Apana from Prana. Then transformed into Udana and issuing
out of the body, envelops all the quarters, with Vyana. After that, she
dwells in Samana. Even in this way did Word formerly speak. Hence Mind,
in consequence of being immovable, is distinguished, and the goddess
Word, in consequence of being movable, is also distinguished."'
