SECTION XXIV
"The Brahmana said, 'In this connection is cited the ancient story of the
discourse between Narada and the Rishi Devamata.'
"Devamata said, 'What verily, comes first into existence, of a creature
that takes birth? Is it Prana, or Apana, or Samana, or Vyana, or Udana?'
"Narada said, 'By whatever the creature is created, that first comes unto
him which is other (or separate from him). The life winds are to be known
as existing in pairs, viz., those that move transversely, upwards, and
downwards.'
"Devamata said, 'By whom (among the life-winds) is a creature produced?
Who (amongst) them comes first? Do thou tell me what the pairs are of the
life-winds, that move transversely, upwards, and downwards.'
"Narada said, 'From Sankalpa (wish) arises Pleasure. It also arises from
sound. It arises also from taste; it arises too from colour. From the
semen, united with blood, first flows Prana. Upon the semen being
modified by Prana, flows Apana. Pleasure arises from the semen as well.
It arises from taste also. This is the form (effect) of Udana. Pleasure
is produced from union. Semen is generated by desire. From desire is
produced the menstrual flow. In the union of semen and blood, generated
by Samana and Vyana, the pair that consists of Prana and Apana, enters,
moving transversely and upwards, Vyana and Samana both form a pair that
moves transversely. Agni (fire) is all the deities. Even this is the
teaching of the Veda. The knowledge of Agni arises in a Brahmana with
intelligence. The smoke of that fire is of the form of (the attribute
called) Darkness. The attribute that is known by the name of Passion is
in its ashes. The quality of goodness arises from that portion of the
fire into which the oblation is poured.[66] They that are conversant with
sacrifices know that Samana and Vyana are from the attribute of Goodness.
Prana and Apana are portions of the oblation (of clarified butter).
Between them is the Fire. That is the excellent form (or seat) of Udana,
as the Brahmanas know. Listen as I say which is distinct from the pairs.
Day and Night constitute a pair. Between them is the Fire. That is the
excellent seat of Udana as the Brahmanas know. The existent and the
non-existent form a pair. Between them is the Fire. That is the excellent
seat of Udana as the Brahmanas know. First is Samana; then Vyana. The
latter's function is managed through it (viz., Samana). Then, secondly,
Samana once more comes into operation. Only Vyana exists for
tranquillity. Tranquillity is eternal Brahman. This is the excellent seat
of Udana as the Brahmanas know.'"[67]
