SECTION III
"Vyasa said, 'O Yudhishthira, thy wisdom, I conceive, is not adequate.
None doth any act by virtue of his own power. It is God. who engageth him
in acts good or bad, O bestower of honour. Where then is the room for
repentance? Thou deemest thyself as having perpetrated impious acts. Do
thou, therefore, O Bharata, harken as to the way in which sin may be
removed. O Yudhishthira, those that commit sins, can always free
themselves from them through penance, sacrifice and gifts. O king, O
foremost of men, sinful people are purified by sacrifice, austerities and
charity. The high-souled celestials and Asuras perform sacrifices for
securing religious merit; and therefore sacrifice are of supreme
importance. It is through sacrifices that the high-souled celestials had
waxed so wondrously powerful; and having celebrated rites did they
vanquish the Danavas. Do thou, O Yudhishthira, prepare for the Rajasuya,
and the horse-sacrifice, as well as, O Bharata, for the Sarvamedha and
the Naramedha.[2] And then as Dasaratha's son, Rama, or as Dushmanta's
and Sakuntala's son, thy ancestor, the lord of the Earth, the exceedingly
puissant king Bharata, had done, do thou agreeably to the ordinance
celebrate the Horse-sacrifice with Dakshinas. Yudhishthira replied,
'Beyond a doubt, the Horse-sacrifice purifieth princes. But I have a
purpose of which it behoveth thee to hear. Having caused this huge
carnage of kindred, I cannot, O best of the regenerate ones, dispense
gifts even on a small scale; I have no wealth to give. Nor can I for
wealth solicit these juvenile sons of kings, staying in sorry plight,
with their wounds yet green, and undergoing suffering. How, O foremost of
twice-born ones, having myself destroyed the Earth can I, overcome by
sorrow, levy dues for celebrating a sacrifice? Through Duryodhana's
fault, O best of ascetics, the kings of the Earth have met with
destruction, and we have reaped ignominy. For wealth Duryodhana hath
wasted the Earth; and the treasury of that wicked-minded son of
Dhritarashtra is empty. (In this sacrifice), the Earth is the Dakshina;
this is the rule that is prescribed in the first instance. The usual
reversal of this rule, though sanctioned, is observed, by the learned as
such. Nor, O ascetic, do I like to have a substitute (for this process).
In this matter, O reverend sir, it behoveth thee to favour me with thy
counsel'. Thus addressed by Pritha's son, Krishna Dwaipayana, reflecting
for a while, spoke unto the righteous king,--'This treasury, (now)
exhausted, shall be full. O son of Pritha, in the mountain Himavat (The
Himalayas) there is gold which had been left behind by Brahmanas at the
sacrifice of the high-souled Marutta.'[3] Yudhishthira asked, 'How in
that sacrifice celebrated by Marutta was so much gold amassed? And, O
foremost of speakers, when did he reign?' Vyasa said 'If, O Pritha's son,
thou art anxious to hear concerning that king sprung from the Karandhama
race, then listen to me as I tell thee when that highly powerful monarch
possessed of immense wealth reigned.'"
