SECTION XCII
"Janamejaya said, 'If, O illustrious one, Heaven is the fruit of wealth
acquired by lawful means, do thou discourse to me fully on it. Thou art
well-conversant with the subject and therefore, it behoveth thee to
explain it. O regenerate one, thou hast said unto me what the high fruit
was that accrued unto that Brahmana, who lived according to the Unccha
mode, through his gift of powdered barley. Without doubt, all thou hast
said is true. In what way, however, was the attainment held certain of
the highest end in all sacrifices? O foremost of regenerate persons, it
behoveth thee to expound this to me in all its details.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'In this connection is cited this old narrative, O
chastiser of foes, of what occurred in former days in the great sacrifice
of Agastya. In olden days, O king, Agastya of great energy, devoted to
the good of all creatures, entered into a Diksha extending for twelve
years.[219] In that sacrifice of the high-souled Rishi many Hotris were
engaged that resembled blazing fires in the splendour of their bodies.
Among them were men that subsisted upon roots or fruits, or that used two
pieces of stone only for husking their corn, or that were supported by
only the rays (of the moon). Among them were also men who never took any
food unless it was placed before them by others solicitous of feeding
them, and those who never ate anything without having first served the
deities, the Pitris, and guests, and those who never washed the food
which they took. There were also Yatis and Bikshus among them, O king.
All of them were men who had obtained a sight of the deity of
Righteousness in his embodied form. They had subjugated wrath and
acquired a complete mastery over all their senses. Living in the
observance of self-restraint, they were freed from pride and the desire
of injuring others. They were always observant of a pure conduct and were
never obstructed (in the prosecution of their purposes) by their senses.
Those great Rishis attended that sacrifice and accomplished its various
rites. The illustrious Rishi (Agastya) acquired the food that was
collected in that sacrifice and that came up to the required measure, by
lawful means according to the best of his power. Numerous other ascetics
at that time performed large sacrifices. As Agastya, however, was engaged
in that sacrifice of his, the thousand-eyed Indra, O best of the
Bharatas, ceased to pour rain (on the Earth). At the intervals, O king,
of the sacrificial rites, this talk occurred among those Rishis of
cleansed souls about the high-souled Agastya, viz., 'This Agastya,
engaged in sacrifice, is making gifts of food with heart purged of pride
and vanity. The deity of the clouds, however, has ceased to pour rain.
How, indeed, will food grow? This sacrifice of the Rishi, ye Brahmanas,
is great and extends for twelve years. The deity will not pour rain for
these twelve years. Reflecting on this, it behoveth you to do some favour
unto this Rishi of great intelligence, viz., Agastya of severe penances.'
When these words were said, Agastya of great prowess, gratifying those
ascetics by bending his head, said, 'If Vasava does not pour rain for
those twelve years, I shall then perform the mental sacrifice. Even this
is the eternal ordinance. If Vasava does not pour rain for these twelve
years, I shall then perform the Touch-sacrifice. Even this is the eternal
sacrifice. If Vasava does not pour rain for these twelve years, I shall
then, putting forth all my exertion, make arrangements for other
sacrifices characterised by the observance of the most difficult and
severe vows. This present sacrifice of mine, with seeds, has been
arranged for by me with labour extending for many years.[220] I shall,
with seeds, accomplish much good. No impediment will arise. This my
sacrifice is incapable of being baffled. It matters little whether the
deity pours rains or no downpours happen. Indeed, if Indra does not, of
his own will, show any regard for me, I shall, in that case, transform
myself into Indra and keep all creatures alive. Every creature, on
whatever food he has been nourished, will continue to be nourished on it
as before. I can even repeatedly create a different order of things. Let
gold and whatever else of wealth there is, come to this place today. Let
all the wealth that occurs in the three worlds come here today of its own
accord. Let all the tribes of celestial Apsaras, all the Gandharvas along
with the Kinnaras, and Viswavasu, and others there are (of that order),
approach this sacrifice of mine. Let all the wealth that exists among the
Northern Kurus, come of their own accord to these sacrifices. Let Heaven,
and all those who have Heaven for their home, and Dharma himself, come
hither.'--After the ascetic had uttered these words, everything happened
as he wished, in consequence of his penances, for Agastya was endued with
a mind that resembled a blazing fire and was possessed of extraordinary
energy. The Rishis who were there beheld the power of penances with
rejoicing hearts. Filled with wonder they then said these words of grave
import.'
"The Rishis said, 'We have been highly gratified with the words thou hast
uttered. We do not, however, wish that thy penances should suffer any
diminution. Those sacrifices are approved by us which are performed by
lawful means. Indeed, we desire duly those sacrifices which rest on
lawful means.[221] Earning our food by lawful means and observant of our
respective duties, we shall seek to go through sacrificial initiations
and the pouring of libations on the sacred fire and the other religious
rites. We should adore the deities, practising Brahmacharyya by lawful
means. Completing the period of Brahmacharyya we have come out of our
abode, observing lawful methods. That understanding, which is freed from
the desire of inflicting any kind of injury on others, is approved by us.
Thou shouldst always, O puissant one, command such abstention from injury
in all sacrifices. We shall then be highly gratified, O foremast of
regenerate ones. After the completion of thy sacrifice, when dismissed by
thee, we shall then, leaving this place, go away.' As they were saying
these words, Purandara, the chief of the deities, endued with great
energy, beholding the power of Agastya's penances, poured rain. Indeed, O
Janamejaya, till the completion of the sacrifice of that Rishi of
immeasurable prowess, the deity of rain poured rain that met the wishes
of men in respect of both quantity and time. Placing Vrihaspati before
him, the chief of the deities came there, O royal sage, and gratified the
Rishi Agastya. On the completion of that sacrifice, Agastya, filled with
joy, worshipped those great Rishis duly and then dismissed them all.'
"Janamejaya said, 'Who was that mongoose with a golden head, that said
all those words in a human voice? Asked by me, do thou tell me this.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thou didst not ask me before and, therefore, I did
not tell thee. Hear as I tell thee who that mongoose was and why he could
assume a human voice. In former times, the Rishi Jamadagni proposed to
perform a Sraddha. His Homa cow came to him and the Rishi milked her
himself. He then placed the milk in a vessel that was new, durable and
pure. The deity Dharma, assuming the form of Anger, entered that vessel
of milk. Indeed, Dharma was desirous of ascertaining what that foremost
of Rishis would do when seeing some injury done to him. Having reflected
thus, Dharma spoiled that milk. Knowing that the spoiler of his milk was
Anger, the ascetic was not at all enraged with him. Anger, then, assuming
the form of a Brahmana lady, showed himself to the Rishi. Indeed, Anger,
finding that he had been conquered by that foremost one of Bhrigu's race,
addressed him, saying, 'O chief of Bhrigu's race, I have been conquered
by thee. There is a saying among men that the Bhrigus are very wrathful.
I now find that that saying is false, since I have been subdued by thee.
Thou art possessed of a mighty soul. Thou art endued with forgiveness. I
stand here today, owning thy sway. I fear thy penances, O righteous one.
Do thou, O puissant Rishi, show me favour.'
"Jamadagni said, 'I have seen thee, O Anger, in thy embodied form. Go
thou whithersoever thou likest, without any anxiety. Thou hast not done
me any injury today. I have no grudge against thee. Those for whom I had
kept this milk are the highly blessed Pitris. Present thyself before them
and ascertain their intentions.' Thus addressed, penetrated with fear,
Anger vanished from the sight of the Rishi. Through the curse of the
Pitris he became a mongoose. He then began to gratify the Pitris in order
to bring about an end of his curse. By them he was told these words, 'By
speaking disrespectfully of Dharma thou shalt attain to the end of thy
curse.' Thus addressed by them he wandered over places where sacrifices
were performed and over other sacred places, employed in censuring great
sacrifices. It was he that came to the great sacrifice of king
Yudhishthira. Dispraising the son of Dharma by a reference to the prastha
of powdered barley, Anger became freed from his curse, for Yudhishthira
(as Dharma's son) was Dharma's self. Even this is what occurred in the
sacrifice of that high-souled king. Mongoose disappeared there in our
very sight.'"[222]
The end of Aswamedha Parva
FOOTNOTES
1. Mahavahu occurs twice in this passage. One of the epithets is left out
on the score of redundancy.
2. i.e., human sacrifice. From this it appears that the sacrifice of
human beings was in vogue at the time.
3. King Marutta celebrated a sacrifice in the Himalayas, bestowing gold
on Brahmanas. Not being able to carry the entire quantity, they had
carried as much as they could, throwing away the remainder.
4. Digambara, i.e., in naked state.
5. Nityada always, left out on the ground of redundancy.
6. Bhutanam etc. is explained by Nilakantha as no swasya, and the
vocative vibho is taken as Paramatman.
7. Agatagamam implies, as explained by the commentator,
praptasastrarahasyam.
8. Nirakarasritena is explained by Nilakantha as
Asamprajnatas-samadhi-samadhigamya Brhamabhavasritena, implying reliance
on Brahman by having recourse to Samadhi or a suspension of all functions
of both body and mind (through Yoga) and arrival at that state which is
one of perfect unconsciousness.'
9. The dissolution here spoken of is the Mahapralaya and not the Khanda
or Avantara Pralayas. Till then, the sage will look upon all beings,
i.e., their repeated migrations.
10. The commentator explains that altogether seven questions are asked.
The first is about the dissolution of the body. The second relates to the
manner of re-acquiring a body. The third has reference to the manner in
which rebirth may be avoided. The fourth relates to the causes that
operate for giving a body to Jiva. By Prakriti is meant Nature or that
Nescience which is the cause of body. The fifth relates to the Anyat or
Param, viz., how final Emancipation or absorption into Brahman takes
place. The sixth pertains to the manner in which the fruits of acts are
enjoyed or endured. The seventh enquires after the way in which acts
attach to Jiva even when devoid of a body.
11. Kala here means both the season of the year and the age of the
person. Food that is beneficial in summer is not so in winter, or that
which is beneficial in youth is otherwise at old age. All the texts that
I have seen have viditwa and not aviditiwa which Telang takes in his
version for the Sacred Books of the East. Kala is always interpreted by
the commentators of Charaka as referring to either period of life or
period of the year. This, as well as the following verses, relates to the
laws of health as expounded by Charaka.
12. The faults are three, viz., Wind, Bile, and Phlegm. When existing in
a state of harmony, they produce health. When one is excited or two, or
all, indisposition sets in. They are called dosha or faults, because of
their liability to be excited and product, disease. Telang, not
suspecting that the whole passage is a reproduction of a passage in the
ancient work edited by Charaka, misunderstands some expressions and
wrongly renders doshan into 'disorders.'
13. Jivitam in the second line seems to be an objective of sariram in the
first.
14. Garbha-sankramane is explained by Nilakantha as 'entering the foetus
in the womb after casting off the body appertaining to the other world. I
think Telang is not correct in his version of 19 and 20. Atisarpana can
never imply 'exhaustion'; hence, karmanam can never be the reading he
adopts. Besides tadrisam seems to settle the question. The tortures felt
at death are similar to those at birth.
15. Sambutatwam is sanhatatwam. Niyachachati is nasyyati Vayu is
understood in the second line, or that in the first line of the next
verse may be taken as the nom. of niyachachati.
16. Pachante is phalam prayachhanti.
17. Nilakantha explains this verse in a different way. According to him
it means,--'in consequence of his subtlety and imperceptibility, Jiva
does not become attached to anything. For this reason, one possessed of a
knowledge of Brahman, having become cognisant of Brahman and attained the
great object of his desire, succeeds in becoming so (i.e., dissociated
from all things). This interpretation seems to be a little far-fetched.
18. Chetasa indicates upadhibhutena, for previously, Jiva was without
upadhi. Pranasthaneshu implies Indriyagolokeshu or those vital parts
which constitute the seats of the senses. Chetana does not, I think, mean
'consciousness.' It implies mind.
19. Causes them to grow. I do not follow Nilakantha here.
20. Nilakantha points out that one of the cha's indicates the reason or
cause. Hence, the use of 'therefore' in the text.
21. Vikrita does not necessarily mean degraded. It implies 'changed or
altered.' Jiva, who is pure and immaculate, takes birth in this world,
failing away from his true status of Brahman owing to his acts. Acts,
again, are eternal, no beginning being conceivable.
22. Parantwa-maritam-aksharam indicates two things, viz., Amritam and
Aksharam. The first line speaks of Kshara, or the material case, or body;
then of that which is para or other. This other is of two kinds, viz.,
Amritam or suddha-chaitanyam, implying Brahman in its condition of
purity; and Aksharamt or Jiva as existing in the material case. In the
second line, trayanam refers to Kshara, Amrita, and Akshara. Mithunam is
duality, referring to that which is composed of Kshara and Akshara. What
is stated in this verse is that every Purusha is a duality, made up of
Kshara and Akshara. Telang gives a different version of the verse. He
ignores the word trayanam totally, and takes Mithunam as implying a
couple (male and female). All the texts I have seen contain trayanam.
23. Atra purvajamnani (vishaye) yatha kaschit Medhavi etc., (vadet).
seems to be the correct order of the words. Telang translates the first
line differently.
24. Ekayana is the one receptacle of all things, viz., Brahman. Tushni
implies ahamevedam sarvamasmityabhimanamapyakurvan i.e., 'without even
retaining the consciousness of his own identity with everything.'
Kinchikachintayan--i.e., not even thinking that he is existing. Purvam
purvam parityajya implies the gradual merging of the grosser in the
subtler. i.e., the successive stages of Yoga before absorption into
Brahman. I follow Nilakantha.
25. The first half of the second line of 8 is read differently in the
Bengal texts. Aswasthamavasam mudham implies 'without ease or happiness,
endued with slavery and ignorance.'
26. The Soul being destitute of these becomes Chinmatra, i.e., a pure
Chit without the attributes superinduced upon it by Ne-science or
ignorance.
27. Formlessness implies subtlety. 'Without cause' implies increate or as
identical with eternal Brahman. Dissociation from attributes while
enjoying them implies an emancipate condition.
28. Nirvana, according to orthodox commentators, implies the annihilation
or cessation of separate or individual existence by absorption into
universal and eternal Brahman.
29. The impressions caused by objects outside self are destroyed by those
belonging to contemplation. The latter, again, should be destroyed before
absorption into Brahman can occur.
30. Siddham is explained as 'destitute of the errors due to Ne-science.'
31. Attnanam is Chittam; atmani is dehe; charayan is antarmukham kritwa;
nityam is adyantasunyam. So Nilakantha.
32. 'Fixing the mind upon the soul' is that concentration which leads to
Emancipation. This becomes possible in consequence of severe austerities
undergone previously.
33. I expand the verse a little to make it intelligible. The sense is
this: having seen the supreme Soul in Samadhi, upon awaking from it, he
recognises it in the universe, i.e., regards the universe to be nothing
else than the Supreme Soul.
34. This may also mean 'he has none superior to him; not even he that is
the Lord of the universe.'
35. The first line seems to be doubtful. The sense, as I understand it,
is,--such a person becomes the god of the very gods. The causal verb
karayate may be taken as equivalent to karoti.
36. I follow Nilakantha in rendering the second line. The sense is clear,
viz., that one should not fall away from the practice of Yoga, tempted by
the puissance that Yoga brings. Telang renders the line 'one practising
concentration should never become despondent.' I think, Nilakantha is
right.
37. Nilakantha notes that this indicates that only that Yogin who has not
advanced much may be tempted by the desire of enjoyment. He, however, who
has adequately devoted himself to Yoga feels no regard for Indra himself
but can turn him away like Diogenes dismissing Alexander the Great.
38. I have endeavoured to render verses 33 to 37 as literally as
possible, under the guide of Nilakantha, omitting his inferences. The
passage relates to the mysteries of Yoga. In the second line of 33,
drishtapurvam disam, which has been rendered 'that point of the compass
which has the Sun behind it,' means the instructions laid down in the
Vedanta as based upon Srutis. Drishtam implies 'Sruti', for it is as
authoritative as anything seen. 'Pura' implies a city, a citadel, or a
mansion. Here it refers to the body. The avasatha within the pura refers
to the chakra or nervous centres beginning with what is called the
muladhara. At the time when Brahman is realised, the whole universe
appears as Brahman and so nothing exists, besides Brahman, upon which the
mind can then dwell. Telang, I think, is not correct in rendering
manaschasya ... vahyatah as 'his mind should not any way wander outside'.
The correct version would 'the mind is then nowhere,' implying that at
that time the mind has nothing else to dwell upon. Kayamabhyantaram is
kayamabhi and antaram, i.e., both within and without the body. The
several parts of the body named, beginning with teeth, etc, refer to
eating and other operations, all of which influence the mind and dispose
it for purity and otherwise.
39. i.e., that from which the entire universe has been created.
40. Probably, 'by any of the senses'. The plural form occurs in the
original.
41. This answers the questions respecting the form of the Soul, says
Nilakantha.
42. I render this verse, following Nilakantha's gloss. The second line of
50, according to that commentator, refers to the ascension of the Yogin
from Brahma vested with attributes to Brahma divested of all attributes.
The tam does not refer to body, as Telang takes it, but to Brahma as
endued with hands and feet on all sides, etc. Deheswam dharayan means
'restraining the mind within the body'. Kevalam Brahma is Brahma without
attributes.
43. The speaker here is the regenerate visitor of Krishna. The latter is
repeating the words of that visitor. In this verse, Krishna, forgetting
that he is merely reciting the words of another, refers to himself as the
Supreme Brahman in whom one must merge for attaining to Emancipation.
44. The second line of 56 is read variously.
45. Heaven is the reward of those who follow the religion of Pravritti or
acts, such as sacrifices, religious observances, etc. The followers,
however, of the religion of Nivritti or inaction, i.e., they who betake
themselves to the path of knowledge, become emancipated. The deities
derive their sustenance from the former and become even jealous of the
latter, for the emancipate state is higher than that of the deities
themselves.
46. Avichakshanam is undiscerning, in the sense of the husband's not
knowing that the interrogatrix as wife, has no other refuge than her lord
with all his defects.
47. I follow Nilakantha. Telang adopts the views or Arjuna Misra and
renders the first line as 'whatever acts are seized (by the touch, or
seen, or heard, etc.') Grahyam, according to Nilakantha, implies those
acts, like Diksha, etc, which are adopted with the aid of others.
48. This seat, says Nilakantha, is called Avimukta and lies between the
eyebrows and the nose.
49. Nilakantha interprets this mystically. By Soma he understands the
artery or duct called Ida, and by Agni the duct called Pingala. Dhira is
Buddipreraka; vyavayam is sancharam. Dhirobhutani dharayan nityam
vyavayam kurute is the order of the words. The sense is this: in this
spot is seated Brahman; there Ida and Pingala meet; and there also is
Vayu which urges the understanding and upholds all living creatures.
50. Yatra is not to be taken as a locative here. It is equivalent to
yatah or for which.
51. Tasmin is taken, by Nilakantha as Apana sahite Prane.
52. Utkarshena anayati, hence Udana, says Nilakantha. The sense of the
whole passage seems to be this. Worldly life is regulated by the
life-breaths. These are attached to the Soul and lead to its individual
manifestations. Udana controls all the breaths. Udana is controlled by
penance. It is penance then that destroys the round of rebirths and leads
to absorption into Brahman.
53. The meaning seems to be this: they who renounce sensuous objects can
create them when they like. One casting off smell that has earth for its
object can create earth when he likes.
54. What is stated in this passage is, shortly, this: the ear, etc, are
the Hotris or sacrificing priests who are to pour libations on the
sacrificial fire. The perceptions and functions of those organs
constitute the Havi or libations that are to be poured. The points, wind,
etc, are the Agni or sacred fires on which they are to be poured. These
statements are recapitulated in verse 5. The objects of the senses, of
the same as those in verse 3, are the fuel, previously described as Havi
or libations, which are to be burnt off by being cast into the fires.
55. The Hridaya or heart is the Garhapatya fire. From it is produced
another fire, the Ahavaniya, viz., the mind. 'The heart was pierced. From
the heart arose mind, for the mind arose Chandramas,' is the declaration
of the Sruti cited by Nilakantha. The Ahavaniya fire or mind is the
mouth. Asyam ahavaniya is the Sruti. Annamayam hi Somya manas, apomayah
pranah, tejomayi vak is the Sruti that bears upon this. Food or fire,
poured into the mouth develops into speech or word. Vachaspati implies
the Veda or word. First arises the word, the mind sets itself upon it,
desirous of creation. This corresponds with the Mosaic Genesis.--'God
said; let there be light, and there was light.' The word was first.
56. The last question seems to be this: in dreamless slumber, the mind
disappears totally. If it is the mind upon which Prana rests, why does
not Prana also disappear? It is seen to separate itself from mind, for it
continues to exist while mind does not exist. If so, i.e., if existing,
as it must be admitted to do, why does it not apprehend objects? What is
it that restrains its powers of apprehension?
57. Bhutatmanam is ordinary Prajapati. Nilakantha takes it to mean here
individual Jiva or self.
58. It is, through words that desirable fruits, visible and invisible,
are acquired. Of course, word means both ordinary speech and Vedic
Mantras.
59. The speaker is the Brahmana, which Nilakantha explains to mean 'the
Brahmana named Manas or Mind'. Instead of such a learned interpretation,
we may take it as implying that the Brahmana is repeating the answer
which Bhutatman, i.e., Prajapati or Jiva, made to Word. The Brahmana is
the real speaker. He recites the words of Jiva. Immovable, according to
Nilakantha, means 'that which is seizable by the external senses'; and
'movable', that which is beyond the ken of the senses, such as heaven,
etc. The external world being only a manifestation of the mind, it is
spoken of here as identical with it. So, the ideas in the mind which are
not due to the senses, are only the mind. This is the movable mind. That
mind depends on word or the scriptures.
60. Telang gives a different version of this verse. I offer a verbal
tendering, without attempting to explain it.
61. i.e., as noisy or noiseless.
62. I have given as close a verbal rendering of the passage as possible.
The sense, however, is not very intelligible to me. The gloss of
Nilakantha is as unintelligible as the text. Telang also has given a
verbal rendering which differs from the above slightly. His foot-notes do
not, I think, bring out the meaning at all. As regards the two vernacular
versions, both are useless.
63. The correct reading is cha after arthan and not twam after it. Hence,
the Senses say that, without ourselves and without those which are our
objects, thou canst not have thy enjoyments.'
64. Thus creatures may exist through us, even though mind may be out of
order.
65. Both mental purposes and dreams having failed to gratify him.
66. The reading sarvam in the second line is incorrect, though Nilakantha
adopts it. The different portions of the fire are indicated as the
different attributes. The smoke is of the form of Darkness (Tamas): the
ashes are the attributes of Passion; while the blazing flame, that into
which the oblation is thrown, is the attribute of Goodness.
67. I give a close rendering of these verses, without endeavouring to
bring out the sense as explained by the commentators. The printed texts
are not correct. The text adopted by Nilakantha differs from that of
Arjuna Misra. The very order of the verses is not uniform in all the
texts.
68. 'These' refers to action, agent and instrument. The qualities of
which they are possessed are goodness, passion, and darkness.
69. What is stated in these two verses is this: it is the Senses that
enjoy; and not the Soul. This is well known to those that are learned. On
the other hand, those that are not learned, regard this or that to be
theirs, when in reality they are different from them. They are their
selves, and not their senses, although they take themselves for the
latter, ignorantly identifying themselves with things which they are not.
70. What is stated here is this: Restraining the senses and the mind, the
objects of those senses and the mind should be poured as libations on the
sacred fire of the Soul that is within the body.
71. i.e., truth is the Sastra of the Prasastri.
72. Narayana is taken by Nilakantha to stand here for either the Veda or
the Soul. The animals offered up to Narayana in days of old were the
senses offered up as sacrifices.
73. Srota here means preceptor or dispeller of doubts. Amaratwam is the
status of the immortal head of all.
74. I think Telang is not correct in his rendering of this verse. What is
stated here is plain, viz., that it is He who is the preceptor and the
disciple. Ayam srinoti,--'prochyamanam grihnati,--'tat prichcchatah ato
bhuyas anye srinanti is the grammar of the construction. The conclusion
then comes--'gururanyo na vidyate'.
75. One who understands the truth.
76. The seven large trees are the five senses, the mind, and the
understanding. The fruits are the pleasures and pains derived from or
through them. The guests are the powers of each sense, for it is they
that receive those pleasures and pains. The hermitages are those very
trees under which the guests take shelter. The seven forms of Yoga are
the extinctions of the seven senses. The seven forms of initiation are
the repudiation, one after another, of the actions of the seven senses.
77. The correct reading is bhavantyanityah and vahuswabhavan.
78. Swabhava is explained by Nilakantha as sutaram abhava.
79. The sense seems to be this; the life-winds indicate the operations of
the several organs of action: the tongue, which stands here for all the
organs of perception, of the sensual perceptions; the mind, of all the
internal operations; the quality of goodness, of all pleasure; and the
quality of passion, of all kinds of pain. These, therefore include the
whole external and the internal worlds. He that is free from these,
transcends sin, for sin is destroyed by freedom from these, knowledge
being the means of attaining to that freedom.
80. 'I have no fault etc.'--The sense seems to be that by doing these
rites with the aid of Mantras I have done that which has been approved
from ages past by those who have always been regarded wise. My eyes,
however, have now been opened by thee. I should not be held responsible
for what I did while I was ignorant.
81. Kshatriyas always require Brahmanas for assisting them in their acts.
These particular Kshatriyas, through fear of Rama, fled to the forests
and mountains. They could not, accordingly, find Brahmanas for assisting
them. Their children, therefore, fell away from the status of Kshatriyas
and became Vrishalas or Sudras.
82. Kshatriya-bandhu always implies low or inferior Kshatriyas, as
Brahma-bandhu implies low or inferior Brahmanas. The expression, very
probably, is similar to Brahman-sangat in current Bengali. It does not
surely mean 'kinsmen of Kshatriyas'.
83. The vocative, 'O foremost of regenerate ones' applies to Jamadagni's
son. The narration is that of the Pitris. All the copies, however,
represent this as the Brahmana's speech to his wife. Indeed, the Brahmana
is only reciting to his wife the speech of the Pitris to Rama. The Yoga
here spoken of is, as Nilakantha explains the Raja-Yoga. Previously,
Alarka had been bent upon Hatha-Yoga which frequently ends in the
destruction of the person practising it.
84. Praharsha, rendered 'exultation', is explained by Nilakantha as the
joy that is felt at the certainty of attaining what is desired. Priti is
that satisfaction which is felt when the object desired is attained.
Ananda is what arises while enjoying the attained object.
85. The sense seems to be this. Having first conquered the internal foes
mentioned, the man of intelligence, bent on effecting his deliverance,
should then seek to vanquish all external foes standing in his way.
86. Nilakantha explains that dosha here refers to attachment, cupidity
and the rest; while Sadhu implies not men but the virtues of tranquillity
and the rest.
87. think Telang renders this verse wrongly. Samhatadehabandhanah does
not mean 'with bodily frame destroyed' but 'with bodily frame united.' If
samhata be taken as destroyed, the compound bhinna-vikirna-dehah in the
second line would be a useless repetition. The meaning is that with
bodily frame or the bonds of body united, he takes birth. When he dies,
that frame becomes dismembered and scattered.
88. The conditions referred to are affluence and indigence, as explained
by Nilakantha.
89. This is, rather, obscure. Nilakantha observes that the Vedic text
referred to is: 'Do not covet anybody's property.' What Janaka says seems
to be this: Thinking of this prohibition about coveting other people's
property, I thought how could it be ascertained what belongs to others.
90. The sense seems to be this: the property of smell attaches to earth.
I do not desire smell for my own enjoyment. If it is perceived, it is
perceived by the organ of smell. The earth, therefore, is subject to me,
not I to the earth. I have transcended my sensations, and, therefore, the
objects to which they inhere. The whole world represents only the objects
of the sensations. The latter being mastered, the whole world has been
mastered by me.
91. i.e., I live and act for these and not my own self.
92. Nilakantha's reading is erroneous, Brahma-labhasya should be
Brahmana-bhasya. So also durvarasya is incorrect. Nemi may also mean the
line or track that is made by a wheel as it moves. If taken in this
sense, it would mean 'that is confined to, or that cannot deviate from
the track constituted by goodness'. The nave, Brahman, is, of course, the
Vedas.
93. The sense seems to be this. The sovereignty of the whole Earth or of
Heaven, and this knowledge of my identity with the universe--of these two
alternatives, I would freely choose the latter. Hence, he says--'This
knowledge is my wealth.'
94. These are different modes of life.
95. The sense is this: the knowledge to be acquired is that all is one.
Diverse ways there are for acquiring it. Those, again, that have attained
to tranquillity have acquired it.
96. Actions are perishable and can lead to no lasting result. It is by
the understanding that that knowledge, leading to what is permanent, is
to be attained.
97. I expand this verse a little for making it intelligible. A literal
version would run as follows: Good means may be seen, perceived as by
bees. Action is (cleansed) understanding; through folly it is invested
with the symbols of knowledge. Karmabudhhi never means 'action and
knowledge' as rendered by Telang. Abudhitwatt means 'through ignorance.'
This ignorance is of those persons whose understandings have not been
cleansed by action.
98. What is stated here is this. In the matter of achieving Emancipation,
no ordinances have been laid down, positive or negative, like those in
respect of other things. If one wishes to attain to Heaven, he should do
this and abstain from the other. For achieving Emancipation, however,
only seeing and hearing are prescribed. Seeing implies contemplation, and
hearing, the receiving of instructions from the preceptor. Nilakantha
explains hearing as Vedantadisravanam (vide his comment on the word
'srutam' in verse 3 above).
99. The speaker wishes to inculcate that one should first contemplate an
object of direct perception, such as earth, etc. Then on such
'unperceived' objects as operations of the mind. Such contemplation will
gradually lead to that which is Supreme. The abhyasa or practice referred
to in the second line is the practice of sama, dama, etc. I do not think
that Telang's version of 8 and 9 brings out the meaning clearly.
100. The sense is that when her individual soul became merged into the
Supreme soul, she became identified with Brahman. This, was, of course,
due to the knowledge of Kshetra as something separate from Kshetrajna.
101. Their origin is Brahman or Truth. They live, dissociated from their
origin, in consequence of their acts. When their acts cease, they return
to and become merged in Brahman.
102. i.e., that course of life which has for its object the acquisition
of knowledge relating to the soul. This, of course, includes the
knowledge that is needed for achieving identification with the Supreme
Soul or Brahman.
103. The specific characteristics of the five elements are, as frequently
referred before, smell attaching to earth, sound to ether, taste, to
water, etc. The deities referred to in the last verse are probably the
senses.
104. The total eleven is made up of the three qualities, the five
elements, the group of organs and senses as one, egoism and understanding.
105. Anyatha pratipannah is explained by Nilakantha as 'born in other
orders'. Telang takes it as 'Behaving in a contrary way.' 'How can goats
and sheep behave otherwise?' The sense seems to be that those born as
goats, succeed in ascending upwards through the efficacy of the religious
acts of the Brahmanas. By becoming sacrificial victims they regain their
true position.
106. Qualities abiding in Darkness etc, imply those qualities that are
permanently attached to Darkness.
107. Some texts read Santapah and not Sanghatah. The meaning then will be
grief or sorrow.
108. This may refer to the exposure of other people's weaknesses by
tearing open their veils or covers.
109. Vibhajanti implies enjoyments in this connection. Telang starts a
needless objection to this word.
110. 'From even a distance.' implies that upon even a cursory view;
without even being examined minutely.
111. What is said here is this: the three qualities exist in even the
immobile objects of the universe. As regards Darkness, it predominates in
them. As regards Passion, it dwells in such properties of theirs as
pungency, sourness, sweetness, etc, which change with time or in
consequence of cooking or through admixture. Their only properties are
said to appertain to Goodness. Tiryagbhavagatam is explained by
Nilakantha as adhikyam gatam. Telang thinks this is unwarrantable. His
own version, however, of the first line is untenable. What can be the
tiryagbhava or 'form of lower species' of immobile objects? Telang
frequently forgets that Nilakantha represents a school of interpretation
not founded by him but which existed from a time long anterior to him.
112. 'Conjunctions' are evidently the periods joining the seasons, i.e.,
the close of one season and the beginning of another.
113. This probably implies that the mind, through the aid of the senses,
enters into all things or succeeds in knowing them.
114. The sense seems to be that through these one succeeds in taking
birth as a Brahmana.
115. A repetition occurs here of about 5 verses. The passage is evidently
an interpolation originally caused by carelessness.
116. Nilakantha explains that this implies that one should regard these
as really undistinguished from the mind. Indeed, created by the mind
itself, these should always be taken as having no real existence beyond
the mind.
117. 'That' here refers to the attenuation of all things by absorption
into the mind.
118. Gunagunam is treating the qualities as not qualities; i.e.,
regarding bravery, magnanimity, etc, as really not merits, for these lead
to pride. Ekacharyyam is ekantavasam, i.e., life in seclusion, or living
without depending upon others. Anantaram is nirastasamastabheda or
non-recognition of all distinctions. Some texts read Brahmamatah meaning
'existing among Brahmanas'. Ekapadam sukham is samastasukhagarbham, i.e.,
the source or fountain of all happiness.
119. The two deities are Jiva and Iswara.
120. The correct reading, in 53 seems to be samsargabhiratam and not
samsayabhiratam.
121. In the second line, the correct words are martya and sarva. The
sense of the second line seems to be that this body is ceaselessly
revolving, for Emancipation is difficult to achieve. Hence this body is,
as it were, the wheel of Time. Nilakantha's explanation does not seem to
be satisfactory.
122. I do not think that Telang is correct in his version of this verse.
What is said here seems to be this. The body is, as it were the wheel of
Time; the body is the ocean of delusion; the body is the creator,
destroyer and reawakener of the universe. Through the body creatures act,
and hence creation, destruction, and re-creation are due to the body.
This accords with what is said elsewhere regarding the body.
123. It would be wrong to take satah as implying 'the good,' the finite
verses in every text being singular.
124. The correct reading seems to be atmana as the last word of the first
line, and not atman.
125. What is said here is that the quality of passion predominates in
these.
126. Nyagrodha is the Ficus Bengalensis, Linn. Jamvu is Eugenia
Jambolana, Lamk. Pippala is Ficus religiosa, Linn. Salmali is Bombax
Malabaricum. Sinsapa is Dalbergia Sissoo, Roxb. Meshasringa is Asclepia
geminata, Roxb. Kichaka is a variety of mountain bamboo. Here however it
evidently implies the Nimba or Melia Azadirachta, Linn.
127. Nilakantha is for taking the second line as consisting of two
propositions. It would be better to take satinam as referring to strinam,
and vasumatyah, as an adjective of Apsarasah.
128. The sense seems to be that good men never allow others to know what
their acts are. They are strangers to ostentation.
129. The sense seems to be that the knowledge of one's own identity and
of things as discriminated from one another is presided over by Prakriti.
If the question is asked whence is the knowledge--'I am so,' and that
'this is so,' the answer is that it comes from Prakriti or Nature.
130. As explained by Nilakantha, the word Savitri is used here to imply
all forms of worship observed by Brahmanas, etc, and the Mlecchas as
well. This turning back to explain a word used before is said to be an
instance of "looking back like the lion".
131. Telang, I think, renders this verse wrongly. In the first line it is
said that Brahman is superior to the Prajapatis. In the second it is
pointed out that Vishnu is superior to Brahman.
132. It is difficult to understand which part of the wheel is intended to
be expressedly 'bandhanam' or the bond; I take it for the spokes.
Pariskandha is Samuha or the materials that together compose an object.
Here it may be taken for the nave or centre. Home is called the
circumference, because, as the circumference limits the wheel, even so
home (wife and children) limits the affections and acts of life.
133. The words Kalachakram pravartate have been rendered in the first
verse of this lesson. In verse 9, the words asaktaprabhavapavyam are
explained by Nilakantha differently. Manas-krantam, I take, is equivalent
to 'be bounded by the mind,' I do not know whence Telang gets 'never
fatigued' as the substitute of this word.
134. Implying that he should go to the house of his preceptor, study and
serve there, and after completing his course, return for leading a life
of domesticity.
135. The sense seems to be that these last three duties are productive of
merit and should, therefore, be performed. The first three however, are
sources of living.
136. Havishya is food cooked in a particular way and offered to the
deities. It must be free from meat. There may be milk or ghee in it, but
the cooking must be done in a single pot or vessel continuously; no
change of vessels is allowed.
137. Vilwa is the Aegle marmelos, and Palasa is the Butea frondosa of
Roxburgh.
138. At first he should live on fruits and roots and leaves, etc. Next on
water, and then on air. There are different sects of forests recluses.
The course of life is settled at the time of the initiatory rites.
139. What is stated here is this. The Sannyasin should not ask for alms:
or, if he ever seeks for aims, he should seek them in a village or house
where the cooking has been already done and where every one has already
eaten. This limitation is provided as otherwise the Sannyasin may be fed
to his fill by the householder who sees him.
140. He should never plunge into a stream or lake or tank for bathing.
141. Kalakankhi implies, probably 'simply biding time', i.e., allowing
time to pass indifferently over him.
142. The sense seems to be this; the self or soul is without qualities.
He who knows the self, or rather he who pursues the self with the desire
of knowing it, should practise the truths of Piety laid down above. They
constitute the path that leads to the self.
143. 'That which has Brahman for its origin' implies the Vedas.
144. Commentators differ about what is implied by the ten or the twelve.
Nilakantha thinks that the ten mean the eight characteristics of Yoga,
viz., Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana,
Samadhi, and Tarka and Vairagya. The twelve would imply the first eight,
and these four, viz., Maitri, Karuna, Mudita, and Upeksha. If ten plus
twelve or two and twenty be taken, then that number would be made up by
the five modes of Yama, the five of Niyama, the remaining six of Yoga
(beginning with Asana and ending with Samadhi), the four beginning with
Maitri, and the two, viz., Tarka and Vairagya.
145. What is said in this Lesson seems to be this: the Unmanifest or
Prakriti is that condition in which all the three qualities of Goodness,
Passion, and Darkness exist in a state of combination. The unmanifest is
the condition existing before creation. When one particular quality,
viz., Goodness prevails over the others, there arises Purusha, viz., that
from whom everything flows. The relation of Purusha and Nature is both
unity and diversity. The three illustrations of the Gnat and the Udumbara
the fish and water, and water drops and the lotus leaf, explain the
relation between Purusha and Nature. He is in Nature, yet different from
it. There is both association and dissociation.
146. The doubts appertain to duties, that is whether they should be done
or not, and whether they have any effects here and hereafter.
147. The thinking or enjoying agent is subject, and that which is thought
or enjoyed is object. Subject and object an two well known words in Sir
W. Hamilton's philosophy. I follow Telang in adopting them.
148. Sattawa pradipa, rendered 'light of Nature,' implies, as Nilakantha
explains, knowledge, which is a manifestation of Nature. Arjuna Misra's
interpretation seems to be better. He says that knowledge,--that is,
knowledge of truth,--is acquired by the self through Nature.
149. The sense seems to be this: one who proceeds, on a journey must
provide oneself with the necessary means, otherwise one is sure to feel
discomfort or meet with even destruction. So, in the journey of life, one
must provide oneself with knowledge as the means. One may then avoid all
discomfort and danger. Action does not constitute the proper means. It
may or may not produce fruits.
150. i.e., one should not care for the external.
151. i.e., one need not do acts enjoined by the scriptures after one has
attained to knowledge which is the highest seat.
152. The sense is this: riding on a car may not always be comfortable. As
long as there is a car path, one should travel on one's car. If, however,
the road be such as not to be fit for a car to proceed along it, one
should avoid a car in going over it, for the car instead of conducing to
comfort, would, on such a path, be productive of only discomfort.
153. i.e., first action with desire: then action without desire; then
knowledge, according to Arjuna Misra. Nilakantha explains that action is
first, then Yoga; then the state of Hansa or Paramahansa.
154. Katu is not bitter but pungent or sharp, as that which is attached
to chillies.
155. These are the notes of the Hindu Gamut.
156. The understanding operates on what is placed before it by the mind.
The understanding, therefore, is, as it were, the lord exercising power
or sovereignty, being served by the mind.
157. Sarvan srijati i.e., creates all things by attaining to the
condition of the universal cause, for the unmanifest is the universal
cause. Between such a one and the Supreme Soul there is no difference.
Even this is said in the last sentence.
158. The man who reads the book called Veda is not truly conversant with
the Veda. He, however, who knows Kshetrajna, is regarded as truly knowing
the Veda.
159. The argument is that Mrityu or death being of two syllables, the
correspondence is justifiable between it and Mama or mineness which also
is of two syllables. So in the case of Brahman and na-mama. Of course,
what is meant by mineness being death and not-mineness being Brahman or
emancipation, cannot be unintelligible to one who has carefully read the
preceding sections.
160. i.e., the five great elements, four organs of knowledge with mind,
and the four organs of action.
161. The word Purusha here is used in the sense of dehabhimani Jiva or
individual self with consciousness of body. True knowledge destroys this
condition of Jiva, for the man of knowledge identifies himself with the
universe and thereby assimilates himself to Brahman. By eaters of Amrita
are meant they who never take any food without offering portions thereof
to the deities, Pitris, and guests. Of course, Yogins of piety are
implied by it.
162. Purusha here implies Jiva divested of consciousness of body.
163. The meaning is this: in a dream what is seen is all unreal. So, when
tranquillity has been attained, all the surroundings become unreal.
Nilakantha gives a slightly different interpretation; it is this: when
tranquillity has been attained, the Soul lives without attachment to the
body and all external objects. Indeed, the Soul then lives completely in
itself even as it works in course of a dream.
164. The sense is that they behold all worldly objects, present, past and
future, which are, of course, due to development of previous causes.
165. This line is rather obscure. The sense seems to be this: no one can
know the Supreme Deity if it is not the latter's pleasure to be known.
One, therefore, understands Him in exactly that measure in which it is
His pleasure to be known.
166. Krishna's father Vasudeva is maternal uncle. Yudhishthira asks
Krishna to worship Vasudeva and Valadeva on his behalf, i.e., he charges
Krishna to bear to them a message of respect and love from him.
167. The city of Hastinapura is sometimes called Nagapura, both Hasti and
Naga being words expressive of the elephant. 'The city called after the
elephant' is the usual description of the Kuru capital.
168. Mahyam is equal to 'mam uddisya' i.e., referring to my divine nature.
169. An ascetic loses his penances by cursing another rightly or wrongly.
Hence, forgiveness was always practised by the Brahmanas who were
ascetics. A Brahmana's strength consisted in forgiveness. The more
forgiving he was, the more powerful he became.
170. The first asat or non-existent refers to such objects as the horns
of the hare. The second, viz., sadasat, or existent and non-existent
refers to such objects as exist and meet with destruction. Sadasat param
or that which transcends the existent and non-existent, refers to the
unmanifest. The universe consists of these three. All this is from
Vasudeva.
171. To this day preceptors in India have to feed and teach their
disciples without any pecuniary compensation. In fact, the sale of
knowledge has been strictly forbidden. Pupils, however, after completing
their studies, had to give the final Dakshina which varied according to
their means. The kings and princes of India thought themselves honoured
if solicited by pupils in search of the final Dakshina. What Gautama says
here is that the object of the final present is to gratify the preceptor.
He (Gautama), however, had already been gratified with the dutiful
conduct of Utanka. There was no need, therefore, of any present.
172. These words of the king are intended to be reported to his queen who
would understand the allusion. The sense is this: cursed by Vasishtha, I
have become a cannibal. My condition is intolerable. By this gift of the
ear-rings to a deserving Brahmana, much merit may arise. That merit may
relieve me.
173. This also is an allusion to the dreadful curse of Vasishtha. The
king refers to Madayanti as his only refuge. She may save him by doing an
act or special merit, viz., giving away her costly ear-rings to a truly
deserving Brahmana.
174. The sense is this: a Brahmana is never loose of tongue. He is
truthful. Hence, having passed my word to thee about my return, thou
mayst be sure that I would keep my word. One, again, that acts improperly
towards a friend, comes to be regarded as a thief. By this, Utanka
reminds the king that he should not inflict any wrong on him by carrying
out his intention of eating him up.
175. Vilwa is the Aegle marmalos.
176. Chamu here is used in a general sense, viz., a division. Of course
it stands for an Akshauhini.
177. Kavi or Kavya is another name of Sukra, the preceptor of the Daityas.
178. Krishna implies Vyasa here. The great Rishi was called 'the
island-born Krishna'.
179. The commentator explains that by the constellation Dhruba is implied
Rohini and the Uttaras numbering three. Sunday, again is called the
Dhruba-day.
180. Agnivesya was another name of Dhaumya.
181. Three roads running north to south, and three running cast to west
and intersecting the former, are the six roads that are directed to be
laid out in pitching encampments. Those give nine squares with two
boundary lines at right angles with each other.
182. Karaputa is made up of two wooden chests united with each other by
chains or cords and intended to be borne by camels and bullocks.
183. The first line of 17 is exceedingly terse. Literally rendered, it
runs,--'Each vessel was united with another, and became half the (total)
weight slung on balance.'
184. Vilava is Arjuna.
185. Before performing any rite or act of a grave nature, Hindus are
required to touch water or perform what is called the 'achamana'. A
little quantity of water is taken on the palm of the right hand, and with
it are touched the lips, the nostrils, the ears, and the eyes.
186. The abode of Vaisravana is called Alaka. Vaisravana is, of course,
Kuvera, the lord of treasures, friend of Mahadeva, and chief of the
Yakshas.
187. The last line is slightly expanded.
188. The sense is this: thou art the eldest brother of the Pandavas; if
thou sacrificest, thy brothers also will come to be regarded as
sacrificing with thee.
189. Sphya was a wooden sword or scimitar, used for slaying the
sacrificial animal. Kurcha is a handful of Kusa grass. All these things
are directed by Vyasa to be made of pure gold.
190. It will be remembered that the Samsaptaka host which had engaged
Arjuna for several days on the field of Kurukshetra, all consisted of
Trigarta warriors led by their king Susarman, Samsaptaka means 'sworn'.
Those soldiers who took the oath that they would either conquer or die,
wore called by that name.
191. The reading in every edition seems to be vicious. For obvious
reasons, I read Parthadupadravat instead of Parthamupadravat.
192. Bhagadatta was the friend of Indra, the father of Arjuna.
193. The allusion is to Mahadeva's pursuing Sacrifice when the latter
fled from him in the form of a deer.
194. The Brahmanas were to receive Arjuna duly and the treasure was
intended as a present or offering of respect.
195. Ulupi was one of the wives of Arjuna. She was, therefore, the
step-mother of Vabhruvahana.
196. Yahubharyyata, meaning polygamy in the first line, should, as the
noun of reference for Eshah be taken as vahunam bharyyata, i.e.,
polyandry, in the second line.
197. To sit in Praya is to remain seated in a particular spot, abstaining
from food and drink with a view to cast off one's life-breaths.
198. The sense is, that 'grief does not kill; one does not die till one's
hour comes. If it were otherwise, I would have died, so heavy is the load
of my affliction.'
199. The name of the city was Suktimati.
200. The etymology of Gudakesa as the lord of Gudaka or sleep, is
fanciful.
201. Sakuni was the maternal uncle of Duryodhana and, therefore, of
Arjuna also. Sakuni's son and Arjuna, hence, were cousins.
202. The word chara does not mean always a spy. The ancient kings of
India had their spies it is true, but they had a regular intelligence
department. It was the business of these men to send correct reports to
the king of every important occurrence. The news letter-writers of the
Mussalman time, or Harkaras, were the successors of the charas of Hindu
times.
203. Hetuvadins are dialecticians or philosophers who dispute on the
reasons of things.
204. It is worthy of note that Draupadi was always styled by Krishna as
his sakhi or 'friend'. Krishna was highly chivalrous to the other sex at
an age when women were universally regarded as the inferiors of men.
205. The sense is this: for a horse-sacrifice, the Dakshina or
sacrificial present, payable to the principal Ritwija or to be
distributed among all the Ritwijas including the other Brahmanas, is
enjoined to be of a certain measure. Vyasa advises Yudhishthira to make
that Dakshina triple of what the enjoined measure is. By thus increasing
the Dakshina, the merit of the sacrificer will increase correspondingly.
206. The Diksha is the ceremony of initiation. Certain mantras are
uttered in which the intention is declared of performing what is desired
to be performed.
207. The Karma of a sacrifice or religious rite is the procedure. It is,
of course, laid down in the scriptures on the ritual. There are certain
acts, however, which, though not laid down, should be done agreeably to
reasonable inferences. What is said, therefore, in the second line of 20
is that the procedure was fully followed, both as laid down and as
consistent with inferences.
208. Pravargya is a special preliminary rite performed in a sacrifice.
'Abhishva' is the extraction of the juice of the Soma plant after its
consecration with Mantras.
209. Vitwa is the Aegle marmelos, Linn. Khadira is Acacia catechu, Linn,
or Mimosa catechu; Saravarnin is otherwise called, as explained by
Nilakantha, Palasa. It is the Butea frondosa of Roxburgh. Devadaru is
Pinus Deodara of Roxburgh, or Cedruz Deodara. Sleshmataka is a small tree
identified with the Cordia latifolia. Here probably, some other tree is
intended.
210. It is difficult to understand what these constructions or figures
were. They were probably figures drawn on the sacrificial altar, with
gold-dust. At the present day, powdered rice, coloured red, yellow, blue,
etc, is used.
211. Each animal is supposed to be agreeable to a particular deity.
212. Suvibhaktan implies that they were properly classed or grouped so
that there was no dispute or dissatisfaction among them regarding
questions of precedence.
213. Nilakantha explains that Khandavaraga was made of piper longum and
dried ginger (powdered), and the juice of Phaseolus Mungo, with sugar.
Probably, it is identical with what is now called Mungka laddu in the
bazars of Indian towns.
214. The unccha vow consists of subsisting upon grains of corn picked up
after the manner of the pigeon from the field after the crops have been
cut and removed by the owners.
215. The day of 12 hours is divided into 8 divisions.
216. A prastha is made up of four Kudavas. A Kudava is equal to about
twelve double handfuls.
217. This verse is rather obscure. I am not sure that I have understood
it correctly. The sense seems to be this: thou art capable of enduring
much. Indeed, by barely living, thou art capable of capable of earning
religious merit, for life-breath is a great deity. He should not be cast
off. Thy life is at stake, for if this guest be not gratified, the
thought of it will kill thee. Do thou, therefore, protect thy life by
gratifying this guest with my share of the barley.
218. The sense is this: for the sake of those auspicious results after
which every family should strive, the daughter-in-law should be well
treated. How then can I deprive thee of food?
219. The Diksha consists of the initiatory rites undergone by one
desirous of performing a particular sacrifice or completing a particular
vow. Some auspicious day is selected. Mantras are uttered and the purpose
is expressed in words. There were many long-extending sacrifices which
were partly of the nature of vows. Till their completion the performer or
observer is said to undergo the period of Diksha.
220. The first line of 20 is differently read in the Bombay text. It
runs,--'steadfastly observing my vow, I shall make arrangements for many
sacrifices, creating the articles I want by thought alone (or fiats of my
will).'
221. Probably, the sense is this: If a Brahmana produced extraordinary
results by his penances, a portion of his penances was supposed to be
destroyed. The Rishis did not like that any portion of Agastya's penances
should be spent for completing his sacrifice.
222. It is difficult to resist the conviction that as much of this
section as relates to the mongoose is an interpolation. The Brahmanas
could not bear the idea of a sacrifice with such profusion of gifts, as
that of Yudhishthira, being censurable. Hence the invention about the
transformation of the mongoose. Truly speaking, the doctrine is noble of
the gift of a small quantity of barley made under the circumstances being
superior in point of merit to even a Horse-sacrifice performed by a king
with gifts in profusion made to the Brahmanas
