SECTION XXXIV
"The Brahmana's wife said, 'This is incapable of being understood by a
person of little intelligence as also by one whose soul has not been
cleansed. My intelligence is very little, and contracted, and confused.
Do thou tell me the means by which the knowledge (of which thou speakest)
may be acquired. I wish to learn from thee the source from which this
knowledge flows.'
"The Brahmana said, 'Know that intelligence devoted to Brahman, is the
lower Arani; the preceptor is the upper Arani; penances and conversance
wit tithe scriptures are to cause the attrition. From this is produced
the fire of knowledge.'
"The Brahmana's wife said, 'As regards this symbol of Brahman, which is
designated Kshetrajna, where, indeed, occurs a description of it by which
it is capable of being seized?'
"The Brahmana said, 'He is without symbols, and without qualities.
Nothing exists that may be regarded as his cause. I shall, however, tell
thee the means by which he can be seized or not. A good means may be
found; viz., perception of hearing, etc. as flowers are perceived by
bees. That means consists of an understanding cleansed by action. Those
whose understandings have not been so cleansed, regard that entity,
through their own ignorance, as invested with the properties of knowledge
and others.[97] It is not laid down that this should be done, of that
this should not be done, in the rules for achieving Emancipation,--those,
that is, in which a knowledge of the soul arises only in him who sees and
hears.[98] One should comprehend as many parts, unmanifest and manifest
by hundreds and thousands, as one is capable of comprehending here.
Indeed, one should comprehend diverse objects of diverse import, and all
objects of direct perception. Then will come, from practice (of
contemplation and self-restraint, etc.), that above which nothing
exists.'[99]
"The holy one continued, 'Then the mind of that Brahmana's wife, upon the
destruction of the Kshetrajna, became that which is beyond Kshetrajna, in
consequence of the knowledge of Kshetra.'[100]
"Arjuna said, 'Where, indeed, is that Brahmana's wife, O Krishna, and
where is that foremost of Brahmanas, by both of whom was such success
attained. Do thou, tell me about them, O thou of unfading glory.'
"The blessed and holy one said, 'Know that my mind is the Brahmana, and
that my understanding is the Brahmana's wife. He who has been spoken of
as Kshetrajna is I myself, O Dhananjaya!"'
