SECTION LXXXVIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Entering the palace of the Pandavas the mighty-armed
prince saluted his grand-mother in soothing and sweet accents. Then queen
Chitrangada, and (Ulupi) the daughter of (the snake) Kauravya, together
approached Partha and Krishna with humility. They then met Subhadra and
the other ladies of the Kuru race with due formalities. Kunti gave them
many gems and costly things. Draupadi and Subhadra and the other ladies
of Kuru's race all made presents to them. The two ladies took up their
residence there, using costly beds and seats, treated with affection and
respect by Kunti herself from desire of doing what was agreeable to
Partha. King Vabhruvahana of great energy, duly honoured (by Kunti), then
met Dhritarashtra according to due rites. Repairing then to king
Yudhishthira and Bhima and the other Pandavas, the mighty prince of
Manipura saluted them all with humility. They all embraced him with great
affection and honoured him duly. And those mighty car-warriors highly
gratified with him, made large gifts of wealth unto him. The king of
Manipura then humbly approached Krishna, that hero armed with the discus
and the mace, like a second Pradyumna approaching his sire. Krishna gave
unto the king a very costly and excellent car adorned with gold and unto
which were yoked excellent steeds. Then king Yudhishthira the just, and
Bhima, and Phalguna, and the twins, each separately honoured him and made
costly presents unto him. On the third day, the sage Vyasa, the son of
Satyavati, that foremost of eloquent men, approaching Yudhishthira
said,--'From this day, O son of Kunti, do thou begin thy sacrifice. The
time for it has come. The moment for commencing the rite is at hand. The
priests are urging thee. Let the sacrifice be performed in such a way
that no limb may become defective. In consequence of the very large
quantity of gold that is required for this sacrifice, it has come to be
called the sacrifice of profuse gold. Do thou also, O great king, make
the Dakshina of this sacrifice three times of what is enjoined. Let the
merit of thy sacrifice increase threefold. The Brahmanas are competent
for the purpose.[205] Attaining to the merits then of three
Horse-sacrifices, each with profuse presents, thou shalt be freed, O
king, from the sin of having slain thy kinsmen. The bath that one
performs upon completion of the Horse-sacrifice, O monarch, is highly
cleansing and productive of the highest merit. That merit will be thine,
O king of Kuru's race. Thus addressed by Vyasa of immeasurable
intelligence, the righteous-souled Yudhishthira of great energy underwent
the Diksha for performance of the Horse-sacrifice.[206] The mighty-armed
monarch then performed the great Horse-sacrifice characterised by gifts
of food and presents in profusion and capable of fructifying every wish
and producing every merit. The priests, well conversant with the Vedas,
did every rite duly, moving about in all directions. They were all
well-trained, and possessed of omniscience. In nothing was there a
swerving from the ordinances and nothing was down improperly. Those
foremost of regenerate persons followed the procedure as laid down (in
the scriptures) and as it should be followed in those points about which
no directions are given.[207] Those best of regenerate ones, having first
performed the rite called Pravargya, otherwise called Dharma, then duly
went through the rite of Abhishava, O king.[208] Those foremost of
Soma-drinkers, O monarch, extracting the juice of the Soma, then
performed the Savana rite following the injunctions of the scriptures.
Among those that came to that sacrifice none could be seen who was
cheerless, none who was poor, none who was hungry, none who was plunged
into grief, and none that seemed to be vulgar. Bhimasena of mighty energy
at the command of the king, caused food to be ceaselessly distributed
among those that desired to eat. Following the injunctions of the
scriptures, priests, well-versed in sacrificial rites of every kind,
performed every day all the acts necessary to complete the great
sacrifice. Amongst the Sadasayas of king Yudhishthira of great
intelligence there was none who was not well conversant with the six
branches of (Vedic). learning. There was none among them that was not an
observer of vows, none that was not an Upadhyaya; none that was not well
versed in dialectical disputations. When the time came for erecting the
sacrificial stake, O chief of Bharata's race, six stakes were set up that
were made of Vilwa,[209] six that were made of Khadira, and six that were
made of Saravarnin. Two stakes were get up by the priests that were made
of Devadaru in that sacrifice of the Kuru king, and one that was made of
Sleshmataka. At the command of the king, Bhima caused some other stakes
to be set up, for the sake of beauty only, that were made of gold.
Adorned with fine cloths supplied by the royal sage, those stakes shone
there like Indra and the deities with the seven celestial Rishis standing
around them in Heaven. A number of golden bricks were made for
constructing therewith a Chayana. The Chayana made resembled in beauty
that which had been made for Daksha, the lord of creatures (on the
occasion of his great sacrifice). The Chayana measured eight and ten
cubits and four stories or lairs. A golden bird, of the shape of Garuda,
was then made, having three angles.[210] Following the injunctions of the
scriptures, the priests possessed of great learning then duly tied to the
stakes both animals and birds, assigning each to its particular
deity.[211] Bulls, possessed of such qualifications as are mentioned in
the scriptures, and aquatic animals were properly tied to the stakes
after the rites relating to the sacrificial fire had been performed. In
that sacrifice of the high-souled son of Kunti, three hundred animals
were tied to the stakes setup, including that foremost of steeds. That
sacrifice looked exceedingly beautiful as if adorned with the celestial
Rishis, with the Gandharvas singing in chorus and the diverse tribes of
Apsaras dancing in merriment. It teemed, besides, with Kimpurushas and
was adorned with Kinnaras. All around it were abodes of Brahmanas crowned
with ascetic success. There were daily seen the disciples of Vyasa, those
foremost of regenerate ones, who are compilers of all branches of
learning, and well conversant with sacrificial rites. There was Narada,
and there was Tumvuru of great splendour. There were Viswavasu and
Chitrasena and others, all of whom were proficient in music. At intervals
of the sacrificial rites, those Gandharvas, skilled in music and well
versed in dancing, used to gladden the Brahmanas who were engaged in the
sacrifice.'"
