SECTION XLII
'Brahmana said, From Egoism were verily born the five great elements.
They are earth, air, ether, water, and light numbering the fifth. In
these five great elements, in the matter of the sound, touch, colour,
taste, and smell, all creatures become deluded. When at the close of the
destruction of the great elements, the dissolution of the universe
approaches, ye that are possessed of wisdom, a great fear comes upon all
living creatures. Every existent object is dissolved into that from which
it is produced. The dissolution takes place in an order that is the
reverse of that in which creation takes place. Indeed, as regards birth,
they are born from one another. Then, when all existent objects, mobile
and immobile, become dissolved, wise men endued with powerful memory
never dissolve. Sound, touch, colour, taste, and smell numbering the
fifth, are effects. They are, however, inconstant, and called by the name
of delusion. Caused by the production of cupidity, not different from one
another, without reality, connected with flesh and blood, and depending
upon one another, existing outside the soul, these are all helpless and
powerless. Prana and Apana, and Udana and Samana and Vyana,--these five
winds are always closely attached to the soul. Together with speech,
mind, and understanding, they constitute the universe of eight
ingredients. He whose skin, nose, ear, eyes, tongue, and speech are
restrained, whose mind is pure, and whose understanding deviates not
(from the right path), and whose mind is never burnt by those eight
fires, succeeds in attaining to that auspicious Brahman to which nothing
superior exists. Those which have been called the eleven organs and which
have sprung from Egoism, I shall now, ye regenerate ones, mention
particularly. They are the ear, the skin, the two eyes, the tongue, the
nose numbering the fifth, the two feet, the lower duct, the organ of
generation, the two hands, and speech forming the tenth. These constitute
the group of organs, with mind numbering as the eleventh. One should
first subdue this group. Then will Brahman shine forth (in him). Five
amongst these are called organs of knowledge, and five, organs of action.
The five beginning with the ear are truly said to be connected with
knowledge. The rest, however, that are connected with action, are without
distinction. The mind should be regarded as belonging to both. The
understanding is the twelfth in the top. Thus have been enumerated the
eleven organs in due order. Learned men, having understood these, think
they have accomplished everything. I shall, after this, enumerate all the
various organs. Space (or Ether) is the first entity. As connected with
the soul, it is called the ear. As connected with objects, that is sound.
The presiding deity (of this) is the quarters. The Wind is the second
entity. As connected with the soul, it is known as the skin. As connected
with objects, it is known as objects of touch; and the presiding deity
there is touch. The third is said to be Light. As connected with the
soul, it is known as the eye. As connected with objects, it is colour;
and the sun is its deity. The fourth (entity) should be known as Water.
As connected with the soul, it is said to be the tongue. As connected
with objects, it is taste, and the presiding deity there is Soma. The
fifth entity is Earth. As connected with the soul, it is said to be the
nose. As connected with objects, it is scent; and the presiding deity
there is the wind. Thus has the manner been declared of how the five
entities are divided into sets of three. After this I shall declare
everything about the diverse (other) organs. Brahmanas conversant with
the truth say that the two feet are mentioned as connected with the soul.
As connected with objects, it is motion; and Vishnu is there the
presiding deity. The Apana wind, whose motion is downward, as connected
with the soul, is called the lower duct. As connected with objects, it is
the excreta that is ejected; and the presiding deity there is Mitra. As
connected with the soul, the organ of generation is mentioned, the
producer of all beings. As connected with objects, it is the vital seed;
and the presiding deity is Prajapati. The two hands are mentioned as
connected with the soul by persons conversant with the relations of the
soul. As connected with objects, it is actions; and the presiding deity
there is Indra. Next, connected with the soul is speech which relates to
all the gods. As connected with objects, it is what is spoken. The
presiding deity there is Agni. As connected with the soul, the mind is
mentioned, which moves within the soul of the five elements.[113] As
connected with objects, it is the mental operation; and the presiding
deity is Chandramas (moon). As connected with the soul is Egoism, which
is the cause of the whole course of worldly life. As connected with
objects, it is consciousness of self; and the presiding deity there is
Rudra. As connected with the soul is the understanding, which impels the
six senses. As connected with objects, it is that which is to be
understood, and the presiding deity there is Brahma. Three are the seats
of all existent objects. A fourth is not possible. These are land, water,
and ether. The mode of birth is fourfold. Some are born of eggs; some are
born of germs which spring upwards, penetrating through the earth; some
are born of filth; and some are born of fleshy balls in wombs. Thus is
the mode of birth seen to be of four kinds, of all living creatures. Now,
there are other inferior beings and likewise those that range the sky.
These should be known to be born of eggs as also those which crawl on
their breasts. Insects are said to be born of filth, as also other
creatures of a like description. This is said to be the second mode of
birth and is inferior. Those living creatures that take birth after the
lapse of some time, bursting through the earth, are said to be germ-born
beings, ye foremost of regenerate persons. Creatures of two feet or of
many feet and those which move crookedly, are the beings born of wombs.
Among them are some that are deformed, ye best of men. The eternal womb
of Brahma should be known to be of two kinds, viz., penance and
meritorious acts. Such is the doctrine of the learned.[114] Action should
be understood to be of various kinds, such as sacrifice, gifts made at
sacrifices, and the meritorious duty of study for every one that is born;
such is the teaching of the ancients. He who duly understands this, comes
to be regarded as possessed of Yoga, ye chief of regenerate persons. Know
also that such a man becomes freed too from all his sins. I have thus
declared to you duly the doctrine of Adhyatma.[115] Ye Rishis conversant
with all duties, a knowledge of this is acquired by those who are
regarded as persons of knowledge. Uniting all these together, viz., the
senses, the objects of the senses, and the five great entities, one
should hold them in the mind.[116] When everything is attenuated (by
absorption) in the mind, one no longer esteems the pleasures of life.
Learned men, whose understandings are furnished with knowledge, regard
that as true happiness.[117] I shall after this, tell thee of
renunciation with respect to all entities by means, gentle and hard,
which produces attachment to subtle topics and which is fraught with
auspiciousness. That conduct which consists in treating the qualities is
not qualities, which is free from attachment, which is living alone,
which does not recognise distinctions, and which is full of Brahman, is
the source of all happiness.[118] The learned man who absorbs all desires
into himself from all sides like the tortoise withdrawing all its limbs,
who is devoid of passion, and who is released from everything, becomes
always happy. Restraining all desires within the soul, destroying his
thirst, concentrated in meditation, and becoming the friend of good heart
towards all creatures, he succeeds in becoming fit for assimilation with
Brahman. Through repression of all the senses which always hanker after
their objects, and abandonment of inhabited places, the Adhyatma fire
blazes forth in the man of contemplation. As a fire, fed with fuel,
becomes bright in consequence of the blazing flames it puts forth, even
so, in consequence of the repression of the senses, the great soul puts
forth its effulgence. When one with a tranquil soul beholds all entities
in one's own heart, then, lighted by one's own effulgence, one attains to
that which is subtler than the subtle and which is unrivalled in
excellence. It is settled that the body has fire for colour, water for
blood and other liquids, wind for sense of touch, earth for the hideous
holder of mind (viz., flesh and bones, etc.), space (or ether) for sound;
that it is pervaded by disease and sorrow; that it is overwhelmed by five
currents; that it is made up of the five elements; that it has nine doors
and two deities;[119] that it is full of passion; that it is unfit to be
seen (owing to its unholy character); that it is made up of three
qualities; that it has three constituent elements, (viz., wind, bile and
phelgm); that it is delighted with attachments of every kind, that it is
full of delusions.[120] It is difficult of being moved in this mortal
world, and it rests on the understanding as its support. That body is, in
this world, the wheel of Time that is continually revolving.[121] That
(body), indeed, is a terrible and unfathomable ocean and is called
delusion. It is this body which stretches forth, contracts, and awakens
the (whole) universe with the (very) immortals.[122] By restraining the
senses, one casts off lust, wrath, fear, cupidity, enmity, and falsehood,
which are eternal and, therefore, exceedingly difficult to cast off.[123]
He who has subjugated these in this world, viz., the three qualities and
the five constituent elements of the body, has the Highest for his seat
in Heaven. By him is Infinity attained. Crossing the river, that has the
five senses for its steep banks, the mental inclinations for its mighty
waters, and delusion for its lake, one should subjugate both lust and
wrath. Such a man freed from all faults, then beholds the Highest,
concentrating the mind within the mind and seeing self in self.
Understanding all things, he sees his self, with self, in all creatures,
sometimes as one and sometimes as diverse, changing form from time to
time.[124] Without doubt he can perceive numerous bodies like a hundred
lights from one light. Verily he is Vishnu, and Mitra, and Varuna, and
Agni, and Prajapati. He is the Creator and the ordainer: he is the Lord
possessed of puissance, with faces turned in all directions. In him, the
heart of all creatures, the great soul, becomes resplendent. Him all
conclaves of learned Brahmanas, deities and Asuras, and Yakshas, and
Pisachas, the Pitris, and birds, and bands of Rakshasas, and bands of
ghostly beings, and all the great Rishis, praise.'"
