SECTION I
(Asramavasa Parva)
OM! AFTER HAVING bowed down to Narayana, and Nara, the foremost of men,
and unto the goddess Saraswati also, must the word Jaya be uttered.
"Janamejaya said 'After having acquired their kingdom, how did my
grandsires, the high-souled Pandavas, conduct themselves towards the
high-souled king Dhritarashtra? How, indeed, did that king who had all
his counsellors and sons slain, who was without a refuge, and whose
affluence had disappeared, behave? How also did Gandhari of great fame
conduct herself? For how many years did my high-souled grandsires rule
the kingdom? It behoveth thee to tell me all this.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having got back their kingdom, the high-souled
Pandavas, their foes all slain, ruled the Earth, placing Dhritarashtra at
their head. Vidura, and Sanjaya and Yuyutsu of great intelligence, who
was Dhritarashtra's son by his Vaisya wife, used to wait upon
Dhritarashtra. The Pandavas used to take the opinion of that king in all
matters. Indeed, for ten and five years, they did all things under the
advice of the old king. Those heroes used very often to go to that
monarch and sit beside him, after having worshipped his feet, agreeably
to the wishes of king Yudhishthira the just. They did all things under
the command of Dhritarashtra who smelt their heads in affection. The
daughter of king Kuntibhoja also obeyed Gandhari in everything. Draupadi
and Subhadra and the other ladies of the Pandavas behaved towards the old
king and the queen as if they were their own father-in-law and
mother-in-law. Costly beds and robes and ornaments, and food and drink
and other enjoyable articles, in profusion and of such superior kinds as
were worthy of royal use, were presented by king Yudhishthira unto
Dhritarashtra. Similarly Kunti behaved towards Gandhari as towards a
senior. Vidura, and Sanjaya, and Yuyutsu, O thou of Karu's race, used to
always wait upon the old king whose sons had all been slain. The dear
brother-in-law of Drona, viz., the very Superior Brahmana, Kripa, that
mighty bowman, also attended upon the king. The holy Vyasa also used to
often meet with the old monarch and recite to him the histories of old
Rishis and celestial ascetics and Pitris and Rakshasas. Vidura, under the
orders of Dhritarashtra, superintended the discharge of all acts of
religious merit and all that related to the administration of the law.
Through the excellent policy of Vidura, by the expenditure of even a
small wealth, the Pandavas obtained numerous agreeable services from
their feudatories and followers. King Dhritarashtra liberated prisoners
and pardoned those that were condemned to death. King Yudhishthira the
just never said anything to this. On those occasions when the son of
Amvika went on pleasure excursions, the Kuru king Yudhishthira of great
energy used to give him every article of enjoyment. Aralikas, and
juice-makers, and makers of Ragakhandavas waited on king Dhritarashtra as
before.[1] Pandu's son, collected costly robes and garlands of diverse
kinds and duly offered them to Dhritarashtra. Maireya wines, fish of
various kinds, and sherbets and honey, and many delightful kinds of food
prepared by modifications (of diverse articles), were caused to be made
for the old king as in his days of prosperity. Those kings of Earth who
came there one after another, all used to wait upon the old Kuru monarch
as before. Kunti, and Draupadi, and she of the Sattwata race, possessed
of great fame, and Ulupi, the daughter of the snake chief, and queen
Chitrangada, and the sister of Dhrishtaketu, and the daughter of
Jarasandha,--these and many other ladies, O chief of men, used to wait
upon the daughter of Suvala like maids of all work. That Dhritarashtra,
who was deprived of all his children, might not feel unhappy in any
matter, was what Yudhishthira often said unto his brothers to see. They
also, on their part, listening to these commands of grave import from
king Yudhishthira, showed particular obedience to the old king. There was
one exception, however. It embraced Bhimasena. All that had followed from
that match at dice which had been brought about by the wicked
understanding of Dhritarashtra, did not disappear from the heart of that
hero. (He remembered those incidents still)."'
