SECTION L
"Brahmana said, 'Well then, I shall declare to you what you ask. Learn
what was told by a preceptor to a disciple that came unto him. Hearing it
all, do you settle properly (what it should be). Abstention from harming
any creature is regarded as the foremost of all duties. That is the
highest seat, free from anxiety and constituting an indication of
holiness. The ancients who were beholders of the certain truth, have said
that knowledge is the highest happiness. Hence, one becomes released of
all sins by pure knowledge. They that are engaged in destruction and
harm, they that are infidels in conduct, have to go to Hell in
consequence of their being endued with cupidity and delusion. Those who,
without procrastination, perform acts, impelled thereto by expectation
become repeatedly born in this world and sport in joy. Those men who,
endued with learning and wisdom, perform acts with faith, free from
expectations, and possessed of concentration of mind, are said to
perceive clearly. I shall, after this, declare how the association and
the dissociation takes place of Kshetrajna and Nature. Ye best of men,
listen. The relation here is said to be that between the object and the
subject.[147] Purusha is always the subject; and Nature has been said to
be the object. It has been explained, by what has been said in a previous
portion of the discourse where it has been pointed out, that they exist
after the manner of the Gnat and the Udumbara. An object of enjoyment as
it is, Nature is unintelligent and knows nothing. He, however, who enjoys
it, is said to know it. Kshetrajna being enjoyer, Nature is enjoyed. The
wise have said that Nature is always made up of pairs of opposites (and
consists of qualities). Kshetrajna is, on the other hand, destitute of
pairs of opposites, devoid of parts, eternal, and free, as regards its
essence, from qualities. He resides in everything alike, and walks, with
knowledge. He always enjoys Nature, as a lotus leaf (enjoys) water.
Possessed of knowledge, he is never tainted even if brought into contact
with all the qualities. Without doubt, Purusha is unattached like the
unsteady drop of water on the lotus-leaf. This is the certain conclusion
(of the scriptures) that Nature is the property of Purusha. The relation
between these two (viz., Purusha and Nature) is like that existing
between matter and its maker. As one goes into a dark place taking a
light with him, even so those who wish for the Supreme proceed with the
light of Nature.[148] As long as matter and quality (which are like oil
and wick) exist, so long the light shines. The flame, however, becomes
extinguished when matter and quality (or oil and wick) are exhausted.
Thus Nature is manifest; while Purusha is said to be unmanifest.
Understand this, ye learned Brahmanas. Well, I shall now tell you
something more. With even a thousand (explanations), one that has a bad
understanding succeeds not in acquiring knowledge. One, however, that is
endued with intelligence succeeds in attaining happiness, through only a
fourth share (of explanations). Thus should the accomplishment of duty be
understood as dependent on means. For the man of intelligence, having
knowledge of means, succeeds in attaining to supreme felicity. As some
man travelling along a road without provisions for his journey, proceeds
with great discomfort and may even meet with destruction before he
reaches the end of his journey, even so should it be known that ill acts
there may not be fruits.[149] The examination of what is agreeable and
what is disagreeable in one's own self is productive of benefit.[150] The
progress in life of a man that is devoid of the perception of truth is
like that of a man who rashly journeys on a long road unseen before. The
progress, however, of those that are endued with intelligence is like
that of men who journey along the same road, riding on a car unto which
are yoked (fleet) steeds and which moves with swiftness. Having ascended
to the top of a mountain, one should not cast one's eyes on the surface
of the earth.[151] Seeing a man, even though travelling on a car,
afflicted and rendered insensible by pain, the man of intelligence
journeys on a car as long as there is a car path.[152] The man of
learning, when he sees the car path end, abandons his car for going on.
Even thus proceeds the man of intelligence who is conversant with the
ordinances respecting truth and Yoga (or Knowledge and Devotion).
Conversant with the qualities, such a man proceeds, comprehending what is
next and next.[153] As one that plunges, without a boat, into the
terrible ocean, with only one's two arms, through delusion, undoubtedly
wishes for destruction; while the man of wisdom, conversant with
distinctions, goes into the water, with a boat equipt with oars, and soon
crosses the lake without fatigue, and having crossed it attains to the
other shore and casts off the boat, freed from the thought of meum. This
has been already explained by the illustration of the car and the
pedestrian. One who has been overwhelmed by delusion in consequence of
attachment, adheres to it like a fisherman to his boat. Overcome by the
idea of meum, one wanders within its narrow range. After embarking on a
boat it is not possible in moving about on land. Similarly, it is not
possible in moving about on water after one has mounted on a car. There
are thus various actions with regard to various objects. And as action is
performed in this world, so does it result to those that perform them.
That which is void of smell, void of taste, and void of touch and sound,
that which is meditated upon by the sages with the aid of their
understanding, is said to be Pradhana. Now, Pradhana is unmanifest. A
development of the unmanifest is Mahat. A development of Pradhana when it
has become Mahat is Egoism. From egoism is produced the development
called the great elements. And of the great elements respectively, the
objects of sense are said to be the developments. The unmanifest is of
the nature of seed. It is productive in its essence. It has been heard by
us that the great soul has the virtues of a seed, and that is a product.
Egoism is of the nature of seed and is a product again and again. And the
five great elements are of the nature of seed and products. The objects
of the five great elements are endued with the nature of seed, and yield
products. These have Chitta for their property. Among them, space has one
quality; wind is said to have two. Light, it is said, is endued with
three qualities; and water as possessed of four qualities. Earth, teeming
with mobiles and immobiles, should be known as possessed of five
qualities. She is a goddess that is the source of all entities and
abounds with examples of the agreeable and the disagreeable. Sound,
likewise touch, colour, taste, and smell numbering the fifth,--these are
the five qualities of earth, ye foremost of regenerate persons. Smell
always belongs to earth, and smell is said to be of various kinds. I
shall state at length the numerous qualities of smell. Smell is agreeable
or disagreeable, sweet, sour, pungent, diffusive and compact, oily and
dry, and clear. Thus smell, which belongs to the earth, should be known
as of ten kinds.[154] Sound, touch, likewise colour, and taste have been
said to be the qualities of water. I shall now speak of the qualities of
Taste. Taste has been said to be of various kinds. Sweet, sour, pungent,
bitter, astringent, and saline likewise. Taste, which has been said to
appertain to water, is thus of six varieties. Sound, touch, and likewise
colour,--these are the three qualities which light is said to be
possessed of. Colour is the quality of light, and colour is said to be of
various kinds. White, dark, likewise red, blue, yellow, and grey also,
and short, long, minute, gross, square and circular, of these twelve
varieties in colour which belongs to light. These should be understood by
Brahmanas venerable for years, conversant with duties, and truthful in
speech. Sound and touch should be known as the two qualities of wind.
Touch has been said to be of various kinds. Rough, cold and like wise
hot, tender and clear, hard, oily, smooth, slippery, painful and soft, of
twelve kinds is touch, which is the quality of wind, as said by Brahmanas
crowned with success, conversant with duties, and possessed of a sight of
truth. Now space has only one quality, and that is said to be sound. I
shall speak at length of the numerous qualities of sound. Shadaja,
Rishabha, together with Gandhara, Madhyama, and likewise Panchama; after
this should be known Nishada, and then Dhaivata.[155] Besides these,
there are agreeable sounds and disagreeable sounds, compact, and of many
ingredients. Sound which is born of space should thus be known to be of
ten kinds. Space is the highest of the (five) elements. Egoism is above
it. Above egoism is understanding. Above understanding is the soul. Above
the soul is the Unmanifest. Above the Unmanifest is Purusha. One who
knows which is superior and inferior among existent creatures, who is
conversant with the ordinances in respect of all acts, and who
constitutes himself the soul of all creatures, attains to the Unfading
Soul.'"
