SECTION XLIX
"The Rishis said,--'Which among the duties is deemed to be the most
worthy of being performed? The diverse modes of duty, we see, are
contradictory. Some say that (it remains) after the body (is destroyed).
Others say that it does not exist. Some say that everything is doubtful.
Others have no doubts.[146] Some say that the eternal (principle) is not
eternal. Some say that it exists, and some that it exists not. Some say
it is of one form, or two-fold, and others that it is mixed. Some
Brahmanas who are conversant with Brahman and utterers of truth regard it
to be one. Others, that it is distinct; and others again that it is
manifold. Some say that both time and space exist; others, that it is not
so. Some bear matted locks on their heads and are clad in deer-skins.
Others have shaven crowns and go entirely naked. Some are for entire
abstention from bathing, and some for bathing. Such differences of views
may be seen among deities and Brahmanas conversant with Brahman and
endued with perceptions of truth. Some are for taking food; while some
are devoted to fasts. Some applaud action; others applaud perfect
tranquillity. Some applaud Emancipation; some, various kinds of
enjoyments. Some desire diverse kinds of wealth; some, poverty. Some say
that means should be resorted to; others, that this is not so. Some are
devoted to a life of abstention from harm; others are addicted to
destruction. Some are for merit and glory, others say that this is not
so. Some are devoted to goodness; others are established on doubt. Some
are for pleasure; some are for pain. Other people say that it is
meditation. Other learned Brahmanas say that it is Sacrifice. Others,
again, say that it is gift. Others applaud penances; others, the study of
the scriptures. Some say that knowledge and renunciation (should be
followed). Others who ponder on the elements say that it is Nature. Some
extol everything; others, nothing. O foremost one of the deities, duty
being thus confused and full of contradictions of various kinds, we are
deluded and unable to come to any conclusion. People stand up for acting,
saying,--This is good,--This is good--He that is attached to a certain
duty applauds that duty as the best. For this reason our understanding
breaks down and our mind is distracted. We therefore, wish, O best of all
beings, to know what is good. It behoves thee to declare to us, after
this, what is (so) mysterious, and what is the cause of the connection
between the Kshetrajna and Nature. Thus addressed by those learned
Brahmanas, the illustrious creator of the worlds, endued with great
intelligence and possessed of a righteous soul, declared to them
accurately what they asked.'"
