SECTION XXXII
"The Brahmana said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative, O
lady, of the discourse between a Brahmana and (king) Janaka. King Janaka
(on a certain occasion), desirous of punishing him, said unto a Brahmana
who had become guilty of some offence, 'Thou shalt not dwell within my
dominions.' Thus addressed, the Brahmana replied unto that best of kings,
saying, 'Tell me, O king, what the limits are of the territories subject
to thee. I desire, O lord, to dwell within the dominions of another king.
Verily, I wish to obey thy behest, O lord of Earth, agreeably to the
scriptures.--Thus addressed by that celebrated Brahmana, the king,
hearing repeated and hot sighs, said not a word in reply. Like the planet
Rahu overwhelming the Sun, a cloudedness of understanding suddenly
overwhelmed that king of immeasurable energy as he sat plunged in
thought. When that cloudedness of understanding passed away and the king
became comforted, he spoke after a short while these words unto that
Brahmana.'
"Janaka said, 'Although a (large) inhabited tract is subject to me within
this ancestral kingdom of mine, yet I fail to find my dominion, searching
through the whole Earth. When I failed to find it on the Earth, I then
searched Mithila (for it). When I failed to find it in Mithila, I then
searched for it among my own children. When I failed to find it even
there, a cloudedness of understanding came over me. After that
cloudedness of understanding passed away, intelligence came back to me.
Then I thought that I have no dominion, or that everything is my
dominion. Even this body is not mine, or the whole Earth is mine. At the
same time, O best of regenerate persons, I think that that is as much
mine as it is of others. Do thou, therefore, dwell (here) as long as thy
choice leads thee, and do thou enjoy as long as thou pleasest.'
"The Brahmana said, 'When there is a large inhabited tract in thy
ancestral kingdom, tell me, depending upon what understanding, has the
idea of meum been got rid of by thee. What also is that understanding
depending upon which thou hast come to the conclusion that everything
constitutes thy dominion? What, indeed, is the notion through which thou
hast no dominion, or everything is thy dominion?'
"Janaka said, 'All conditions here, in all affairs, have been understood
by me to be terminable. Hence, I could not find that which should be
called mine.[88] (Considering) whose is this, I thought of the Vedic text
about anybody's property, I could not, therefore, find, by my
understanding, what should be (called) mine.[89] Depending upon this
notion, I got rid of idea of mineness. Hear now what that notion is
depending upon which I came to the conclusion that I have dominion
everywhere. I do not desire for my own self those smells that are even in
my nose. Therefore, the earth, subjugated by me, is always subject to
me.[90] I do not desire for my own self those tastes that exist in
contact with even my tongue. Therefore, water, subjugated by me, is
always subject to me. I do not desire for my own self the colour or light
that appertains to my eye. Therefore, light subjugated by me, is always
subject to me. I do not desire for my own self those sensations of touch
which are in contact with even my skin. Therefore, the wind, subjugated
by me, is always subject to me. I do not desire for my own self those
sounds which are in contact with even my ear. Therefore sounds,
subjugated by me, are always subject to me. I do not desire for my own
self the mind that is always in my mind. Therefore the mind, subjugated
by me, is subject to me. All these acts of mine are for the sake of the
deities, the Pitris, the Bhutas, together with guests.[91]--The Brahmana
then, smiling, once more said unto Janaka,--Know that I am Dharma, who
have come here today for examining thee. Thou art verily the one person
for setting this wheel in motion, this wheel that has the quality of
Goodness for its circumference, Brahmin for its nave, and the
understanding for its spokes, and which never turns back!'"[92]
