SECTION XXVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'They passed that night which was characterised by
auspicious constellations even thus, O king, in that retreat of righteous
ascetics. The conversation that occurred was characterised by many
reflections on morality and wealth. Consisting of delightful and sweet
words, it was graced with diverse citations from the Srutis. The
Pandavas, O king, leaving costly beds, laid themselves down, near their
mother, on the bare ground. Indeed, those heroes passed that night,
having eaten the food which was the food of the high-souled king
Dhritarashtra. After the night had passed away, king Yudhishthira, having
gone through his morning acts, proceeded to survey that retreat in the
company of his brothers. With the ladies of his household the servants,
and his priest, the king roved about the retreat in all directions, as he
pleased, at the command of Dhritarashtra. He beheld many sacrificial
altars with sacred fires blazing on them and with many ascetics seated on
them, that had performed their oblations and poured libations in honour
of the deities. Those altars were overspread with fruits and roots of the
forest, and with heaps of flowers. The smoke of clarified butter curled
upwards from them. They were graced, besides, with many ascetics
possessed of bodies that looked like the embodied Vedas and with many
that belonged to the lay brotherhood. Herds of deer were grazing, or
resting here and there, freed from every fear. Innumerable birds also
were there, engaged in uttering their melodious notes, O king. The whole
forest seemed to resound with the notes of peacocks and Datyuhas and
Kokilas and the sweet songs of other warblers.[43] Some spots echoed with
the chant of Vedic hymns recited by learned Brahmanas. Some were adorned
with large heaps of fruits and roots gathered from the wilderness. King
Yudhishthira then gave those ascetics jars made of gold or copper which
he had brought for them, and many deer-skins and blankets and sacrificial
ladles made of wood, and Kamandalus and wooden platters, and pots and
pans, O Bharata.[44] Diverse kinds of vessels, made of iron, and smaller
vessels and cups of various sizes, were also given away by the king, the
ascetics taking them away, each as many as he liked. King Yudhishthira of
righteous soul, having thus roved through the woods and beheld the
diverse retreats of ascetics and made many gifts, returned to the place
where his uncle was. He saw king Dhritarashtra, that lord of Earth, at
his ease, with Gandhari beside him, after having finished his morning
rites. The righteous-souled monarch saw also his mother, Kunti, seated
not much remote from that place, like a disciple with bent head, endued
with humility. He saluted the old king, proclaiming his name. 'Sit down'
were the words the old king said. Receiving Dhritarashtra's permission,
Yudhishthira sat himself down on a mat of Kusa grass. Then the other sons
of Pandu with Bhima among them, O thou of Bharata's race, saluted the
king and touched his feet and sat themselves down, receiving his
permission. The old Kuru king, surrounded by them, looked exceedingly
beautiful. Indeed, he blazed with a Vedic splendour like Vrihaspati in
the midst of the celestials. After they had sat themselves down, many
great Rishis, viz., Satayupa and others, who were denizens of
Kurukshetra, came there. The illustrious and learned Vyasa, possessed of
great energy, and reverenced by even the celestial Rishis, showed
himself, at the head of his numerous disciples, unto Yudhishthira. The
Kuru king Dhritarashtra, Kunti's son Yudhishthira of great energy, and
Bhimasena and others, stood up and advancing a few steps, saluted those
guests. Approaching near, Vyasa, surrounded by Satayupa and others,
addressed king Dhritarashtra, saying,--'Be thou seated.' The illustrious
Vyasa then took an excellent seat made of Kusa grass placed upon a black
deer-skin and covered with a piece of silken cloth. They had reserved
that seat for him. After Vyasa had been seated, all those foremost of
regenerate persons, endued with abundant energy, sat themselves down,
having received the permission of the Island-born sage."
