SECTION LXIV
"Vaisampayana said, 'They then set out, with cheerful hearts, and
accompanied by men and animals all of whom and which were equally
cheerful. They filled the whole Earth with the loud clatter of their
wheels. Their praises hymned by eulogists and Sutas and Magadhas and
bards, and supported by their own army, they looked like so many Adityas
adorned with their own rays. With the white umbrella held over his head,
king Yudhishthira shone with beauty like the lord of the stars on the
night when he is at full. That foremost of men, the eldest son of Pandu,
accepted, with due forms, the blessings and cheers of his gladdened
subjects as he proceeded on his way. As regards the soldiers that
followed the king, their confused murmurs seemed to fill the entire
welkin. That host crossed many lakes and rivers and forests and pleasure
gardens. They at last came upon the mountains. Arrived at that region
where that wealth was buried, O king, the royal Yudhishthira fixed his
camp with all his brothers and troops. The region selected for the
purpose, O chief of Bharata's race, was perfectly level and auspicious
There the king pitched his camp, placing in his van such Brahmanas as
were endued with penances and learning and self-restraint, as also his
priest Agnivesya, O thou of Kuru's race, who was well-conversant with the
Vedas and all their branches.[180] Then the royal sons of Pandu, and the
other kings (who accompanied that expedition), and the Brahmanas and
priests well-skilled in sacrificial rites, having duly performed same
propitiatory ceremonies, spread themselves all over that spot. Having
duly placed the king and his ministers in the middle, the Brahmanas
caused the camp to be pitched by laying out six roads and nine
divisions.[181] King Yudhishthira caused a separate encampment to be duly
made for the infuriate elephants that accompanied his force. When
everything was complete, he addressed the Brahmanas, saying, 'Ye foremost
of Brahmanas, let that be done which you think should be done in view of
the matter at hand. Indeed, let an auspicious day and constellation be
fixed for it. Let not a long time pass away over our heads as we wait in
suspense here. Ye foremost of learned Brahmanas, having formed this
resolution, let that be done which should be done after this.' Hearing
these words of the king, the Brahmanas with those amongst them that were
well-skilled in the performance of religious rites, became filled with
gladness and desirous of doing what was agreeable to king Yudhishthira
the just, said these words in reply, 'This very day is, an auspicious one
with an auspicious constellation. We shall, therefore, strive to
accomplish those high rites we propose. We shall today, O king, live upon
water alone. Do you all fast also today' Hearing those words of those
foremost Brahmanas, the royal sons of Pandu passed that night, abstaining
from all food, and lying confidently on beds of Kusa grass, like blazing
fires in a sacrifice. And the night wore away as they listened to the
discourses of the learned Brahmanas (on diverse subjects). When the
cloudless morning came, those foremost of Brahmanas addressed the royal
son of Dharma (saying as follows).'
