
SECTION XIX
"Sauti said, 'Then the Daityas and the Danauas equipped with first-class
armours and various weapons attacked the gods. In the meantime the
valiant Lord Vishnu in the form of an enchantress accompanied by Nara
deceived the mighty Danavas and took away the Amrita from their hands.
"And all the gods at that time of great fright drank the Amrita with
delight, receiving it from Vishnu. And while the gods were partaking of
it, after which they had so much hankered, a Danava named Rahu was also
drinking it among them in the guise of a god. And when the Amrita had
reached Rahu's throat only, Surya and Soma (recognised him and) intimated
the fact to the gods. And Narayana instantly cut off with his discus the
well-adorned head of the Danava who was drinking the Amrita without
permission. And the huge head of the Danava, cut off by the discus and
resembling a mountain peak, then rose up to the sky and began to utter
dreadful cries. And the Danava's headless trunk, falling upon the ground
and rolling thereon, made the Earth tremble with her mountains, forests
and islands. And from that time there is a long-standing quarrel between
Rahu's head and Surya and Soma. And to this day it swalloweth Surya and
Soma (during solar and lunar eclipses).
"Then Narayana quitting his enchanting female form and hurling many
terrible weapons at the Danavas, made them tremble. And thus on the
shores of the salt-water sea, commenced the dreadful battle of the gods
and the Asuras. And sharp-pointed javelins and lances and various weapons
by thousands began to be discharged on all sides. And mangled with the
discus and wounded with swords, darts and maces, the Asuras in large
numbers vomited blood and lay prostrate on the earth. Cut off from the
trunks with sharp double-edged swords, heads adorned with bright gold,
fell continually on the field of battle. Their bodies drenched in gore,
the great Asuras lay dead everywhere. It seemed as if red-dyed mountain
peaks lay scattered all around. And when the Sun rose in his splendour,
thousands of warriors struck one another with weapons. And cries of
distress were heard everywhere. The warriors fighting at a distance from
one another brought one another down by sharp iron missiles, and those
fighting at close quarters slew one another with blows of their fists.
And the air was filled with shrieks of distress. Everywhere were heard
the alarming sounds,--'cut', 'pierce', 'at them', 'hurl down', 'advance'.
'And when the battle was raging fiercely, Nara and Narayana entered the
field. And Narayana seeing the celestial bow in the hand of Nara, called
to mind his own weapon, the Danava-destroying discus. And lo! the discus,
Sudarsana, destroyer of enemies, like to Agni in effulgence and dreadful
in battle, came from the sky as soon as thought of. And when it came,
Narayana of fierce energy, possessing arms like the trunk of an elephant,
hurled with great force that weapon of extraordinary lustre, effulgent as
blazing fire, dreadful and capable of destroying hostile towns. And that
discus blazing like the fire that consumeth all things at the end of
Yuga, hurled with force from the hands of Narayana, and falling
constantly everywhere, destroyed the Daityas and the Danavas by
thousands. Sometimes it blazed like fire and consumed them all; sometimes
it struck them down as it coursed through the sky; and sometimes, falling
on the earth, it drank their life-blood like a goblin.
"On the other hand, the Danavas, white as the clouds from which the rain
hath dropped, possessing great strength and bold hearts, ascended the
sky, and by hurling down thousands of mountains, continually harassed the
gods. And those dreadful mountains, like masses of clouds, with their
trees and flat tops, falling from the sky, collided with one another and
produced a tremendous roar. And when thousands of warriors shouted
without intermission in the field of battle and mountains with the woods
thereon began to fall around, the earth with her forests trembled. Then
the divine Nara appeared at the scene of the dreadful conflict between
the Asuras and the Ganas (the followers of Rudra), and reducing to dust
those rocks by means of his gold-headed arrows, he covered the heavens
with dust. Thus discomfited by the gods, and seeing the furious discus
scouring the fields of heaven like a blazing flame, the mighty Danavas
entered the bowels of the earth, while others plunged into the sea of
salt-waters.
"And having gained the victory, the gods offered due respect to Mandara
and placed him again on his own base. And the nectar-bearing gods made
the heavens resound with their shouts, and went to their own abodes. And
the gods, on returning to the heavens, rejoiced greatly, and Indra and
the other deities made over to Narayana the vessel of Amrita for careful
keeping.'"
And so ends the nineteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
