SECTION XXIII
"Vaisampayana said. 'That foremost one of Bharata's race, then ordered
his troops, which were protected by heroes that were headed by Arjuna and
that resembled the very guardians of the universe, to march out.
Instantly, a loud clamour arose consisting of the words--Equip,
Equip!--of horse-men, O Bharata, engaged in equipping and their steeds.
Some proceeded on carriages and vehicles, some on horses of great speed,
and some on cars made of gold endued with the splendour of blazing fires.
Some proceeded on mighty elephants, and some on camels, O king. Some
proceeded on foot, that belonged to that class of combatants which is
armed with tiger-like claws.[38] The citizens and inhabitants of the
provinces, desirous of seeing Dhritarashtra, followed the king on diverse
kinds of conveyances. The preceptor Kripa also, of Gotama's race, that
great leader of forces, taking all the forces with him, proceeded, at the
command of the king, towards the old monarch's retreat. The Kuru king
Yudhishthira, that perpetuator of Kuru's race, surrounded by a large
number of Brahmanas, his praises sung by a large band of Sutas and
Magadhas and bards, and with a white umbrella held over his head and
encompassed around by a large number of cars, set out on his journey.
Vrikodara, the son of the Wind-god, proceeded on an elephant as gigantic
as a hill, equipt with strung bow and machines and weapons of attack and
defence. The twin sons of Madri proceeded on two fleet steeds, well cased
in mail, well protected, and equipt with banners. Arjuna of mighty
energy, with senses under control, proceeded on an excellent car endued
with solar effulgence and unto which were equipt excellent steeds of
white hue. The ladies of the royal household, headed by Draupadi,
proceeded in closed litters protected by the superintendents of women.
They scattered copious showers of wealth as they proceeded. Teeming with
cars and elephants and steeds, and echoing with the blare of trumpets and
the music of Vinas, the Pandava host, O monarch, blazed with great
beauty. Those chiefs of Kuru's race proceeded slowly, resting by
delightful banks of rivers and lakes, O monarch. Yuyutsu of mighty
energy, and Dhaumya, the priest at the command of Yudhishthira, were
engaged in protecting the city. By slow marches, king Yudhishthira
reached Kurukshetra, and then, crossing the Yamuna, that highly sacred
river, he beheld from a distance the retreat, O thou of Kuru's race, of
the royal sage of great wisdom and of Dhritarashtra. Then all the men
became filled with joy and quickly entered the forest, filling it with
loud sounds of glee, O chief of Bharata's race."'
