SECTION XXVI
"The Brahmana said, 'There is one Ruler. There is no second beside him.
He that is Ruler resides in the heart. I shall speak now of him. Impelled
by Him, I move as directed, like water along an inclined plane. There is
one Preceptor. There is no second beside him. He resides in the heart,
and of him I shall now speak. Be instructed by that preceptor; they who
are always endued with feelings of animosity are like snakes. There is
one kinsman. There is no second beside him. He resides in the heart of
him I shall now speak. Instructed by him, kinsmen become possessed of
kinsmen, and the seven Rishis, O son of Pritha, shine in the firmament.
There is one dispeller. There is no second beside him. He resides in the
heart. Of him I shall now speak. Having lived with that instructor under
the proper mode of living, Sakra attained to the sovereignty of all the
worlds.[73] There is one enemy. There is no second beside him. He resides
in the heart. Of him I shall now speak. Instructed by that preceptor all
snakes in the world are always endued with feelings of animosity. In this
connection is cited the ancient story of the instruction of the snakes,
the deities, and the Rishis by the Lord of all creatures. The deities and
the Rishis, the snakes, and the Asuras, seated around the Lord of all
creatures, asked him, saying,--Let that which is highly beneficial for us
be declared. Unto them that enquired about what is highly beneficial, the
holy one uttered only the word Om, which is Brahman in one syllable.
Hearing this, they ran away in various directions. Amongst them that thus
ran in all directions from desire of self-instruction, the disposition
first arose in snakes of biting. Of the Asuras, the disposition, born of
their nature for ostentations, pride arose. The deities betook themselves
to gifts, and the great Rishis to self-restraint. Having repaired to one
teacher, and having been instructed (refined) by one word, the snakes,
the deities, the Rishis, and the Danavas, all betook themselves to
diverse different dispositions. It is that one who hears himself when
speaking, and apprehends it duly. Once, again, is that heard from him
when he speaks. There is no second preceptor.[74] It is in obedience to
his counsels that action afterwards flows. The instructor, the
apprehender, the hearer, and the enemy, are pleased within the heart. By
acting sinfully in the world it is he that becomes a person of sinful
deeds. By acting auspiciously in the world, it is he who becomes a person
of auspicious deeds. It is he who becomes a person of unrestrained
conduct by becoming addicted to the pleasures of sense, impelled by
desire. It is he who becomes a Brahmacharin by always devoting himself to
the subjugation of his senses. It is he, again, that casts off vows and
actions and takes refuge on Brahman alone. By moving in the world,
identifying himself the while with Brahman, he becomes a Brahmacharin.
Brahman. is his fuel; Brahman is his fire; Brahman is his origin; Brahman
is his water; Brahman is his preceptor: he is rapt in Brahman.
Brahmacharyya is even so subtle, as understood by the wise. Having
understood it, they betook themselves to it, instructed by the
Kshetrajna!'"[75]
