
SECTION CCIII
(Viduragamana Parva continued)
"Vaisampayana said, 'Dhritarashtra replied saying, I desire to do exactly
what you would recommend. But I do not wish to inform Vidura of it even
by a change of muscle. It was, therefore, O son, that I was applauding
the Pandavas in Vidura's presence, so that he might not know even by a
sign what is in my mind. Now that Vidura hath gone away, this is the
time, O Suyodhana (Duryodhana), for telling me what thou hast hit upon,
and what, O Radheya (Karna), thou too hast hit upon.'
"Duryodhana said. 'Let us, O father, by means of trusted and skilful and
adroit Brahmanas, seek to produce dissensions between the sons of Kunti
and Madri. Or, let king Drupada and his sons, and all his ministers of
state, be plied with presents of large wealth, so that they may abandon
the cause of Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti. Or, let our spies induce the
Pandavas to settle in Drupada's dominions, by describing to them,
separately, the inconvenience of residing in Hastinapura, so that,
separated from as, they may permanently settle in Panchala. Or, let some
clever spies, full of resources, sowing the seeds of dissension among the
Pandavas, make them jealous of one another. Or, let them incite Krishna
against her husbands. She has many lords and this will not present any
difficulty. Or, let some seek to make the Pandavas themselves
dissatisfied with Krishna, in which case Krishna also will be
dissatisfied with them. Or, let, O king, some clever spies, repairing
thither, secretly compass the death of Bhimasena. Bhima is the strongest
of them all. Relying upon Bhima alone, the Pandavas used to disregard us,
of old. Bhima is fierce and brave and the (sole) refuge of the Pandavas.
If he be slain, the others will be deprived of strength and energy.
Deprived of Bhima who is their sole refuge, they will no longer strive to
regain their kingdom. Arjuna, O king, is invincible in battle, if Bhima
protecteth him from behind. Without Bhima, Arjuna is not equal to even a
fourth part of Radheya. Indeed, O king, the Pandavas conscious of their
own feebleness without Bhima and of our strength would not really strive
to recover the kingdom. Or, if, O monarch, coming hither, they prove
docile and obedient to us, we would then seek to repress them according
to the dictates of political science (as explained by Kanika). Or, we may
tempt them by means of handsome girls, upon which the princess of
Panchala will get annoyed with them. Or, O Radheya, let messengers be
despatched to bring them hither, so that, when arrived, we may through
trusted agents, by some of the above methods, cause them to be slain.
Strive, O father, to employ any of these (various) methods that may
appear to thee faultless. Time passeth. Before their confidence in king
Drupada--that bull amongst kings--is established we may succeed, O
monarch, to encounter them. But after their confidence hath been
established in Drupada, we are sure to fail. These, O father, are my
views for the discomfiture of the Pandavas. Judge whether they be good or
bad. What, O Karna, dost thou think?'"
(Viduragamana Parva continued)
(Viduragamana Parva continued)
(Viduragamana Parva continued)
(Viduragamana Parva continued)
(Viduragamana Parva continued)
(Viduragamana Parva continued)
