SECTION CCXXXVI
"Vaisampayana said, 'Mandapala then addressed his children, saying, 'I
had spoken unto Agni for the safety of you all. The illustrious deity had
assured me that he would grant my wish. At those words of Agni, and
knowing the virtuous disposition of your mother, as also the great energy
that is in yourselves, I came not here earlier. Therefore, ye sons, do
not harbour in your hearts any resentment towards me. Ye are all Rishis
acquainted with the Vedas. Even Agni knoweth you well.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having given such assurances unto his sons, the
Brahmana Mandapala took with him his wife and sons, and leaving that
region, went away to some other country.
"It was thus that the illustrious god of fierce rays, having grown in
strength consumed the forest of Khandava with the help of Krishna and
Arjuna, for the good of the world. And Agni having drunk several rivers
of fat and marrow, became highly gratified, and showed himself to Arjuna.
Then Purandara, surrounded by the Maruts, descended from the firmament
and addressing Partha and Kesava said, 'Ye have achieved a feat that a
celestial even could not. Ask ye each a boon that is not obtainable by
any man. I have been gratified with you.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Partha asked from Indra all his weapons.
At this Sakra of great splendour, having fixed the time for giving them,
said, 'When the illustrious Madhava becomes pleased with thee, then, O
son of Pandu, I will give thee all my weapons! O prince of Kuru's race, I
shall know when the time cometh. Even for thy austere asceticism I will
give thee all my weapons of fire and all my Vayavya weapons, and thou
also wilt accept them all of me.' Then Vasudeva asked that his friendship
with Arjuna might be eternal. The chief of the celestials granted unto
the intelligent Krishna the boon he desired. And having granted these
boons unto Krishna and Arjuna, the lord of the Maruts, accompanied by the
celestials, ascended to heaven, having also spoken to Hutasana (one whose
food is sacrificial butter). Agni also, having burnt that forest with its
animals and birds for five and ten days, became gratified and ceased to
burn. Having eaten flesh in abundance and drunk fat and blood, he became
highly gratified, and addressing Achyuta and Arjuna said, 'I have been
gratified by you two tigers among men. At my command, ye heroes, ye shall
be competent to go wheresoever ye choose!' Thus addressed by the
illustrious Agni, Arjuna and Vasudeva and the Danava Maya also--these
three,--having wandered a little at last sat themselves down on the
delightful banks of a river.'"
END OF ADI PARVA
FOOTNOTES
1. These are divisions of time
