SECTION VI
"Vaisampayana said,--At the conclusion of Narada's words, king
Yudhishthira the just worshipped him duly; and commanded by him the
monarch began to reply succinctly to the questions the Rishi had asked.
"Yudhishthira said--'O holy one, the truths of religion and morality thou
hast indicated one after another, are just and proper. As regards myself,
I duly observe those ordinances to the best of my power. Indeed, the acts
that were properly performed by monarchs of yore are, without doubt, to
be regarded as bearing proper fruit, and undertaken from solid reasons
for the attainment of proper objects. O master, we desire to walk in the
virtuous path of those rulers that had, besides, their souls under
complete control."
"Vaisampayana continued,--"Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu, possessed of
great glory, having received with reverence the words of Narada and
having also answered the Rishi thus, reflected for a moment. And
perceiving a proper opportunity, the monarch, seated beside the Rishi,
asked Narada sitting at his ease and capable of going into every world at
will, in the presence of that assembly of kings, saying,--'Possessed of
the speed of mind, thou wanderest over various and many worlds created in
days of yore by Brahma, beholding everything. Tell me, I ask thee, if
thou hast, O Brahmana, ever beheld before anywhere an assembly room like
this of mine or superior to it!' Hearing these words of Yudhishthira the
just, Narada smilingly answered the son of Pandu in these sweet accents,--
"Narada said,--'O child, O king I did neither see nor hear of ever before
amongst men, any assembly room built of gems and precious stones like
this of thine, O Bharata. I shall, however, describe unto thee the rooms
of the king of the departed (Yama), of Varuna (Neptune) of great
intelligence, of Indra, the King of Gods and also of him who hath his
home in Kailasha (Kuvera). I shall also describe unto thee the celestial
Sabha of Brahma that dispelleth every kind of uneasiness. All these
assembly rooms exhibit in their structure both celestial and human
designs and present every kind of form that exists in the universe. And
they are ever worshipped by the gods and the Pitris, the Sadhyas,
(under-deities called Gana), by ascetics offering sacrifices, with souls
under complete command, by peaceful Munis engaged without intermission in
Vedic sacrifices with presents to Brahmanas. I shall describe all these
to you if, O bull of the Bharata race, thou hast any inclinations to
listen to me!'"
"Vaisampayana continued,--"Thus addressed by Narada, the high-souled king
Yudhishthira the just, with his brothers and all those foremost of
Brahmanas (seated around him), joined his hands (in entreaty). And the
monarch then asked Narada, saying,--'Describe unto us all those assembly
rooms. We desire to listen to thee. O Brahmana, what are the articles
with which each of the Sabhas are made of? What is the area of each, and
what is the length and breadth of each? Who wait upon the Grandsire in
that assembly room? And who also upon Vasava, the Lord of the celestials
and upon Yama, the son of Vivaswana? Who wait upon Varuna and upon Kuvera
in their respective assembly rooms. O Brahmana Rishi, tell us all about
these. We all together desire to hear thee describe them. Indeed, our
curiosity is great.' Thus addressed by the son of Pandu, Narada replied,
saying,--'O monarch, hear ye all about those celestial assembly rooms one
after another."
