SECTION LX
Yudhishthira said,--"Thou hast won this stake of me by unfair means. But
be not so proud, O Sakuni. Let us play staking thousands upon thousands.
I have many beautiful jars each full of a thousand Nishkas in my
treasury, inexhaustible gold, and much silver and other minerals. This, O
king, is the wealth with which I will stake with thee!'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"Thus addressed, Sakuni said unto the chief of
the perpetuators of the Kuru race, the eldest of the sons of Pandu, king
Yudhishthira, of glory incapable of sustaining any diminution. 'Lo, I
have won!'"
Yudhishthira said,--'This my sacred and victorious and royal car which
gladdeneth the heart and hath carried us hither, which is equal unto a
thousand cars, which is of symmetrical proportions and covered with
tiger-skin, and furnished with excellent wheels and flag-staffs which is
handsome, and decked with strings of little bells, whose clatter is even
like the roar of the clouds or of the ocean, and which is drawn by eight
noble steeds known all over the kingdom and which are white as the
moon-beam and from whose hoofs no terrestrial creature can escape--this,
O king, is my wealth with which I will stake with thee!'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words, Sakuni ready with the
dice, and adopting unfair means, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won!'
"Yudhishthira said,--'I have a hundred thousand serving-girls, all young,
and decked with golden bracelets on their wrists and upper arms, and with
nishkas round their necks and other ornaments, adorned with costly
garlands and attired in rich robes, daubed with the sandal paste, wearing
jewels and gold, and well-skilled in the four and sixty elegant arts,
especially versed in dancing and singing, and who wait upon and serve at
my command the celestials, the Snataka Brahmanas, and kings. With this
wealth, O king, I will stake with thee!'"
Vaisampayana continued,--'Hearing these words, Sakuni ready with the
dice, adopting unfair means, said unto Yudhishthira. 'Lo, I have won!'
Yudhishthira said,--"I have thousands of serving-men, skilled in waiting
upon guests, always attired in silken robes, endued with wisdom and
intelligence, their senses under control though young, and decked with
ear-rings, and who serve all guests night and day with plates and dishes
in hand. With this wealth, O king, I will stake with thee!'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words, Sakuni, ready with the
dice, adopting unfair means said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won!'
"Yudhishthira said,--'I have, O son of Suvala, one thousand musty
elephants with golden girdles, decked with ornaments, with the mark of
the lotus on their temples and necks and other parts, adorned with golden
garlands, with fine white tusks long and thick as plough-shafts, worthy
of carrying kings on their backs, capable of bearing every kind of noise
on the field of battle, with huge bodies, capable of battering down the
walls of hostile towns, of the colour of new-formed clouds, and each
possessing eight she-elephants. With this wealth, O king, I will stake
with thee.'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"Unto Yudhishthira who had said so, Sakuni, the
son of Suvala, laughingly said, 'Lo, I have won it!'
Yudhishthira said,--'I have as many cars as elephants, all furnished with
golden poles and flag-staffs and well-trained horses and warriors that
fight wonderfully and each of whom receiveth a thousand coins as his
monthly pay whether he fighteth or not. With this wealth, O king, I will
stake with thee!'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"When these words had been spoken, the wretch
Sakuni, pledged to enmity, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won it.'
Yudhishthira said.--'The steeds of the Tittiri, Kalmasha, and Gandharva
breeds, decked with ornaments, which Chitraratha having been vanquished
in battle and subdued cheerfully gave unto Arjuna, the wielder of the
Gandiva. With this wealth, O king, I will stake with thee."
Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing this, Sakuni, ready at dice, adopting
unfair means, said unto Yudhishthira: 'Lo, I have won!'
Yudhishthira said,--'I have ten thousand cars and vehicles unto which are
yoked draught animals of the foremost breed. And I have also sixty
thousand warriors picked from each order by thousands, who are all brave
and endued with prowess like heroes, who drink milk and eat good rice,
and all of whom have broad chests. With this wealth, O king, I will stake
with thee.'
Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing this, Sakuni ready at dice, adopting
unfair means said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won!'
Yudhishthira said,--'I have four hundred Nidis (jewels of great value)
encased in sheets of copper and iron. Each one of them is equal to five
draunikas of the costliest and purest leaf gold of the Jatarupa kind.
With this wealth, O king, I will stake with thee.'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing this, Sakuni ready at dice, adopting
foul means, said unto Yudhishthira, 'Lo, I have won it!'"
