SECTION LXV
Duryodhana said,--'Come, Kshatta, bring hither Draupadi the dear and
loved wife of the Pandavas. Let her sweep the chambers, force her
thereto, and let the unfortunate one stay where our serving-women are.'
"Vidura said,--'Dost thou not know, O wretch, that by uttering such harsh
words thou art tying thyself with cords? Dost thou not understand that
thou art hanging on the edge of a precipice? Dost thou not know that
being a deer thou provokest so many tigers to rage? Snakes of deadly
venom, provoked to ire, are on thy head! Wretch, do not further provoke
them lest thou goest to the region of Yama. In my judgement, slavery does
not attach to Krishna, in as much as she was staked by the King after he
had lost himself and ceased to be his own master. Like the bamboo that
beareth fruit only when it is about to die, the son of Dhritarashtra
winneth this treasure at play. Intoxicated, he perceiveth nor in these
his last moments that dice bring about enmity and frightful terrors. No
man should utter harsh speeches and pierce the hearts of the others. No
man should subjugate his enemies by dice and such other foul means. No
one should utter such words as are disapproved by the Vedas and lead to
hell and annoy others. Some one uttereth from his lips words that are
harsh. Stung by them another burneth day and night. These words pierce
the very heart of another. The learned, therefore, should never utter
them, pointing them at others. A goat had once swallowed a hook, and when
it was pierced with it, the hunter placing the head of the animal on the
ground tore its throat frightfully in drawing it out. Therefore, O
Duryodhana, swallow not the wealth of the Pandavas. Make them not thy
enemies. The sons of Pritha never use words such as these. It is only low
men that are like dogs who use harsh words towards all classes of people,
viz., those that have retired to the woods, those leading domestic lives,
those employed in ascetic devotions and those that are of great learning.
Alas! the son of Dhritarashtra knoweth not that dishonesty is one of the
frightful doors of hell. Alas! many of the Kurus with Dussasana amongst
them have followed him in the path of dishonesty in the matter of this
play at dice. Even gourds may sink and stones may float, and boats also
may always sink in water, still this foolish king, the son of
Dhritarashtra, listeneth not to my words that are even as regimen unto
him. Without doubt, he will be the cause of the destruction of the Kurus.
When the words of wisdom spoken by friends and which are even as fit
regimen are not listened to, but on the other hand temptation is on the
increase, a frightful and universal destruction is sure to overtake all
the Kurus."
