SECTION II
"Vaisampayana said, 'When that night passed away and day broke in, those
Brahmamas who supported themselves by mendicancy, stood before the
Pandavas of exalted deeds, who were about to enter the forest. Then king
Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, addressed them, saying, "Robbed of our
prosperity and kingdom, robbed of everything, we are about to enter the
deep woods in sorrow, depending for our food on fruits and roots, and the
produce of the chase. The forest too is full of dangers, and abounds with
reptiles and beasts of prey. It appeareth to me that ye will certainly
have to suffer much privation and misery there. The sufferings of the
Brahmanas might overpower even the gods. That they would overwhelm me is
too certain. Therefore, O Brahmana, go ye back whithersoever ye list!'
"The Brahmanas replied, 'O king, our path is even that on which ye are
for setting out! It behoveth thee not, therefore, to forsake us who are
thy devoted admirers practising the true religion! The very gods have
compassion upon their worshippers,--specially upon Brahmanas of regulated
lives!'
"Yudhishthira said, 'We regenerate ones, I too am devoted to the
Brahmanas! But this destitution that hath overtaken me overwhelmed me
with confusion! These my brothers that are to procure fruits and roots
and the deer (of the forest) are stupefied with grief arising from their
afflictions and on account of the distress of Draupadi and the loss of
our kingdom! Alas, as they are distressed, I cannot employ them in
painful tasks!'
"The Brahmanas said, 'Let no anxiety, O king, in respect of our
maintenance, find a place in thy heart! Ourselves providing our own food,
we shall follow thee, and by meditation and saying our prayers we shall
compass thy welfare while by pleasant converse we shall entertain thee
and be cheered ourselves.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Without doubt, it must be as ye say, for I am ever
pleased with the company of the regenerate ones! But my fallen condition
maketh me behold in myself an object of reproach! How shall I behold you
all, that do not deserve to bear trouble, out of love for me painfully
subsisting upon food procured by your own toil? Oh, fie upon the wicked
sons of Dhritarashtra!'
"Vaisampayana continued. 'Saying this, the weeping king sat himself down
upon the ground. Then a learned Brahmana, Saunaka by name versed in
self-knowledge and skilled in the Sankhya system of yoga, addressed the
king, saying, 'Causes of grief by thousands, and causes of fear by
hundreds, day after day, overwhelm the ignorant but not the wise. Surely,
sensible men like thee never suffer themselves to be deluded by acts that
are opposed to true knowledge, fraught with every kind of evil, and
destructive of salvation. O king, in thee dwelleth that understanding
furnished with the eight attributes which is said to be capable of
providing against all evils and which resulteth from a study of the Sruti
(Vedas) and scriptures! And men like unto thee are never stupefied, on
the accession of poverty or an affliction overtaking their friends,
through bodily or mental uneasiness! Listen, I shall tell the slokas
which were chanted of old by the illustrious Janaka touching the subject
of controlling the self! This world is afflicted with both bodily and
mental suffering. Listen now to the means of allaying it as I indicate
them both briefly and in detail. Disease, contact with painful things,
toil and want of objects desired.--these are the four causes that induce
bodily suffering. And as regards disease, it may be allayed by the
application of medicine, while mental ailments are cured by seeking to
forget them yoga-meditation. For this reason, sensible physicians first
seek to allay the mental sufferings of their patients by agreeable
converse and the offer of desirable objects And as a hot iron bar thrust
into a jar maketh the water therein hot, even so doth mental grief bring
on bodily agony. And as water quencheth fire, so doth true knowledge
allay mental disquietude. And the mind attaining ease, the body findeth
ease also. It seemeth that affection is the root of all mental sorrow. It
is affection that maketh every creature miserable and bringeth on every
kind of woe. Verily affection is the root of all misery and of all fear,
of joy and grief of every kind of pain. From affection spring all
purposes, and it is from affection that spring the love of worldly goods!
Both of these (latter) are sources of evil, though the first (our
purposes) is worse than the second. And as (a small portion of) fire
thrust into the hollow of a tree consumeth the tree itself to its roots,
even so affection, ever so little, destroyeth both virtue and profit. He
cannot be regarded to have renounced the world who hath merely withdrawn
from worldly possessions. He, however, who though in actual contact with
the world regardeth its faults, may be said to have truly renounced the
world. Freed from every evil passion, soul dependent on nothing with such
a one hath truly renounced the world. Therefore, should no one seek to
place his affections on either friends or the wealth he hath earned. And
so should affection for one's own person be extinguished by knowledge.
Like the lotus-leaf that is never drenched by water, the souls of men
capable of distinguishing between the ephemeral and the everlasting, of
men devoted to the pursuit of the eternal, conversant with the scriptures
and purified by knowledge, can never be moved by affection. The man that
is influenced by affection is tortured by desire; and from the desire
that springeth up in his heart his thirst for worldly possessions
increaseth. Verily, this thirst is sinful and is regarded as the source
of all anxieties. It is this terrible thirst, fraught with sin that
leaneth unto unrighteous acts. Those find happiness that can renounce
this thirst, which can never be renounced by the wicked, which decayeth
not with the decay of the body, and which is truly a fatal disease! It
hath neither beginning nor end. Dwelling within the heart, it destroyeth
creatures, like a fire of incorporeal origin. And as a faggot of wood is
consumed by the fire that is fed by itself, even so doth a person of
impure soul find destruction from the covetousness born of his heart. And
as creatures endued with life have ever a dread of death, so men of
wealth are in constant apprehension of the king and the thief, of water
and fire and even of their relatives. And as a morsel of meat, if in air,
may be devoured by birds; if on ground by beasts of prey; and if in water
by the fishes; even so is the man of wealth exposed to dangers wherever
he may be. To many the wealth they own is their bane, and he that
beholding happiness in wealth becometh wedded to it, knoweth not true
happiness. And hence accession of wealth is viewed as that which
increaseth covetousness and folly. Wealth alone is the root of
niggardliness and boastfulness, pride and fear and anxiety! These are the
miseries of men that the wise see in riches! Men undergo infinite
miseries in the acquisition and retention of wealth. Its expenditure also
is fraught with grief. Nay, sometimes, life itself is lost for the sake
of wealth! The abandonment of wealth produces misery, and even they that
are cherished by one's wealth become enemies for the sake of that wealth!
When, therefore, the possession of wealth is fraught with such misery,
one should not mind its loss. It is the ignorant alone who are
discontented. The wise, however, are always content. The thirst of wealth
can never be assuaged. Contentment is the highest happiness; therefore,
it is, that the wise regard contentment as the highest object of pursuit.
The wise knowing the instability of youth and beauty, of life and
treasure-hoards, of prosperity and the company of the loved ones, never
covet them. Therefore, one should refrain from the acquisition of wealth,
bearing the pain incident to it. None that is rich free from trouble, and
it is for this that the virtuous applaud them that are free from the
desire of wealth. And as regards those that pursue wealth for purposes of
virtue, it is better for them to refrain altogether from such pursuit,
for, surely, it is better not to touch mire at all than to wash it off
after having been besmeared with it. And, O Yudhishthira, it behoveth
thee not to covet anything! And if thou wouldst have virtue, emancipate
thyself from desire of worldly possessions!'
"Yudhishthira said, 'O Brahmana, this my desire of wealth is not for
enjoying it when obtained. It is only for the support of the Brahmanas
that I desire it and not because I am actuated by avarice! For what
purpose, O Brahmana, doth one like us lead a domestic life, if he cannot
cherish and support those that follow him? All creatures are seen to
divide the food (they procure) amongst those that depend on them.[1] So
should a person leading a domestic life give a share of his food to Yatis
and Brahmacharins that have renounced cooking for themselves. The houses
of the good men can never be in want of grass (for seat), space (for
rest), water (to wash and assuage thirst), and fourthly, sweet words. To
the weary a bed,--to one fatigued with standing, a seat,--to the thirsty,
water,--and to the hungry, food should ever be given. To a guest are due
pleasant looks and a cheerful heart and sweet words. The host, rising up,
should advance towards the guest, offer him a seat, and duly worship him.
Even this is eternal morality. They that perform not the Agnihotra[2] not
wait upon bulls, nor cherish their kinsmen and guests and friends and
sons and wives and servants, are consumed with sin for such neglect. None
should cook his food for himself alone and none should slay an animal
without dedicating it to the gods, the pitris, and guests. Nor should one
eat of that food which hath not been duly dedicated to the gods and
pitris. By scattering food on the earth, morning and evening, for (the
behoof of) dogs and Chandalas and birds, should a person perform the
Viswedeva sacrifice.[3] He that eateth the Vighasa, is regarded as eating
ambrosia. What remaineth in a sacrifice after dedication to the gods and
the pitris is regarded as ambrosia; and what remaineth after feeding the
guest is called Vighasa and is equivalent to ambrosia itself. Feeding a
guest is equivalent to a sacrifice, and the pleasant looks the host
casteth upon the guest, the attention he devoteth to him, the sweet words
in which he addresseth him, the respect he payeth by following him, and
the food and drink with which he treateth him, are the five Dakshinas[4]
in that sacrifice. He who giveth without stint food to a fatigued
wayfarer never seen before, obtaineth merit that is great, and he who
leading a domestic life, followeth such practices, acquireth religious
merit that is said to be very great. O Brahmana, what is thy opinion on
this?"
"Saunaka said, 'Alas, this world is full of contradictions! That which
shameth the good, gratifieth the wicked! Alas, moved by ignorance and
passion and slaves of their own senses, even fools perform many acts of
(apparent merit) to gratify in after-life their appetites! With eyes open
are these men led astray by their seducing senses, even as a charioteer,
who hath lost his senses, by restive and wicked steeds! When any of the
six senses findeth its particular object, the desire springeth up in the
heart to enjoy that particular object. And thus when one's heart
proceedeth to enjoy the objects of any particular sense a wish is
entertained which in its turn giveth birth to a resolve. And finally,
like unto an insect falling into a flame from love of light, the man
falleth into the fire of temptation, pierced by the shafts of the object
of enjoyment discharged by the desire constituting the seed of the
resolve! And thenceforth blinded by sensual pleasure which he seeketh
without stint, and steeped in dark ignorance and folly which he mistaketh
for a state of happiness, he knoweth not himself! And like unto a wheel
that is incessantly rolling, every creature, from ignorance and deed and
desire, falleth into various states in this world, wandering from one
birth to another, and rangeth the entire circle of existences from a
Brahma to the point of a blade of grass, now in water, now on land, and
now against in the air!
'This then is the career of those that are without knowledge. Listen now
to the course of the wise they that are intent on profitable virtue, and
are desirous of emancipation! The Vedas enjoin act but renounce (interest
in) action. Therefore, shouldst thou act, renouncing Abhimana,[5]
performance of sacrifices, study (of the Vedas), gifts, penance, truth
(in both speech and act), forgiveness, subduing the senses, and
renunciation of desire,--these have been declared to be the eight
(cardinal) duties constituting the true path. Of these, the four first
pave the way to the world of the pitris. And these should be practised
without Abhimana. The four last are always observed by the pious, to
attain the heaven of the gods. And the pure in spirit should ever follow
these eight paths. Those who wish to subdue the world for purpose of
salvation, should ever act fully renouncing motives, effectually subduing
their senses, rigidly observing particular vows, devotedly serving their
preceptors, austerely regulating their fare, diligently studying the
Vedas, renouncing action as mean and restraining their hearts. By
renouncing desire and aversion the gods have attained prosperity. It is
by virtue of their wealth of yoga[6] that the Rudras, and the Sadhyas,
and the Adityas and the Vasus, and the twin Aswins, rule the creatures.
Therefore, O son of Kunti, like unto them, do thou, O Bharata, entirely
refraining from action with motive, strive to attain success in yoga and
by ascetic austerities. Thou hast already achieved such success so far as
thy debts to thy ancestors, both male and female concerned, and that
success also which is derived from action (sacrifices). Do thou, for
serving the regenerate ones endeavour to attain success in penances.
Those that are crowned with ascetic success, can, by virtue of that
success, do whatever they list; do thou, therefore, practising asceticism
realise all thy wishes."
