SECTION III
"Vaisampayana said, 'Yudhishthira the son of Kunti, thus addressed by
Saunaka, approached his priest and in the midst of his brothers said,
'The Brahmanas versed in the Vedas are following me who am departing for
the forest. Afflicted with many calamities I am unable to support them. I
cannot abandon them, nor have I the power to offer them sustenance: Tell
me, O holy one, what should be done by me in such a pass.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'After reflecting for a moment seeking to find out
the (proper) course by his yoga powers, Dhaumya, that foremost of all
virtuous men, addressed Yudhishthira, in these words, 'In days of old,
all living beings that had been created were sorely afflicted with
hunger. And like a father (unto all of them), Savita (the sun) took
compassion upon them. And going first into the northern declension, the
sun drew up water by his rays, and coming back to the southern
declension, stayed over the earth, with his heat centered in himself. And
while the sun so stayed over the earth, the lord of the vegetable world
(the moon), converting the effects of the solar heat (vapours) into
clouds and pouring them down in the shape of water, caused plants to
spring up. Thus it is the sun himself, who, drenched by the lunar
influence, is transformed, upon the sprouting of seeds, into holy
vegetable furnished with the six tastes. And it is these which constitute
the food of all creatures upon the earth. Thus the food that supporteth
the lives of creatures is instinct with solar energy, and the sun is,
therefore, the father of all creatures. Do thou, hence, O Yudhishthira,
take refuge even in him. All illustrious monarchs of pure descent and
deeds are known to have delivered their people by practising high
asceticism. The great Karttavirya, and Vainya and Nahusha, had all, by
virtue of ascetic meditation preceded by vows, delivered their people
from heavy afflictions. Therefore, O virtuous one, as thou art purified
by the acts do thou likewise, entering upon a file of austerities. O
Bharata, virtuously support the regenerate ones.'
"Janamejaya said, 'How did that bull among the Kurus, king Yudhishthira,
for the sake of the Brahmanas adore the sun of wonderful appearance?"
"Vaisampayana said, 'Listen attentively, O king, purifying thyself and
withdrawing thy mind from every other thing. And, O king of kings,
appoint thou a time. I will tell thee everything in detail, And, O
illustrious one, listen to the one hundred and eight names (of the sun)
as they were disclosed of old by Dhaumya to the high-souled son of
Pritha. Dhaumya said, 'Surya, Aryaman, Bhaga, Twastri, Pusha, Arka,
Savitri. Ravi,
Gabhastimat, Aja, Kala, Mrityu, Dhatri, Prabhakara, Prithibi, Apa, Teja,
Kha, Vayu, the sole stay, Soma, Vrihaspati, Sukra, Budha, Angaraka,
Indra, Vivaswat, Diptanshu, Suchi, Sauri, Sanaichara, Brahma, Vishnu,
Rudra, Skanda, Vaisravana, Yama, Vaidyutagni, Jatharagni, Aindhna,
Tejasampati, Dharmadhwaja, Veda-karttri, Vedanga, Vedavahana, Krita,
Treta, Dwapara, Kali, full of every impurity, Kala, Kastha, Muhurtta,
Kshapa, Yama, and Kshana; Samvatsara-kara, Aswattha, Kalachakra,
Bibhavasu, Purusha, Saswata, Yogin, Vyaktavyakta, Sanatana, Kaladhyaksha,
Prajadhyaksha, Viswakarma, Tamounda, Varuna, Sagara, Ansu, Jimuta,
Jivana, Arihan, Bhutasraya, Bhutapati, Srastri, Samvartaka, Vanhi,
Sarvadi, Alolupa, Ananta, Kapila, Bhanu, Kamada, Sarvatomukha, Jaya,
Visala, Varada, Manas, Suparna, Bhutadi, Sighraga, Prandharana,
Dhanwantari, Dhumaketu, Adideva, Aditisuta, Dwadasatman, Aravindaksha,
Pitri, Matri, Pitamaha, Swarga-dwara, Prajadwara, Mokshadwara,
Tripistapa, Dehakarti, Prasantatman, Viswatman, Viswatomukha,
Characharatman, Sukhsmatman, the merciful Maitreya. These are the hundred
and eight names of Surya of immeasurable energy, as told by the
self-create (Brahma). For the acquisition of prosperity, I bow down to
thee, O Bhaskara, blazing like unto gold or fire, who is worshipped of
the gods and the Pitris and the Yakshas, and who is adored by Asuras,
Nisacharas, and Siddhas. He that with fixed attention reciteth this hymn
at sunrise, obtaineth wife and offspring and riches and the memory of his
former existence, and by reciting this hymn a person attaineth patience
and memory. Let a man concentrating his mind, recite this hymn. By doing
so, he shall be proof against grief and forest-fire and ocean and every
object of desire shall be his.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having heard from Dhaumya these words suitable
to the occasion, Yudhishthira the just, with heart concentrated within
itself and purifying it duly, became engaged in austere meditation, moved
by the desire of supporting the Brahmanas. And worshipping the maker of
day with offerings of flowers and other articles, the king performed his
ablutions. And standing in the stream, he turned his face towards the god
of day. And touching the water of the Ganges the virtuous Yudhishthira
with senses under complete control and depending upon air alone for his
sustenance, stood there with rapt soul engaged in pranayama.[7] And
having purified himself and restrained his speech, he began to sing the
hymn of praise (to the sun).'
'Yudhishthira said, "Thou art, O sun, the eye of the universe. Thou art
the soul of all corporeal existences. Thou art the origin of all things.
Thou art the embodiment of the acts of all religious men. Thou art the
refuge of those versed in the Sankhya philosophy (the mysteries of the
soul), and thou art the support of the Yogins. Thou art a door unfastened
with bolts. Thou art the refuge of those wishing for emancipation. Thou
sustainest and discoverest the world, and sanctifiest and supportest it
from pure compassion. Brahmanas versed in the Vedas appearing before
thee, adore thee in due time, reciting the hymns from the respective
branches (of the Vedas) they refer. Thou art the adored of the Rishis.
The Siddhas, and the Charanas and the Gandharvas and the Yakshas, and the
Guhyakas, and the Nagas, desirous of obtaining boons follow thy car
coursing through the skies. The thirty-three gods[8] with Upendra
(Vishnu) and Mahendra, and the order of Vaimanikas[9] have attained
success by worshipping thee. By offering thee garlands of the celestial
Mandaras[10] the best of the Vidyadharas have obtained all their desires.
The Guhyas and the seven orders of the Pitris--both divine and
human--have attained superiority by adoring thee alone. The Vasus, the
Manilas, and the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Marichipas, the Valikhilyas,
and the Siddhas, have attained pre-eminence by bowing down unto thee.
There is nothing that I know in the entire seven worlds, including that
of Brahma which is beyond thee. There are other beings both great and
endued with energy; but none of them hath thy lustre and energy. All
light is in thee, indeed, thou art the lord of all light. In thee are the
(five) elements and all intelligence, and knowledge and asceticism and
the ascetic properties.[11] The discus by which the wielder of the
Saranga[12] humbleth the pride of Asuras and which is furnished with a
beautiful nave, was forged by Viswakarman with thy energy. In summer thou
drawest, by thy rays, moisture from all corporeal existences and plants
and liquid substances, and pourest it down in the rainy season. Thy rays
warm and scorch, and becoming as clouds roar and flash with lightning and
pour down showers when the season cometh. Neither fire nor shelter, nor
woolen cloths give greater comfort to one suffering from chilling blasts
than thy rays. Thou illuminest by thy rays the whole Earth with her
thirteen islands. Thou alone are engaged in the welfare of the three
worlds. If thou dost not rise, the universe becometh blind and the
learned cannot employ themselves in the attainment of virtue, wealth and
profit. It is through thy grace that the (three) orders of Brahmanas,
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas are able to perform their various duties and
sacrifices.[13] Those versed in chronology say that thou art the
beginning and thou the end of a day of Brahma, which consisteth of a full
thousand Yugas. Thou art the lord of Manus and of the sons of the Manus,
of the universe and of man, of the Manwantaras, and their lords. When the
time of universal dissolution cometh, the fire Samvartaka born of thy
wrath consumeth the three worlds and existeth alone And clouds of various
hues begotten of thy rays, accompanied by the elephant Airavata and the
thunderbolt, bring about the appointed deluges. And dividing thyself into
twelve parts and becoming as many suns, thou drinkest up the ocean once
more with thy rays. Thou art called Indra, thou art Vishnu, thou art
Brahma, thou art Prajapati. Thou art fire and thou art the subtle mind.
And thou art lord and the eternal Brahma. Thou art Hansa, thou art
Savitri, thou art Bhanu, Ansumalin, and Vrishakapi. Thou art Vivaswan,
Mihira, Pusha, Mitra, and Dharma. Thou art thousand-rayed, thou art
Aditya, and Tapana, and the lord of rays. Thou art Martanda, and Arka,
and Ravi, and Surya and Saranya and maker of day, and Divakara and
Suptasaspti, and Dhumakeshin and Virochana. Thou art spoken of as swift
of speed and the destroyer of darkness, and the possessor of yellow
steeds. He that reverentially adoreth thee on the sixth or the seventh
lunar day with humility and tranquillity of mind, obtaineth the grace of
Lakshmi. They that with undivided attention adore and worship thee, are
delivered from all dangers, agonies, and afflictions. And they that hold
that thou art everywhere (being the soul of all things) living long,
freed from sin and enjoying an immunity from all diseases. O lord of all
food, it behoveth thee to grant food in abundance unto me who am desirous
of food even for entertaining all my guests with reverence. I bow also to
all those followers of thine that have taken refuge at thy feet--Mathara
and Aruna and Danda and others, including Asani and Kshuva and the
others. And I bow also to the celestial mothers of all creatures, viz.,
Kshuva and Maitri and the others of the class. O, let them deliver me
their supplient.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus, O great king, was the sun that purifier of the
world, adored (by Yudhishthira). And pleased with the hymn, the maker of
day, self-luminous, and blazing like fire showed himself to the son of
Pandu. And Vivaswan said, 'Thou shall obtain all that thou desirest. I
shall provide thee with food for five and seven years together. And, O
king, accept this copper-vessel which I give unto thee. And, O thou of
excellent vows, as long as Panchali will hold this vessel, without
partaking of its contents fruits and roots and meat and vegetables cooked
in thy kitchen, these four kinds of food shall from this day be
inexhaustible. And, on the fourteenth year from this, thou shall regain
thy kingdom.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said this, the god vanished away. He
that, with the desire of obtaining a boon, reciteth this hymn
concentrating his mind with ascetic abstraction, obtaineth it from the
sun, however difficult of acquisition it may be that he asketh for. And
the person, male or female, that reciteth or heareth this hymn day after
day, if he or she desireth for a son, obtaineth one, and if riches,
obtaineth them, and if learning acquireth that too. And the person male
or female, that reciteth this hymn every day in the two twilights, if
overtaken by danger, is delivered from it, and if bound, is freed from
the bonds. Brahma himself had communicated this hymn to the illustrious
Sakra, and from Sakra was it obtained by Narada and from Narada, by
Dhaumya. And Yudhishthira, obtaining it from Dhaumya, attained all his
wishes. And it is by virtue of this hymn that one may always obtain
victory in war, and acquire immense wealth also. And it leadeth the
reciter from all sins, to the solar region.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having obtained the boon, the virtuous son of
Kunti, rising from the water, took hold of Dhaumya's feet and then
embraced his brother's. And, O exalted one, wending then with Draupadi to
the kitchen, and adored by her duly, the son of Pandu set himself to cook
(their day's) food. And the clean food, however little, that was dressed,
furnished with the four tastes, increased and became inexhaustible. And
with it Yudhishthira began to feed the regenerate ones. And after the
Brahmanas had been fed, and his younger brothers also, Yudhishthira
himself ate of the food that remained, and which is called Vighasa. And
after Yudhishthira had eaten, the daughter of Prishata took what
remained. And after she had taken her meal, the day's food became
exhausted.
'And having thus obtained the boon from the maker of day, the son of
Pandu, himself as resplendent as that celestial, began to entertain the
Brahmanas agreeably to their wishes. And obedient to their priest, the
sons of Pritha, on auspicious lunar days and constellations and
conjunctions, performed sacrifices according to the ordinance, the
scriptures, and the Mantras. After the sacrifices, the sons of Pandu,
blessed by the auspicious rites performed by Dhaumya and accompanied by
him, and surrounded also by the Brahmanas set out for the woods of
Kamyaka.'"
