SECTION XVII
"Vasudeva continued, 'O bull of the Bharata race, having spoken thus unto
the Yadavas, the son of Rukmini (Pradyumna) ascended his golden car. And
the car he rode was drawn by excellent steeds in mail. And over it stood
a standard bearing the figure of a Makara with gaping mouth and fierce as
Yama. And with his steeds, more flying than running on the ground, he
rushed against the foe And the hero equipped with quiver and sword, with
fingers cased in leather, twanged his bow possessed of the splendour of
the lightning, with great strength, and transferring it from hand to
hand, as if in contempt of the enemy, spread confusion among the Danavas
and other warriors of the city of Saubha. And as hot in contempt of the,
foe, and continuously slew the Danavas in battle, no one could mark the
slightest interval between his successive shafts. And the colour of his
face changed not, and his limbs trembled not. And people only heard his
loud leonine roars indicative of wonderful valour. And the aquatic
monster with mouth wide open, that devourer of all fishes, placed on
golden flag-staff of that best of cars, struck terror into the hearts of
Salwa's warriors. And, O king, Pradyumna, the mower of foes rushed with
speed against Salwa himself so desirous of an encounter! And, O
perpetuator of the Kuru race, braved by the heroic Pradyumna in that
mighty battle, the angry Salwa could ill bear the challenge! And that
conqueror of hostile cities, Salwa, maddened by anger, descended from his
beautiful car of unchecked speed, resolved to encounter Pradyumna. And
the people beheld the fight between Salwa and the foremost of Vrishni
heroes, which was even like unto the encounter between Vasava with Vali.
And, O hero, mounting on his beautiful car decked with gold and furnished
with flags and flag-staffs and quivers, the illustrious and mighty Salwa
began to discharge his arrows at Pradyumna! Pradyumna also by the energy
of his arms, overwhelmed Salwa in the combat by a thick shower of arrows.
The king of Saubha, however, thus attacked in battle by Pradyumna,
endured him not, but discharged at my son arrows that were like blazing
fire. But the mighty Pradyumna parried off that arrowy shower. Beholding
this, Salwa rained on my son other weapons of blazing splendour. Then, O
foremost of monarchs, pierced by the shafts of Salwa, the son of Rukmini
discharged without loss of time an arrow that was capable of entering the
vitals of a foe in fight. And that winged shaft shot by my son, piercing
Salwa's mail, entered his heart--whereupon he fell down, in a swoon. And
beholding the heroic king Salwa fallen down deprived of sense, the
foremost of the Danavas fled away rending the ground beneath their feet.
And, O lord of the earth, the army of Salwa sent up exclamations of Oh!
and Alas! seeing their king, the lord of Saubha, drop down bereft of
sense! And O son of the Kuru race, regaining his senses, the mighty Salwa
rose and all of a sudden discharged his arrows on Pradyumna. Then the
heroic and mighty armed Pradyumna, sorely pierced by his adversary about
his throat, was enfeebled on his car. And, O mighty king, wounding the
son of Rukmini, Salwa sent up a shout like unto the roar of a lion, and
filling the entire earth with it! And, O Bharata, when my son became
senseless, Salwa, without losing a moment, again discharged at him other
shafts difficult to bear. And pierced with numberless arrows and deprived
of his senses, Pradyumna, O chief of the Kuru race, became motionless on
the field of battle!'"
