SECTION XXV
Vaisampayana said, "Having fallen into distress, those princes thus
obtained at last a pleasant habitation in that forest. And there in those
woods abounding with Sala trees and washed by the Saraswati, they who
were like so many Indras, began to sport themselves. And the illustrious
king, that bull of the Kuru race, set himself to please all the Yatis and
Munis and the principal Brahmanas in that forest, by offerings of
excellent fruits and roots. And their priest, Dhaumya endued with great
energy, like unto a father to those princes, began to perform the
sacrificial rites of Ishti and Paitreya for the Pandavas residing in that
great forest. And there came, as a guest, unto the abode of the
accomplished Pandavas living in the wood after loss of their kingdom, the
old Rishi Markandeya, possessed of intense and abundant energy. And that
bull of the Kuru race, the high-souled Yudhishthira, possessed of
unrivalled strength and prowess, paid his homage unto that great Muni,
reverenced by celestials and Rishis of men, and possessed of the
splendour of blazing fire. And that illustrious and all-knowing Muni, of
unrivalled energy, beholding Draupadi and Yudhishthira and Bhima and
Arjuna, in the midst of the ascetics, smiled, recollecting Rama in his
mind. And Yudhishthira the just, apparently grieved at this, asked him,
saying, 'All these ascetics are sorry for seeing me here. Why is it that
thou alone smilest, as if an glee, in the presence of these?' Markandeya
replied, 'O child', I too am sorry and do not smile in glee! Nor doth
pride born of joy possess my heart! Beholding to-day the calamity, I
recollect Rama, the son of Dasaratha, devoted to truth! Even that Rama,
accompanied by Lakshman, dwelt in the woods at the command of his father.
O son of Pritha, I beheld him in days of old ranging with his bow on the
top of the Rishyamuka hills! The illustrious Rama was like unto Indra,
the lord of Yama himself, and the slayer of Namuchi! Yet that sinless one
had to dwell in the forest at the command of his father, accepting it as
his duty. The illustrious Rama was equal unto Sakra in prowess, and
invincible in battle. And yet he had to range the forest renouncing all
pleasures! Therefore should no one act unrighteously, saying,--I am
mighty! Kings Nabhaga and Bhagiratha and others, having subjugated by
truth this world bounded by the seas, (finally) obtained, O child, all
the region hereafter. Therefore, should no one act unrighteously,
saying,--I am mighty! And, O exalted of men, the virtuous and truthful
king of Kasi and Karusha was called a mad dog for having renounced his
territories and riches! Therefore, should no one act unrighteously,
saying,--I am mighty! O best of men, O son of Pritha, the seven righteous
Rishis, for having observed the ordinance prescribed by the Creator
himself in the Vedas, blaze in the firmament. Therefore, should no one
act unrighteously, saying,--I am mighty! Behold, O king, the mighty
elephants, huge as mountain cliffs and furnished with tusks, transgress
not, O exalted of men, the laws of the Creator! Therefore, should none
act unrighteously saying, Might is mine! And, O foremost of monarchs,
behold all the creatures acting according to their species, as ordained
by the Creator. Therefore, should none act unrighteously, saying, Might
is mine. O son of Pritha, in truth, and virtue, and proper behaviour, and
modesty, thou hast surpassed all creatures, and thy fame and energy are
as bright as fire or the Sun! Firm in thy promises, O illustrious one,
having passed in the woods thy painful exile, thou wilt again, O king,
snatch from the Kauravas thy blazing prosperity with the help of thy own
energy!'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Having spoken these words unto Yudhishthira
(seated) in the midst of the ascetics with friends, the great Rishi
having also saluted Dhaumya and all the Pandavas set out in a northerly
direction!"
