SECTION LVIII
"Vrihadaswa said, 'When the blazing guardians of the worlds were
returning after the daughter of Bhima had chosen Naishadha, on their way
they met Dwapara with Kali approaching towards them. And seeing Kali,
Sakra the slayer of Vala and Vritra, said, 'O Kali, say whither thou art
going with Dwapara.' And thereupon Kali replied unto Sakra, 'Going to
Damayanti's Swayamvara, will I obtain her (for my wife), as my heart is
fixed upon that damsel.' Hearing this, Indra said with a smile, 'That
Swayamvara is already ended. In our sight she hath chosen Nala for her
husband.' Thus answered by Sakra, Kali, that vilest of the celestials,
filled with wrath, addressing all those gods spake, 'Since in the
presence of the celestials she hath chosen a mortal for her lord, it is
meet that she should undergo a heavy doom.' Upon hearing these words of
Kali, the celestials answered, 'It is with our sanction that Damayanti
hath chosen Nala. What damsel is there that would not choose king Nala
endued with every virtue? Well-versed in all duties, always conducting
himself with rectitude, he hath studied the four Vedas together with the
Puranas that are regarded as the fifth. Leading a life of harmlessness
unto all creatures, he is truth-telling and firm in his vows, and in his
house the gods are ever gratified by sacrifices held according to the
ordinance. In that tiger among men--that king resembling a Lokapala, is
truth, and forbearance, and knowledge, and asceticism, and purity and
self-control, and perfect tranquillity of soul. O Kali, the fool that
wisheth to curse Nala bearing such a character, curseth himself, and
destroyeth himself by his own act. And, O Kali, he that seeketh to curse
Nala crowned with such virtues, sinketh into the wide bottomless pit of
hell rife with torments.' Having said this to Kali and Dwapara, the gods
went to heaven. And when the gods had gone away, Kali said unto Dwapara,
'I am ill able, O Dwapara, to suppress my anger. I shall possess Nala,
deprive him of his kingdom, and he shall no more sport with Bhima's
daughter. Entering the dice, it behoveth thee to help me.'"
