SECTION LXXXII
"Pulastya said, 'O thou of excellent vows, I have been much gratified
with thy humility, thy self-control, and thy truth, thou blessed one
versed in morality! O sinless one, it is for this virtue of thine which
thou hast acquired from regard to thy ancestors, that I have been
gratified with thee and thou hast, O son, obtained a sight of my person.
O Bhishma. my eyes can penetrate into everything. Tell me what I may do
for thee. O sinless one, O thou foremost of the Kuru race, I will grant
thee whatever thou mayst ask me.'
"Bhishma said, 'O highly blessed one, when thou who art worshipped by the
three worlds hast been gratified with me and when I have obtained a sight
of thy exalted self, I regard myself as already crowned with success.
But, O thou foremost of virtuous persons, if I have deserved thy favour,
I will tell thee my doubts and it behoveth thee to dispel them, O holy
one, I have some religious doubts in respect of tirthas. Speak of those
to me in detail, I desire to hear thee. O thou that resemblest a
celestial himself, what is his merit, O regenerate Rishi, who goeth round
the whole earth (visiting shrines). O tell me this with certainty."
"Pulastya said, 'O son, listen with attention. I will tell thee of the
merit which attacheth to tirthas and which constituth the refuge of the
Rishis. He whose hands and feet and mind and knowledge and asceticism and
acts are under wholesome control, enjoyeth the fruits of tirthas. He who
has ceased to accept gifts, he that is contented, he that is free from
pride enjoys the fruits of tirthas. He that is without sin, he that acts
without purpose, he that eats light, he that has his senses under
control, he that is free from every sin, enjoys the fruits of tirthas. O
king, he that is free from anger, he that adhereth to truth, he that is
firm in vows, he that regardeth all creatures as his own self, enjoyeth
the fruits of tirthas. In the Vedas the Rishis have declared in due order
the sacrifices and also their fruits here and hereafter truly. O lord of
earth, those sacrifices cannot be accomplished by him that is poor, for
those sacrifices require various materials and diverse things in large
measures. These, therefore can be performed by kings or sometimes by
other men of prosperity and wealth. O lord of men, that rite, however,
which men without wealth, without allies, singly, without wife and
children, and destitute of means, are capable of accomplishing and the
merit of which is equal unto the sacred fruits of sacrifices, I will now
declare unto thee, thou best of warriors! O thou best of the Bharata
race, sojourns in tirthas which are meritorious and which constitute one
of the high mysteries of the Rishis, are even superior to sacrifices. He
is a poor man who having gone to a tirtha hath not fasted for three
nights, who hath not given away gold, and who hath not distributed kine.
Indeed, one acquireth not, by the performance of the Agnishtoma and other
sacrifices distinguished by large gifts, that merit which one requireth
by a sojourn to a tirtha. In the world of men, there is that tirtha of
the God of gods, celebrated over the three worlds by the name of
Pushkara. One that sojourneth there becometh equal unto that deity. O
high-souled son of the Kuru race, during the two twilights and mid-day
there is the presence of hundred thousand millions of tirthas in
Pushkara. The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Maruts,
the Gandharvas, and the Apsaras are ever present, O exalted one, in
Pushkara. It was there, O king, that the gods, the Daityas and
Brahmarshis, having performed ascetic devotions there, obtained great
merit and finally attained to god-hood.'"
"Men of self-control, by even thinking mentally of Pushkara, are cleansed
from their sins, and regarded in heaven. O king, the illustrious
grand-sire having the lotus for his seat, had dwelt with great pleasure
in this tirtha. O blessed one, it was in Pushkara that the gods with the
Rishis having acquired of old great merit, finally obtained the highest
success. The person who, devoted to the worship of the gods and the
Pitris, batheth in this tirtha, obtaineth, it hath been said by the wise,
merit that is equal to ten times that of the horse-sacrifice. Having gone
to the Pushkara woods, he that feedeth even one Brahmana, becometh happy
here and hereafter, O Bhishma, for that act. He that supporteth himself
on vegetables and roots and fruits, may with pious regard and without
disrespect, give even such fare to a Brahmana. And, O best of kings, the
man of wisdom, even by such a gift, will acquire the merit of a
horse-sacrifice. Those illustrious persons among Brahmanas or Kshatriyas
or Vaisyas or Sudras that bathe in Pushkara are freed from the obligation
of rebirth. That man in special who visits Pushkara on the full moon of
the month of Karttika, acquireth ever-lasting regions in the abode of
Brahma. He that thinketh with joined hands morning and evening, of the
Pushkara, practically batheth, O Bharata, in every tirtha. Whether a male
or a female, whatever sins one may commit since birth, are all destroyed
as soon as one batheth in Pushkara. As the slayer of Madhu is the
foremost of all the celestials, so is Pushkara, O king, the foremost of
all tirthas. A man by residing with purity and regulated vows for twelve
years in Pushkara, acquireth the merit of all the sacrifices, and goeth
to the abode of Brahma. The merit of one who performeth the Agni-hotra
for full one hundred years, is equal to that of him who resideth for the
single month of Karttika in Pushkara. There are three white hillocks and
three springs known from the remotest times, we do not know why, by the
name of the Pushkara. It is difficult to go to Pushkara; it is difficult
to undergo ascetic austerities at Pushkara; it is difficult to give away
at Pushkara; and it is difficult to live at Pushkara."
"Having dwelt for twelve nights at Pushkara with regulated diet and vows,
and having walked round (the place), one must go to Jamvu-marga. One that
goeth to Jamvu-marga which is resorted to by the celestials, the Rishis,
and the Pitris, acquireth the merit of the horse-sacrifice and the
fruition of all his wishes. The man that resideth there for five nights,
hath his soul cleansed from all sins. He never sinketh into hell, but
acquireth high success. Leaving Jamvu-marga one must go to
Tandulikasrama. He that goeth there never sinketh into hell but ascendeth
to the abode of Brahma. He that goeth to the lake of Agastya and
occupieth himself with the worship of the Pitris and celestials, fasting
for three nights, acquireth, O king, the fruit of the Agnishtoma. Going
thither, he that liveth on vegetables or fruits acquireth the status
called Kaumara. One should next proceed to the beautiful asylum of Kanwa,
which is worshipped by the whole world. That sacred wood characterised by
holiness, existeth, O bull of the Bharata race, from very remote times.
As soon as one entereth it, he is freed from all his sins. He who with
regulated diet and vows worshippeth the Pitris and the gods there,
obtaineth the fruit of a sacrifice that is capable of bestowing the
fruition of all one's desires. Having walked round this asylum one must
then go to the spot where Yayati fell (from heaven). He that goeth
thither, acquireth the merit of a horse-sacrifice. One must then go to
Mahakala with regulated diet and senses subdued. And having bathed in the
tirtha called Koti, one obtaineth the merit of a horse-sacrifice. A
virtuous man should next proceed to the tirtha of Sthanu, the husband of
Uma, known over the three worlds by the name of Bhadravata. That best of
men who goeth to Bhadravata, beholdeth Isana and obtaineth the fruit of a
gift of a thousand kine. And through the grace of Mahadeva, he acquireth
the status of Ganapatya blessed with prosperity and peace and high grace.
Having arrived then at the Narmada, that river celebrated over the three
worlds, and given oblations of water to the Pitris and the gods, one
acquireth the fruit of the horse-sacrifice. He that goeth into the
Southern ocean, practising the Brahmacharya mode of life, and with senses
subdued, acquireth the fruit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice and ascendeth to
heaven. Having arrived at Charmanwati, with regulated diet and senses
subdued, one acquireth, at the command of Rantideva, the merit of the
Agnishtoma sacrifice. One must then go, O virtuous chief of warriors, to
Arvuda, the son of Himavat, where there was a hole through the earth in
days of yore. There is the asylum of Vasistha, celebrated over the three
worlds. Having resided for one night, one obtaineth the merit of the gift
of a thousand kine. He that, leading a Brahmacharya mode of life batheth
in the tirtha called Pinga, obtaineth, O tiger among kings, the merit of
the gift of a hundred Kapila kine. One must next go, O king, to that
excellent tirtha called Prabhasa. There Hutasana is always present in his
own person. He, the friend of Pavana, O hero, is the mouth of all the
gods. The man that with subdued and sanctified soul batheth in that
tirtha, obtaineth merit greater than that of the Agnishtoma or Atiratra
sacrifices. Proceeding next to the spot where the Saraswati mingleth with
the sea, one obtaineth the fruit of the gift of a thousand kine and
heaven also besides, O bull of the Bharata race, blazing forth for all
time like Agni himself. He that with subdued soul batheth in the tirtha
of the king of waters, and giveth oblations of water unto the Pitris and
the gods, living there for three nights, blazeth forth like the Moon, and
obtaineth also the fruit of the horse-sacrifice. One should next proceed,
O best of the Bharata, unto the tirtha known by the name of Varadana,
where (the Rishi) Durvasa had given a boon unto Vishnu. A man by bathing
in Varadana obtaineth the fruit of the gift of a thousand kine. One
should next proceed with subdued senses and regulated diet to Dwaravati,
where by bathing in Pindaraka, one obtaineth the fruit of the gift of
gold in abundance. O blessed one, it is wonderful to relate that in that
tirtha, to this day, coins with the mark of the lotus and lotuses also
with the mark of the trident, are seen. O represser of heroes! And O bull
among men, the presence of Mahadeva is there. Arriving then, O Bharata,
at the spot where the Sindhu mingleth with the sea, one should with
subdued soul bathe in that tirtha of Varuna. And bathing there and giving
oblations of water to the Pitris, the Rishis, and the gods one acquireth,
O bull of the Bharata race, the region of Varuna, and blazeth forth in
effulgence of his own. Men of wisdom say that, by worshipping the god
known by the name of Shankukarneswara, one acquireth ten times the merit
of the horse-sacrifice. O bull of the Bharata race, having walked round
that tirtha, one should, O thou foremost of the Kurus, go to that tirtha
celebrated over the three worlds and known by the name of Drimi. That
tirtha cleanseth from every sin, and it is there that the gods including
Brahma worship Maheswara. Having bathed there and worshipped Rudra
surrounded by the other gods, one is freed from all sins since birth. It
was there, O best of men, that Drimi was adored by all the gods. Bathing
there, O best of men, one obtaineth the fruit of the horse-sacrifice. O
thou of great intelligence, Vishnu the creator of the universe, after
slaying the Daityas and Danavas, went thither to purify himself. O
virtuous one, one should next proceed to Vasudhara adored by all. The
moment one arrives at that tirtha, one acquireth the fruit of the
horse-sacrifice. And, O thou best of the Kurus, by bathing there with
subdued soul and rapt attention, and giving oblations of water unto the
gods and the Pitris one ascendeth unto the region of Vishnu and is adored
there. In that tirtha, O bull of the Bharata race, there is a sacred lake
of the Vasus. By bathing there and drinking of its water, one becometh
regarded of the Vasus. There is a celebrated tirtha of the name of
Sindhuttama, which destroyeth every sin. O best of men, by bathing there,
one acquireth the fruit of the gift of gold in abundance. By arriving at
Bhadratunga with sanctified soul and purity of conduct, one acquireth the
region of Brahma and a high state of blessedness. There is then the
tirtha of the Kumarikas of Indra, that is much resorted to by the
Siddhas. O best of men, by bathing there, one obtaineth the region of
Indra. In Kumarika there is another tirtha called Renuka, which is also
resorted to by the Siddhas. A Brahmana by bathing there would become as
bright as the Moon. Proceeding next to the tirtha called the Panchananda,
with subdued sense and regulated diet, one obtaineth the fruit of the
five sacrifices that have been mentioned one after another in the
scriptures. Then, O king, one should go to the excellent region of Bhima.
O best of the Bharatas by bathing in the tirtha there, that is called
Yoni, a man (in his next birth) becometh, O king, the son of a goddess,
bearing ear-rings decked with pearls, and obtaineth also the merit of the
gift of a hundred thousand kine. Proceeding next to Srikunda, celebrated
over the three worlds and worshipping the grandsire, one obtaineth the
fruit of the gift of a thousand kine. O virtuous one, one should then go
to the excellent tirtha called Vimala, where to this day may be seen
fishes of golden and silver hues. By bathing there, one soon acquireth
the region of Vasava, and his soul being cleansed from every sin, he
attaineth to a high state of blessedness. Proceeding next to Vitasta and
giving oblations of water unto the Pitris and the gods, a man, O Bharata,
obtaineth the fruit of the Vajapeya sacrifice. That sin-destroying tirtha
known by the name of Vitasta, is situate in the country of the Kasmiras
and is the abode of the Naga Takshaka. Bathing there, a man certainly
obtaineth the fruit of the Vajapeya sacrifice, and his soul cleansed from
every sin, he attaineth to a high state of blessedness. One should next
proceed to Vadava celebrated over the three worlds. Bathing there with
due rites in the evening, one should offer rice boiled in butter and
milk, according to the best of his might, unto the deity of seven flames.
Men of wisdom say that a gift made here in honour of the Pitris, becometh
inexhaustible. The Rishis, the Pitris, the gods, the Gandharvas, several
tribes of Apsaras, the Guhyakas, the Kinnaras, the Yakshas, the Siddhas,
the Vidhyadharas, the Rakshasas, Daityas, Rudras, and Brahma himself, O
king, having with subdued senses, accepted a course of austerities for a
thousand years in order to move Vishnu to grace, cooked rice in milk and
butter and gratified Kesava with oblations, each offered with seven Riks.
And, O king, the gratified Kesava thereupon conferred on them the
eight-fold attributes called Aiswarya and other objects that they
desired. And having bestowed upon them these, that god disappeared in
their sight like lightning in the clouds. And it is for this, O Bharata,
that that tirtha became known by the name of Saptacharu, and if one
offereth Charu there to the seven flamed deity, he obtaineth merit
superior to that of the gift of a hundred thousand kine, to that of a
hundred Rajasuya sacrifices, as also of a hundred horse-sacrifices.
Leaving Vadava, O king, one should then proceed to Raudrapada, and
beholding Mahadeva there one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice.
Proceeding then, with subdued soul and leading a Brahmacharya mode of
life, to Manimat, and residing there for one night, one acquireth, O
king, the merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. One should then go, O king,
to Devika celebrated over the whole world. It was there, O bull of
Bharata race, that, as heard by us, the Brahmanas first sprang into
existence. There also is the region of the holder of the trident--a
region that is celebrated over the world. Having bathed in Devika and
worshipped Maheswara by offering him, to the best of one's might, rice
boiled in milk and butter, a man obtaineth, O bull of the Bharata race,
the merit of a sacrifice that is capable of filling every desire. There
also is another tirtha of Rudra called Kamakhya, which is much resorted
to by the gods. Bathing there, a man speedily obtaineth success. By
touching also the water of Yajana. Brahmavaluka, and Pushpamva, one
becometh free from sorrow in after life. The learned have said that the
sacred tirtha of Devika, the resort of the gods and the Rishis, is five
Yojanas in length and half a Yojana in breadth. One should then, in due
order, proceed, O king, to Dirghasatra. There the gods with Brahma at
their head, the Siddhas, and the greatest Rishis, with regulated vows and
the recitation and acceptance of the preliminary pledge, perform the
long-extending sacrifice. O king, by going only to Dirghasatra, O
represser of foes, one obtaineth merit that is superior, O Bharata, to
that of the Rajasuya or the horse-sacrifice. One should next proceed with
subdued senses and regulated diet to Vinasana, where Saraswati
disappearing on the breast of Meru, re-appeareth at Chamasa, Shivodbheda
and Nagadbheda. Bathing in Chamasadbheda, one obtaineth the merit of the
Agnishtoma sacrifice. Bathing in Shivodbheda, one acquireth the merit of
the gift of a thousand kine. And bathing in Nagodbheda, one obtaineth the
region of the Nagas. One should proceed, next, to the inaccessible tirtha
of Shasayana, where the cranes, O Bharata, disappearing in the form of
sasas, re-appear every year in the month of Karttika, and bathe, O
blessed chief of the Bharata race, in the Sarsawati. Bathing there, O
tiger among men, one blazeth forth like the Moon, and obtaineth, O bull
of the Bharata race, the merit of the gift of a thousand kine. One should
next proceed, O thou of the Kuru race, to Kumarakoti, with subdued
senses, and bathing there, worship the gods and the Puris. By doing this,
one obtaineth the merit of the gift of ten thousand kine, and raiseth all
his ancestors to higher regions. One should next, O virtuous one, proceed
with subdued soul to Rudrakoti, where in olden days, O king, ten millions
of Munis had assembled. And, O king, filled with great joy at the
prospect of beholding Mahadeva, the Rishis assembled there, each saying,
'I will first behold the god! I will first behold the god!' And, O king,
in order to prevent disputes amongst those Rishis of subdued souls, the
Lord of Yoga, by the help of his Yoga power, multiplied himself into ten
million forms, and stood before every one of them. And every one of these
Rishis said, 'I have seen him first!' And gratified, O king, with the
deep devotion of those Munis of subdued souls, Mahadeva granted them a
boon, saying, 'From this day your righteousness shall grow!' And, O tiger
among men, one that bathes, with a pure mind, in Rudrakoti obtaineth the
merit of the horse-sacrifice and delivereth his ancestors. One should
next proceed, O king, to that highly sacred and celebrated region where
the Saraswati mingles with the sea. Thither, O king, the gods with Brahma
at their head and Rishis with wealth of asceticism repair for adoring
Kesava on the fourteenth day of the lighted fortnight of the month of
Chaitra. Bathing there, O tiger among men, one obtaineth the merit of
giving away gold in abundance, and his soul being cleansed from every
sin, he ascendeth to the region of Brahma. It is there, O king, that the
Rishis have completed many a sacrifice. By a trip to that spot one
obtaineth the merit of the gifts of a thousand kine.'"
