SECTION LXXXIV
"Pulastya said, 'Then, O great king, one should proceed to the excellent
tirtha of Dharma, where the illustrious god of justice had practised
highly meritorious austerities. And it is for this that he made the spot
a sacred tirtha and rendered it celebrated by his own name. Bathing
there, O king, a virtuous man with concentrated soul certainly
sanctifieth his family to the seventh generation. One should then repair,
O king, to the excellent Jnanapavana. Sojourning thither, one obtaineth
the merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice, and goeth to the region of the
Munis. Then, O monarch, a man should repair to the Saugandhika-vana.
There dwell the celestials with Brahma at their head, Rishis endued with
wealth of asceticism, the Siddhas, the Charanas, the Gandharvas, the
Kinnaras and the serpents. As soon as one entereth these woods, he is
cleansed of all his sins. Then, O king, should one repair to the sacred
goddess Saraswati, known there as the goddess Plaksha, that best of
streams and foremost of rivers. There should one bathe in the water
issuing from an ant-hill. (Bathing there and) worshipping the Pitris and
the gods, one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice. There existeth
a rare tirtha called Isanadhyushita, lying from the ant-hill at the
distance of six throws of a heavy stick. As seen in the Puranas, O tiger
among men, bathing there a man obtaineth the merit of giving away a
thousand Kapila kine and of the horse-sacrifice. Journeying next, O
foremost of men, to Sugandha, and Satakumbha and Panchayaksha, a man
becometh adored in heaven. Repairing to another tirtha there called
Trisulakhata, one should bathe and set himself to worship the Pitris and
the gods. Doing so, without doubt, one obtaineth, after death, the status
of Ganapatya. One should next proceed, O king, to the excellent spot of
the Goddess celebrated over the three worlds by the name of Sakamvari.
There, for the space of a thousand celestial years, she of excellent
vows, month after month, had subsisted upon herbs, O king of men! And
attracted by their reverence for the Goddess, many Rishis with wealth of
asceticism, came thither, O Bharata. and were entertained by her with
herbs. And it is for this that they bestowed on her the name of
Sakamvari. O Bharata, the man who arriveth at Sakamvari, with rapt
attention and leading a Brahmacharya mode of life and passeth three
nights there in purity and subsisting on herbs alone, obtaineth, at the
will of the goddess, the merit of him that liveth upon herbs for twelve
years. Then should one proceed to the tirtha called Suvarna, famed
through the three worlds. There in days of old, Vishnu had paid his
adorations to Rudra, for his grace, and obtaineth also many boons
difficult of acquisition even by the gods. And, O Bharata, the gratified
destroyer of Tripura said, 'O Krishna, thou shalt, without doubt, be much
beloved in the world, and the foremost of everything in the universe.'
Repairing thither, O king, and worshipping the deity having the bull for
his mark, one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice as also the
status of Ganapatya. One should next proceed to the tirtha of Dhumavati.
Fasting there for three nights, one obtaineth, without doubt, all the
wishes cherished by him. To the southern half of this spot of the
Goddess, there is, O king, a tirtha called Rathavarta. One should, O
virtuous one, go up to that place, with devout heart, and having his
senses under control. By this, through the grace of Mahadeva, one
attaineth to an exalted state. After walking round the place, one should,
O bull of the Bharata race, proceed to the tirtha named Dhara, which, O
thou of great wisdom, washeth off all sins. Bathing there, O tiger among
men, a man is freed from every sorrow. One should then repair, O virtuous
one, after bowing to the great mountain (Himavat), to the source of the
Ganges, which is, without doubt, like the gate of heaven. There should
one, with concentrated soul, bathe in the tirtha called Koti. By this,
one obtaineth the merit of the Pundarika sacrifice, and delivereth his
race. Residing one night there, one acquireth the merit of giving away a
thousand kine. By offering oblations of water duly to the gods and the
Pitris, at Saptaganga, Triganga and Sakravarta, (which are all there),
becometh adored in the regions of the virtuous. Bathing next at
Kanakhala, and fasting there for three nights, a person reapeth the merit
of the horse-sacrifice and goeth to heaven. Then O lord of men, the
pilgrim should repair to Kapilavata. Fasting for one night there, he
obtaineth the merit of giving away a thousand kine. O king, there is a
tirtha of the illustrious Kapila, king of the Nagas, that is celebrated,
O thou best of Kurus, over all the worlds. Bathing there at the
Nagatirtha one obtaineth, O king, the merit of giving away a thousand
Kapila kine. One should next repair to the excellent tirtha of Santanu,
called Lalitika. Bathing there, O king, one never sinketh into distress
(hereafter). The man that bathes at the confluence of the Ganga and the
Yamuna, obtains the merit of ten horse-sacrifices, and also rescues his
race. One should next, O king, go to Sugandha, celebrated over the world.
By this, cleansed of every sin, he becometh adored in the abode of
Brahma. Then, O lord of men, the pilgrim should repair to Rudravarta.
Bathing there, one ascendeth to heaven. Bathing at the confluence of the
Ganga and the Saraswati, a person obtaineth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice and also ascendeth to heaven. Proceeding next to
Bhadrakarneswara and worshipping the gods duly, one, without sinking into
distress, becometh adored in heaven. Then, O lord of men, the pilgrim
should proceed to the tirtha called Kuvjamraka. By this he obtaineth the
merit of giving away a thousand kine, and heaven also. Then, O king, the
pilgrim should go to the Arundhativata. Proceeding thither with
concentrated soul and practising the Brahmacharya vows, one that batheth
in Samudraka and fasteth for three nights, obtaineth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice and of giving away a thousand kine, and also rescueth his
race. One should next proceed to Brahmavarta, with concentrated soul and
practising the Brahmacharya vows. By this, one obtaineth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice, and goeth to the region of Soma. The man that proceedeth
to the Yamuna-prabhava, (the source of the Yamuna) and batheth there,
obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice and is worshipped in heaven.
Arriving at Darvisankramana, that tirtha which is worshipped of the three
worlds, a person obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice and goeth to
heaven. Repairing next to Sindhu-prabhava (the source of the Indus) which
is worshipped by Siddhas and Gandharvas, and staying there for five
nights, one obtaineth the merit of giving away gold in abundance.
Proceeding next to the inaccessible tirtha called Vedi, one obtaineth the
merit of the horse-sacrifice and ascendeth to heaven. Then, O Bharata,
should one proceed to Rishikulya and Vasishtha. By visiting the latter,
all orders attain to Brahmanhood. Repairing to Rishikulya and bathing
there, and living a month upon herbs, and worshipping the gods and
Pitris, one is cleansed of all his sins, and obtaineth the region of the
Rishis. Proceeding next to Bhrigutunga a person acquireth the merit of
the horse-sacrifice. Repairing then to Vipramoksha, one is freed from
every sin. Proceeding then to the tirtha of Krittika and Magha, one, O
Bharata, obtaineth the merit superior to that of the Agnishtoma and
Atiratha sacrifices. The man who, repairing to the excellent tirtha
called Vidya, batheth there in the evening, obtaineth proficiency in
every kind of knowledge. One should next reside for one night at
Mahasrama capable of destroying every sin, taking a single meal. By this,
one obtains many auspicious regions, and delivers ten preceding and ten
succeeding generations of his race. Dwelling next for a month of
Mahalaya, and fasting there for three nights, one's soul is cleansed of
all sins and one acquires the merit of giving away gold in abundance.
Proceeding next to Vetasika worshipped by the Grandsire, one obtaineth
the merit of the horse-sacrifice and the state of Usanas. Going next to
the tirtha called Sundarika, worshipped by the Siddhas, one obtaineth
personal beauty as witnessed by the ancients. Proceeding next to Brahmani
with subdued senses and observing the Brahmacharya vow, a person
ascendeth to the region of Brahma on a lotus-hued car. One should repair
next to the sacred Naimisha, worshipped by the Siddhas. There dwelleth
for aye Brahma with the gods. By only purposing to go to Naimisha, half
one's sins are destroyed; by entering it, one is cleansed of all his
sins. The pilgrim of subdued senses should stay at Naimisha for a month;
for, O Bharata, all the tirthas of the earth are at Naimisha. Bathing
there, with restrained senses and regulated fare, one obtains, O Bharata,
the merit of the cow-sacrifice, and also sanctifies, O best of the
Bharatas, his race for seven generations both upwards and downwards. He
who renounceth his life at Naimisha by fasting, enjoyeth happiness in the
heavenly regions. Even this is the opinion of the wise. O foremost of
kings, Naimisha is ever sacred and holy. Proceeding next to Gangodbheda
and fasting there for three nights, a man obtaineth the merit of the
Vajapeya sacrifice, and becometh like unto Brahma himself. Journeying to
the Saraswati, one should offer oblations unto the gods and the Pitris.
By this, one certainly enjoyeth bliss in the regions called Saraswata.
Then should one wend to Vahuda, with subdued soul and observing the
Brahmacharya vow. Residing there for one night, one becometh adored in
heaven, and obtaineth also, O Kaurava, the merit of the Devasatra
sacrifice. Then should one repair to the holy Kshiravati, frequented by
holier men. By worshipping the gods and the Pitris there, one obtains the
merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice. Proceeding next to Vimalasoka, with
subdued soul and observing the Brahmacharya vow, and residing there for
one night, one is adored in heaven. One should next proceed to the
excellent Gopratra in the Sarayu, whence Rama, O king, with all his
attendants and animals, renouncing his body, ascended to heaven in
consequence of the efficacy of the tirtha alone. Bathing in that tirtha,
O Bharata, one's soul, through Rama's grace, and by virtue of his own
deeds, being cleansed of all sins, one becometh adored in heaven. O
Bharata! Proceeding next, O son of the Kuru race, to the Rama-tirtha on
the Gomati, and bathing there, one obtaineth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice, and sanctifieth also his own race. There, O bull of the
Bharata race, is another tirtha called Satasahasrika. Bathing there, with
restrained senses and regulated diet, a person reapeth, O bull of Bharata
race, the merit of giving away a thousand kine. Then should one, O king,
go to the unrivalled tirtha called Bhartristhana. By this, a person
obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice. Bathing next in the tirtha
called Koti, and worshipping Kartikeya, a man reapeth, O king, the merit
of giving away a thousand kine, and acquireth great energy. Proceeding
next to Varanasi, and worshipping the god having the bull for his mark,
after a bath in the Kapilahrada, one obtaineth the merit of the Rajasuya
sacrifice. Repairing then, O perpetuator of the Kuru race, to the tirtha
called Avimukta, and beholding there the god of gods, the pilgrim, from
such sight alone, is immediately cleansed of even the sin of slaying a
Brahmana. By renouncing one's life there, one obtaineth deliverance.
Arriving next, O king, at the rare tirtha called Markandeya celebrated
over the world and situated at the confluence of the Ganges, a person
obtaineth the merit of Agnishtoma sacrifice, and delivereth his race.
Sojourning next to Gaya, with subdued senses and observing the
Brahmacharya vow, one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice and also
rescueth his race. There in that tirtha is the Akshaya-vata, celebrated
over the three worlds. Whatever is offered there to the Pitris is said to
become inexhaustible. Bathing there at the Mahanadi, and offering
oblations to the gods and the Pitris, a man acquireth eternal regions,
and also rescueth his race. Proceeding then to Brahma-sara that is
adorned by the woods of Dharma, and passing one night there, a man
attaineth to the region of Brahma. In that lake, Brahma had raised a
sacrificial pillar. By walking round this pillar, a person acquireth the
merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice. One should next, O mighty monarch, go to
Denuka celebrated over the world. Staying there for one night and giving
away sesame and kine, one's soul being cleansed from every sin, one
ascendeth, without doubt to the region of Soma. There, O king, on the
mountains, the cow called Kapila used to range with her calf. There is
little doubt, of this, O Bharata, the hoof-marks, of that cow and her
calf are seen there to this day. By bathing in those hoof-prints, O
foremost of monarchs, whatever sin a man may have incurred is, O Bharata,
washed away. Then should one go to Gridhravata, the spot consecrated to
the trident-bearing god. Approaching the deity having the bull for his
mark one should rub himself with ashes. If a Brahmana, he obtains the
merit of observing the twelve year's vow and if belonging to any of the
other orders, he is freed from all his sins. One should next proceed to
the Udyanta mountains, resounding with melodious notes. There, O bull of
the Bharata race, is still seen the foot-print of Savitri. The Brahmana
of rigid vows, who sayeth his morning, noon and evening prayers there,
obtaineth the merit of performing that service for twelve years. There, O
bull of the Bharata race, is the famous Yonidwara. Repairing thither, a
person becometh exempted from the pain of rebirth. The person that
stayeth at Gaya during both the dark and lighted fortnights, certainly
sanctifieth, O king, his own race up and down to the seventh generation.
One should wish for many sons so that even one may go to Gaya, or
celebrate the horse-sacrifice, or offer a nila bull. Then, O king, the
pilgrim should proceed to Phalgu. By this, he obtains the merit of
horse-sacrifice, and acquires great success. O king, one should repair
then, with subdued soul, to Dharmaprishta. There, O foremost of warriors,
dwelleth Dharma for aye. Drinking of the water of a well which is there,
and purifying one's self by a bath, he that offereth oblations to the
gods and the Pitris is cleansed of all his sins and ascendeth to heaven.
There in that tirtha is the hermitage of the great Rishi Matanga of soul
under complete control. By entering that beautiful asylum capable of
soothing fatigue and sorrow, one earneth the merit of the Gavayana
sacrifice, and by touching (the image of) Dharma which is there, one
obtaineth the fruit of the horse-sacrifice. One should next go, O king,
to the excellent tirtha called Brahmasthana. Approaching Brahma, that
bull among male beings, who is there, one acquireth, O mighty monarch,
the merit of the Rajasuya and horse-sacrifices. The pilgrim should then
repair to Rajasuya, O king of men! Bathing there, one liveth (in heaven)
as happily as (the Rishi) Kakshiyan. After purifying himself, one should
partake there of the offerings daily made unto the Yakshini. By this, one
is freed from the sin of even slaying a Brahmana, through the Yakshini's
grace. Proceeding next to Maninaga, one obtains the merit of giving away
a thousand kine. O Bharata, he that eateth anything relating to the
tirtha of Maninaga, if bitten by a venomous snake, doth not succumb to
its poison. Residing there for one night, one is cleansed of one's sins.
Then should one proceed to the favourite wood of the Brahmarshi Gautama.
There bathing in the lake of Ahalya, one attaineth to an exalted state.
Beholding next the image of Sree, one acquireth great prosperity. There
in that tirtha is a well celebrated over the three worlds. Bathing in it,
one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice. There also existeth a
well sacred to the royal Rishi Janaka, which is worshipped by the gods.
Bathing in the well, one ascendeth to the region of Vishnu. Then should
one repair to Vinasana that destroys every sin. By a sojourn thither, one
obtaineth the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice, and goeth also to the
region of Soma. Proceeding next to Gandaki which is produced by the
waters of every tirtha, a person acquireth the merit of the Vajapeya
sacrifice, and ascendeth also to the solar region. Proceeding next to the
Visala, that river celebrated over the three worlds, one obtaineth the
merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice and ascendeth also to heaven. Repairing
then, O virtuous one, to the woody seat of ascetics that is called
Adhivanga, one obtains, without doubt, great happiness amongst the
Guhyakas. Proceeding next to the river Kampana, visited by the Siddhas,
one obtaineth the merit of the Pundarika sacrifice, and ascendeth also to
heaven. Arriving then, O lord of earth, at the stream called Maheswari,
one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice and also rescueth his own
race. Repairing next to the tank of the celestials, one earneth immunity
from misfortune, and also the merit of the horse-sacrifice. One should
next go to Somapada, with subdued soul and leading a Brahmacharya mode of
life. Bathing in Maheswarapada that is there, one reapeth the merit of
the horse-sacrifice. There in that tirtha, O bull of the Bharata race, it
is well known that ten millions of tirthas exist together. A wicked Asura
in the shape of a tortoise had, O foremost of monarchs, been carrying it
away when the powerful Vishnu recovered it from him. There in that tirtha
should one perform his ablutions, for by this he acquireth the merit of
the Pundarika sacrifice and ascendeth also to the region of Vishnu. Then,
O best of kings, should one proceed to the place of Narayana, where, O
Bharata, Narayana is ever present and dwelleth for aye. There the gods
with Brahma at their head, Rishis endued with wealth of asceticism, the
Adityas, the Vasus, and the Rudras, all adore Janardana, in that tirtha,
and Vishnu of wonderful deeds hath become known as Salagrama. Approaching
the eternal Vishnu, that lord of the three worlds, that giver of boons,
one obtaineth the merit of the horse-sacrifice, and goeth to the region
of Vishnu. There in that place, O virtuous one, is a well, capable of
destroying every sin. The four seas are ever present in that well. He
that bathes in it, O king, will have immunity from misfortune. Beholding
(the image of) the boon-giving, eternal, and fierce Mahadeva who is
there, one shineth, O king, like the moon emerged from the cloud. Bathing
then in Jatismara, with pure mind and subdued senses, one acquireth,
without doubt, the recollections of his former life. Proceeding then to
Maheswarapura, and worshipping the god having the bull for his mark,
fasting the while, one obtaineth, without doubt, the fruition of all his
desires. Repairing then to Vamana that destroys every sin, and beholding
the god Hari, one acquireth exemption from every misfortune. One should
next go to the asylum of Kusika that is capable of removing every sin.
Repairing then to the river Kausika that cleanseth from even great sins,
one should bathe in it. By this one obtaineth the merit of Rajasuya
sacrifice. One should next, O foremost of kings, proceed to the excellent
woods of Champaka. By spending there one night, one acquireth the merit
of giving away a thousand kine. Arriving next at Jyeshthila, that tirtha
of rare worth, and passing one night there, one reapeth the fruit of the
gift of a thousand kine. Beholding there (the image of) Visweswara of
great splendour, with his consort the goddess, a person obtaineth, O bull
among men, the region of Mitra-Varuna. By fasting there for three nights,
a man acquireth the merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. By visiting
Kanya-samvedya, with senses restrained and regulated fare, one acquireth,
O bull among men, the region of Manu, the lord of creation. Rishis of
rigid vows have said that he that giveth away rice or maketh any gift at
the tirtha called Kanya, rendereth such gift eternal. Arriving next at
Nischira celebrated over the three worlds, one obtaineth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice and goeth to the legion of Vishnu. O king, those that
give away at the confluence of the Nischira, ascend to the blessed region
of Brahma. There in that tirtha is the asylum of Vasishtha that is known
over the three worlds. Bathing there, one obtaineth the merit of the
Vajapeya sacrifice. Proceeding next to Devakuta that is resorted to by
celestial Rishis, one acquireth the merit of the horse-sacrifice, and
also delivereth his race. Then should one, O king, go to the lake of the
Muni Kausika, where Kusika's son, Viswamitra, obtained high success.
Bathing there, a person acquireth the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice.
There, O hero, at Kausika, should one reside for a month, O bull of the
Bharata race! By a month's residence there, one reapeth the merit of the
horse-sacrifice. He that resideth at the best of tirthas called
Maha-hrada, enjoys immunity from misfortune, and also obtains the merit
of giving away gold in abundance. Beholding next Kartikeya who dwelleth
at Virasrama, a man certainly reapeth the fruit of the horse-sacrifice.
Proceeding then to Agnidhara celebrated over the three worlds, and
beholding there after a bath the eternal and boon-giving Vishnu, that god
of gods, one obtaineth the merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. Proceeding
next to the Grandsire's tank near the snowcapped of mountains, and
bathing in it, a man obtains the merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice.
Falling from the Grandsire's tank, is that world-sanctifying (stream),
celebrated over the three worlds, called Kumara-Dhara. Bathing there, one
regardeth himself as having all his purposes fulfilled. Fasting in that
tirtha for three days, one is even cleansed from the sin of slaying a
Brahmana. The pilgrim should next, O virtuous one, proceed to the peak of
the great goddess Gauri, famed over the three worlds. Ascending it, O
best of men, one should approach Stana-Kunda. By touching the waters of
Stana-Kunda, a person obtaineth the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice.
Bathing in that tirtha and worshipping the gods and Pitris, one acquireth
the merit of the horse-sacrifice and also ascendeth to the region of
Indra. Arriving next at the well of Tamraruna, that is frequented by the
gods, one acquireth, O lord of men, the merit that attaches to human
sacrifice. Bathing next at the confluence of the Kirtika with the Kausiki
and the Aruna, and fasting there for three nights a man of learning is
cleansed of all his sins. Proceeding next to the tirtha called Urvasi,
and then to Somasrama, a wise man by bathing next at Kumbhakarnasrama
becometh adored in the world. The ancients knew that by touching the
waters of Kokamukha, with steady vows and leading Brahmacharya mode of
life, the memory of one's former life is revived. Arriving next with
speed to the river called Nanda a regenerate one becometh freed from all
his sins and ascendeth with soul under control to Indra's region.
Proceeding next to the island called Rishabha, that is destructive of
cranes, and bathing in the Saraswati, an individual blazeth forth in
heaven. Proceeding next to the tirtha called Auddalaka frequented by
Munis, and bathing there one is cleansed of all his sins. Repairing next
to the sacred tirtha called Dharma that is visited by Brahmarshis, one
acquireth the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice and becometh respected in
heaven. Proceeding next to Champa and bathing in the Bhagirathi he that
sojourneth to Dandaparna, acquireth the merit of giving away a thousand
kine. Then should one proceed to the sacred Lalitika that is graced by
the presence of the virtuous. By this one acquireth the merit of the
Rajasuya sacrifice and is regarded in heaven."
