SECTION XCII
"Lomasa continued, 'Listen now, O Yudhishthira, to what Dhananjaya hath
said: 'Cause my brother Yudhishthira to attend to the practice of virtue
which leadeth to prosperity. Endued with wealth of asceticism, thou art
conversant with the highest morality, with ascetic austerities of every
kind, with the eternal duties of kings blessed with prosperity, and the
high and sanctifying merit that men obtain from tirthas. Persuade thou
the sons of Pandu to acquire the merit attaching to tirthas. Do thou with
thy whole soul persuade the king to visit the tirthas and give away
kine.' This is what Arjuna said unto me. Indeed he also said, 'Let him
visit all the tirthas protected by thee. Thou wilt also protect him from
Rakshasas, and watch over him in inaccessible regions and rugged mountain
breasts. And as Dadhichi had protected Indra, and Angiras had protected
the Sun, so do thou, O best of regenerate ones, protect the sons of Kunti
from Rakshasas. Along the way are many Rakshasas, huge as
mountain-cliffs. But protected by thee these will not be able to approach
the sons of Kunti. Obedient to the words of Indra and at the request of
Arjuna also protecting thee from dangers, I shall wander with thee.
Before this, O son of the Kuru race, I have twice visited the tirthas.
With thee I shall repair to them for the third time. O Yudhishthira, Manu
and other royal Rishis of meritorious deeds had undertaken journeys to
tirthas. Indeed, a trip to them is capable of dispelling all fear, O
king! They that are crooked-minded, they that have not their souls under
control, they that are illiterate and perverse, do not, O Kauravya, bathe
in tirthas. But thou art ever of a virtuous disposition and conversant
with morality and firm in thy promises. Thou wilt surely be able to free
thyself from the world. For, O son of Pandu, thou art even as king
Bhagiratha, or Gaya, or Yayati, or any one, O son of Kunti, that is like
them.'
"Yudhishthira answered, 'I am so overwhelmed with delight, O Brahmana,
that I cannot find words to answer thee. Who can be more fortunate than
he who is remembered even by the lord of the celestials? Who can be more
fortunate than he who hath been favoured with thy company, who hath
Dhananjaya for a brother, and who is thought of by Vasava himself? As to
thy words, O illustrious one, in respect of a trip to the tirthas, my
mind had already been made up at the words of Dhaumya. O Brahmana, I
shall start, at whatever hour thou mayst be pleased to appoint, on the
proposed journey to tirthas. Even this is my firm resolve!'
Vaisampayana continued, "Lomasa then said unto Yudhishthira, who had made
up his mind to start on the proposed journey, 'O mighty king, be thou
light as regards thy retinue, for by this thou wilt be able to go more
easily!'
"Yudhishthira then said, 'Let those mendicants and Brahmanas and Yogis
that are incapable of bearing hunger and thirst, the fatigues of travel
and toil, and the severity of winter, desist. Let those Brahmanas also
desist that live on sweetmeats, and they also that desire cooked viands
and food that is sucked or drunk as well as meat. And let those also
remain behind that are dependent on cooks. Let those citizens that have
followed me from motives of loyalty, and whom I have hitherto kept on
proper stipends, repair to king Dhritarashtra. He will give them their
allowances in due time. If, however, that king refuses to grant them
proper allowances, the king of the Panchalas will, for our satisfaction
and welfare, give them these.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "And thereupon oppressed with grief, the citizens
and the principal Brahmanas and Yatis set out for Hastinapura. And out of
affection for Yudhishthira the just, the royal son of Amvika received
them properly, and gratified them with proper allowances. And the royal
son of Kunti, with only a small number of Brahmanas, abode for three
nights at Kamyaka, cheered by Lomasa."
