SECTION LXXXVIII
"Dhaumya continued, 'Listen, O Bharata, I shall now narrate to thee in
detail according to my knowledge, the sacred tirthas of the south. In
that quarter lieth the sacred and auspicious river Godavari, full of
water abounding in groves and frequented by ascetics. In that direction
also are the rivers Venna and Bhimarathi, both capable of destroying sin
and fear, and abounding in birds and deer, and graced with abodes of
ascetics. In that region also, O bull of the Bharata race, is the tirtha
of the royal ascetic, Nriga viz., the river Payoshni, which is delightful
and full of waters and visited by Brahmanas. There the illustrious
Markandeya, of high ascetic merit sang the praises in verse of king
Nriga's line! We have heard respecting the sacrificing king Nriga that
which really took place while he was performing a sacrifice in the
excellent tirtha called Varaha on the Payoshni. In that sacrifice Indra
became intoxicated with quaffing the Soma, and the Brahmanas, with the
gifts they received. The water of the Payoshni, taken up (in vessel), or
flowing along the ground, or conveyed by the wind, can cleanse a person
from whatever sins he may commit till the day of his death. Higher than
heaven itself, and pure, and created and bestowed by the trident-bearing
god, there in that tirtha is an image of Mahadeva beholding which a
mortal goeth to the region of Siva. Placing on one scale Ganga and the
other rivers with their waters, and on the other, the Payoshni, the
latter, in my opinion would be superior to all the tirthas, together, in
point of merit! Then, O foremost of the Bharata race, on the mountain
called Varunasrotasa is the sacred and auspicious wood of Mathara
abounding in fruits and roots, and containing a sacrificial stake. Then,
O king, it is said that in the region on the north of the Praveni, and
about the sacred asylum of Kanwa, are many woody retreats of ascetics.
And, O child, in the tirtha called Surparaka are two sacrificial
platforms of the illustrious Jamadagni, called Pashana and Punaschandra,
O Bharata! And, O son of Kunti, in that spot is the tirtha called Asoka
abounding in woody retreats of ascetics. And, O Yudhishthira, in the
country of the Pandyas are the tirthas named Agastya and Varuna! And, O
bull among men, there, amongst the Pandavas, is the tirtha called the
Kumaris. Listen, O son of Kunti, I shall now describe Tamraparni. In that
asylum the gods had undergone penances impelled by the desire of
obtaining salvation. In that region also is the lake of Gokarna which is
celebrated over the three worlds, hath an abundance of cool waters, and
is sacred, auspicious, and capable, O child, of producing great merit.
That lake is extremely difficult of access to men of unpurified souls.
Near to that tirtha is the sacred asylum of Agastya's disciple, the
mountain Devasabha, which abounds in trees and grass, and fruits and
roots. And there also is the Vaiduryya mountain, which is delightful
abounding in gems and capable of bestowing great merit. There on that
mountain is the asylum of Agastya abounding in fruits and roots and
water.'"
"I shall now, O lord of men, describe the sacred spots, and asylums, and
rivers and lakes belonging to the Surashtra country! O Yudhishthira, the
Brahmanas say that on the sea-coast is the Chamasodbheda, and also
Prabhasa, that tirtha which is much regarded by the gods. There also is
the tirtha called Pindaraka, frequented by ascetics and capable of
producing great merit. In that region is a mighty hill named Ujjayanta
which conduceth to speedy success. Regarding it the celestial Rishi
Narada of great intelligence hath recited an ancient sloka. Do thou
listen to it, O Yudhishthira! By performing austerities on the sacred
hill of Ujjayanta in Surashtra, that abounds in birds and animals, a
person becometh regarded in heaven. There also is Dwaravati, producing
great merit, where dwelleth the slayer of Madhu, who is the Ancient one
in embodied form, and eternal virtue. Brahmanas versed in the Vedas, and
persons acquainted with the philosophy of the soul say that the
illustrious Krishna is eternal Virtue. Govinda is said to be the purest
of all pure things, the righteous of the righteous and the auspicious of
the auspicious. In all the three worlds, He of eyes like lotus-leaves is
the God of gods, and is eternal. He is the pure soul and the active
principle of life, is the Supreme Brahma and is the lord of all. That
slayer of Madhu, Hari of inconceivable soul, dwelleth there!"
