
SECTION XLII
"Sauti said, 'And Sringin then replied to his father, saying, 'Whether
this be an act of rashness, O father, or an improper act that I have
done, whether thou likest it or dislikest it, the words spoken by me
shall never be in vain. O father, I tell thee (a curse) can never be
otherwise. I have never spoken a lie even in jest.'
"And Samika said, 'Dear child, I know that thou art of great prowess, and
truthful in speech. Thou hast never spoken falsehood before, so that thy
curse shall never be falsified. The son, even when he attaineth to age,
should yet be always counselled by the father, so that crowned with good
qualities he may acquire great renown. A child as thou art, how much more
dost thou stand in need of counsel? Thou art ever engaged in ascetic
penances. The wrath of even the illustrious ones possessing the six
attributes increaseth greatly. O thou foremost of ordinance-observing
persons, seeing that thou art my son and a minor too, and beholding also
thy rashness, I see that I must counsel thee. Live thou, O son, inclined
to peace and eating fruits and roots of the forest. Kill this thy anger
and destroy not the fruit of thy ascetic acts in this way. Wrath surely
decreaseth the virtue that ascetics acquire with great pains. And then
for those deprived of virtue, the blessed state existeth not.
Peacefulness ever giveth success to forgiving ascetics. Therefore,
becoming forgiving in thy temper and conquering thy passions, shouldst
thou always live. By forgiveness shalt thou obtain worlds that are beyond
the reach of Brahman himself. Having adopted peacefulness myself, and
with a desire also for doing good as much as lies in my power, I must do
something; even must I send to that king, telling him, 'O monarch, thou
hast been cursed by my son of tender years and undeveloped intellect, in
wrath, at seeing thy act of disrespect towards myself.'
"Sauti continued, 'And that great ascetic, observer of vows, moved by
kindness, sent with proper instructions a disciple of his to king
Parikshit. And he sent his disciple Gaurmukha of good manners and engaged
also in ascetic penances, instructing him to first enquire about the
welfare of the king and then to communicate the real message. And that
disciple soon approached that monarch, the head of the Kuru race. And he
entered the king's palace having first sent notice of his arrival through
the servant in attendance at the gate.
"And the twice-born Gaurmukha was duly worshipped by the monarch. And
after resting for a while, he detailed fully to the king, in the presence
of his ministers, the words of Samika, of cruel import, exactly as he had
been instructed.'
"And Gaurmukha said, 'O king of kings, there is a Rishi, Samika, by name,
of virtuous soul, his passions under control, peaceful, and given up to
hard ascetic devotions, living in thy dominions! By thee, O tiger among
men, was placed on the shoulders of that Rishi observing at present the
vow of silence, a dead snake, with the end of thy bow! He himself forgave
thee that act. But his son could not. And by the latter hast thou today
been cursed, O king of kings, without the knowledge of his father, to the
effect that within seven nights hence, shall (the snake) Takshaka cause
thy death. And Samika repeatedly asked his son to save thee, but there is
none to falsify his son's curse. And because he hath been unable to
pacify his son possessed by anger, therefore have I been sent to thee, O
king, for thy good!'
"And that king of the Kuru race, himself engaged in ascetic practices,
having heard these cruel words and recollecting his own sinful act,
became exceedingly sorry. And the king, learning that foremost of Rishis
in the forest had been observing the vow of silence, was doubly afflicted
with sorrow and seeing the kindness of the Rishi Samika, and considering
his own sinful act towards him, the king became very repentant. And the
king looking like a very god, did not grieve so much for hearing of his
death as for having done that act to the Rishi.'
"And then the king sent away Gaurmukha, saying, 'Let the worshipful one
(Samika) be gracious to me!' And when Gaurmukha had gone away, the king,
in great anxiety, without loss of time, consulted his ministers. And
having consulted them, the king, himself wise in counsels, caused a
mansion to be erected upon one solitary column. It was well-guarded day
and night. And for its protection were placed there physicians and
medicines, and Brahmanas skilled in mantras all around. And the monarch,
protected on all sides, discharged his kingly duties from that place
surrounded by his virtuous ministers. And no one could approach that best
of kings there. The air even could not go there, being prevented from
entering.
"And when the seventh day had arrived, that best of Brahmanas, the
learned Kasyapa was coming (towards the king's residence), desirous of
treating the king (after the snake-bite). He had heard all that had taken
place, viz., that Takshaka, that first of snakes, would send that best of
monarchs to the presence of Yama (Death). And he thought, I would cure
the monarch after he is bit by that first of snakes. By that I may have
wealth and may acquire virtue also.' But that prince of snakes, Takshaka,
in the form of an old Brahmana, saw Kasyapa approaching on his way, his
heart set upon curing the king. And the prince of snakes then spake unto
that bull among Munis, Kasyapa, saying, 'Whither dost thou go with such
speed? What, besides, is the business upon which thou art intent?'
"And Kasyapa, thus addressed, replied, 'Takshaka, by his poison, will
today burn king Parikshit of the Kuru race, that oppressor of all
enemies. I go with speed, O amiable one, to cure, without loss of time,
the king of immeasurable prowess, the sole representative of the Pandava
race, after he is bit by the same Takshaka like to Agni himself in
energy.' And Takshaka answered, 'I am that Takshaka, O Brahmana, who
shall burn that lord of the earth. Stop, for thou art unable to cure one
bit by me.' And Kasyapa rejoined, 'I am sure that, possessed (that I am)
of the power of learning, going thither I shall cure that monarch bit by
thee.'"
