SECTION CXXVIII
"Somaka said, 'O Brahmana! whatever is to be performed--do precisely as
it may be necessary. As I am desirous of having a number of sons, I shall
do all that may be prescribed by thee."
"Lomasa said, "Then the priest officiated in the sacrifice in which Jantu
was offered as the victim. But the mothers is in pity forcibly snatched
the son and took him away. And they cried, 'We are undone!' And they were
smitten with torturing grief and they caught hold of Jantu by his right
hand, and wept in a piteous way. But the officiating priest held the boy
by the right hand and pulled him. And like female ospreys they screamed
in agony! but the priest dragged the son killed him and made a burnt
offering of his fat in the proper form. And, O delight of the race of
Kuru! While the fat was being made an offering of the agonised mothers
smelt its smell, and of a sudden fell to the ground (and swooned away.)
And then all those lovely women became with child, and O lord of men! O
scion of Bharata's race! When ten months had passed a full century of
sons was born to Somaka begotten on all those women. And, O monarch of
the earth! Jantu became the eldest and was born of his former mother and
he became the most beloved to the women,--not so were their own sons. And
on his back there was that mark of gold and of that century of sons, he
was also superior in merit. Then that family priest of Somaka departed
this life as also Somaka after a certain time. Now he beheld that the
priest was being grilled in a terrible hell. And thereupon he questioned
him, 'Why art thou, O Brahmana! being grilled in this hell?" Then the
family priest exceedingly scorched with fire, spake to him saying, 'This
is the outcome of my having officiated in that sacrifice of thine.' O
king, hearing this, the saintly king thus spake to the god who meteth out
punishments to departed souls, 'I shall enter here. Set free my
officiating priest; this reversed man is being grilled by hell-fire on my
account only.'
"Dharmaraja thereat answered thus, 'One cannot enjoy or suffer for
another person's acts. O best of speakers! these are the fruits of thy
acts; see it here.'
"Somaka said, 'Without this Brahmana here, I desire not go to the blessed
regions. My desire is to dwell in company with this very man, either in
the abode of the gods, or in hell, for, O Dharmaraja! my deed is
identical with what hath been done by him and the fruit of our virtuous
or evil deed must be the same for both of us.'
"Dharmaraja said, 'O king! If this is thy wish, then taste with him the
fruit of that act, for the same period that he must do. After that thou
shall go to the blessed regions.'
"Lomasa said, The lotus-eyed king did all that exactly in the way
prescribed to him. And when his sins were worked off, he was set free
together with the priest. O king! Fond of the priest as he was, he won
all those blessings to which he had entitled himself by his meritorious
acts and shared everything with the family priest. This is his hermitage
which looketh lovely before our eyes. Any one would attain the blessed
regions, if he should spend six nights here controlling his passions. O
king of kings! O leader of the tribe of Kurus! Here, free from excitement
and self-controlled, we must spend six nights. Be thou ready therefor.'"
