SECTION CLI
Vaisampayana said, "When that foremost of monkeys had gone away, Bhima,
the best of strong men, began to range the huge Gandhamadana along that
path. And he went on, thinking of Hanuman's body and splendour unrivalled
on earth, and also of the greatness and dignity of Dasaratha's son. And
proceeding in search of the place filled with lotuses of that kind, Bhima
beheld romantic woods, and groves, and rivers, and lakes graced with
trees bearing blossoms, and flowery woodlands variegated with various
flowers. And, O Bharata, he beheld herds of mad elephants besmeared with
mud, resembling masses of pouring clouds. And that graceful one went on
with speed, beholding by the wayside woods wherein there stood with their
mates deer of quick glances, holding the grass in their mouths. And
fearless from prowess, Bhimasena, as if invited by the breeze-shaken
trees of the forest ever fragrant with flowers, bearing delicate coppery
twigs, plunged into the mountainous regions inhabited by buffaloes, bears
and leopards. And on the way, he passed by lotus-lakes haunted by
maddened black-bees, having romantic descents and woods, and on account
of the presence of lotus-buds, appearing as if they had joined their
hands (before Bhima). And having for his provisions on the journey the
words of Draupadi, Bhima went on with speed, his mind and sight fixed on
the blooming slopes of the mountain. And when the sun passed the
meridian, he saw in the forest scattered over with deer, a mighty river
filled with fresh golden lotuses. And being crowded with swans and
Karandavas, and graced with Chakravakas, the river looked like a garland
of fresh lotuses put on by the mountain. And in that river that one of
great strength found the extensive assemblage of Saugandhika lotuses,
effulgent as the rising sun, and delightful to behold. And beholding it,
Pandu's son thought within himself that his object had been gained, and
also mentally presented himself before his beloved worn out by exile."
