
SECTION XLVI
"Sauti said. 'Jaratkaru, hearing all this, became excessively dejected.
And from sorrow he spoke unto those Pitris in words obstructed by tears.'
And Jaratkaru said, 'Ye are even my fathers and grand-fathers gone
before. Therefore, tell me what I must do for your welfare. I am that
sinful son of yours, Jaratkaru! Punish me for my sinful deeds, a wretch
that I am.'
"The Pitris replied, saying, 'O son, by good luck hast thou arrived at
this spot in course of thy rambles. O Brahmana, why hast thou not taken a
wife?'
"Jaratkaru said. 'Ye Pitris, this desire hath always existed in my heart
that I would, with vital seed drawn up, carry this body to the other
world. My mind hath been possessed with the idea that I would not take a
wife. But ye grandsires, having seen you hanging like birds, I have
diverted my mind from the Brahmacharya mode of life. I will truly do what
you like. I will certainly marry, if ever I meet with a maiden of my own
name. I shall accept her who, bestowing herself of her own accord, will
be as aims unto me, and whom I shall not have to maintain. I shall marry
if I get such a one; otherwise, I shall not. This is the truth, ye
grandsires! And the offspring that will be begot upon her shall be your
salvation. And ye Pitris of mine, ye shall live for ever in blessedness
and without fear.'
'Sauti continued, 'The Muni, having said so unto the Pitris, wandered
over the earth again. And, O Saunaka, being old, he obtained no wife. And
he grieved much that he was not successful. But directed (as before) by
his ancestors, he continued the search. And going into the forest, he
wept loudly in great grief. And having gone into the forest, the wise
one, moved by the desire of doing good to his ancestors, said, 'I will
ask for a bride,' distinctly repeating these words thrice. And he said,
'Whatever creatures are here, mobile and immobile, so whoever there be
that are invisible, O, hear my words! My ancestors, afflicted with grief,
have directed me that am engaged in the most severe penances, saying,
'Marry thou for (the acquisition of) a son.' 'O ye, being directed by my
ancestors, I am roaming in poverty and sorrow, over the wide world for
wedding a maiden that I may obtain as alms. Let that creature, amongst
those I have addressed, who hath a daughter, bestow on me that am roaming
far and near. Such a bride as is of same name with me, to be bestowed on
me as alms, and whom, besides, I shall not maintain, O bestow on me!'
Then those snakes that had been set upon Jaratkaru track, ascertaining
his inclination, gave information to Vasuki. And the king of the snakes,
hearing their words, took with him that maiden decked with ornaments, and
went into the forest unto that Rishi. And, O Brahmana, Vasuki, the king
of the snakes, having gone there, offered that maiden as alms unto that
high-souled Rishi. But the Rishi did not at once accept her. And the
Rishi, thinking her not to be of the same name with himself, and seeing
that the question of her maintenance also was unsettled, reflected for a
few moments, hesitating to accept her. And then, O son of Bhrigu, he
asked Vasuki the maiden's name, and also said unto him, 'I shall not
maintain her.'"
