SECTION CLXIII
Vaisampayana continued, "Dwelling in that best of mountains those
high-souled ones observing excellent vows, felt themselves attracted (to
that place), and diverted themselves, eager to behold Arjuna. And
multitudes of Gandharvas and Maharshis gladly visited those energetic
ones, possessing prowess, of chaste desires and being the foremost of
those endued with truth and fortitude. And having arrived at that
excellent mountain furnished with trees bearing blossoms, those mighty
charioteers were exceedingly delighted, even as the Marutas, on arriving
at the celestial regions. And experiencing great exhilaration, they lived
(there), seeing the slopes and summits of that mighty mountain, filled
with flowers, and resonant with the cries of peacocks and cranes. And on
that beautiful mountain they beheld lakes filled with lotuses, and having
their shores covered with trees, and frequented by darkness, and
karandavas and swans. And the flourishing sporting-regions, graceful on
account of the various flowers, and abounding in gems, was capable of
captivating that king, the dispenser of wealth (Kuvera). And always
ranging (there), those foremost of ascetics (the Pandavas) were incapable
of conceiving (the significance of) that Summit, furnished with mighty
trees, and masses of wide-spreading clouds. And, O great hero, owing to
its native splendour, and also on account of the brilliance of the annual
plants, there was no difference there between night and day. And staying
in the mountain, remaining in which the Sun of unrivalled energy
cherisheth the mobile and immobile things, those heroes and foremost of
men beheld the rising and the setting of the Sun. And having seen the
rising and the setting points of the Sun and the rising and the setting
mountain, and all the cardinal points, as well as the intervening spaces
ever blazing with the rays of the Dispeller of darkness, those heroes, in
expectation of the arrival of that mighty charioteer firm in truth,
became engaged in reciting the Vedas, practising the daily rituals,
chiefly discharging the religious duties, exercising sacred vows, and
abiding by the truth. And saying, 'Let us even here experience delight by
joining without delay Arjuna accomplished in arms,' those highly blessed
Parthas became engaged in the practice of Yoga. And beholding romantic
woods on that mountain, as they always thought of Kiriti, every day and
night appeared unto them even as a year. From that very moment joy had
taken leave of them when, with Dhaumya's permission, the high-souled
Jishnu, matting his hair, departed (for the woods). So, how could they,
absorbed in his contemplation, experience happiness there? They had
become overwhelmed with grief ever since the moment when at the command
of his brother, Yudhishthira, Jishnu of the tread of a mad elephant had
departed from the Kamyaka forest. O Bharata, in this way, on that
mountain those descendants of Bharata passed a month with difficulty,
thinking of him of the white steeds, who had gone to Vasava's abode for
learning arms. And Arjuna, having dwelt for five years in the abode of
him of a thousand eyes, and having from that lord of celestials obtained
all the celestial weapons,--such as those of Agni, of Varuna, of Soma, of
Vayu, of Vishnu, of Indra, of Pasupati, of Brahma, of Parameshthi, of
Prajapati, of Yama, of Dhata, of Savita, of Tvashta, and of Vaisravana;
and having bowed down to and gone round him of a hundred sacrifices, and
taken his (Indra's) permission, cheerfully came to the Gandhamadana."
