SECTION CLXIV
Vaisampayana continued, "And it came to pass that once a day as those
mighty charioteers were thinking of Arjuna, seeing Mahendra's car, yoked
with horses of the effulgence of lightning, arrive all on a sudden, they
were delighted. And driven by Matali, that blazing car, suddenly
illuminating the sky, looked like smokeless flaming tongues of fire, or a
mighty meteor embosomed in clouds. And seated in that car appeared Kiriti
wearing garlands and new-made ornaments. Then Dhananjaya possessing the
prowess of the wielder of the thunder-bolt, alighted on that mountain,
blazing in beauty. And that intelligent one decked in a diadem and
garlands, having alighted on the mountain, first bowed down at the feet
of Dhaumya, and then at those of Ajatasatru. And he also paid homage unto
Vrikodara's feet; and the twins also bowed down unto him. Then going to
Krishna, and having cheered her, he stood before his (elder) brother in
humble guise. And on meeting with that matchless one, they were
exceedingly delighted. And he also meeting with them rejoiced
exceedingly, and began to eulogise the king. And seeing before them that
car driving in which the slayer of Namuchi had annihilated seven
phalanxes of Diti's offspring, the magnanimous Parthas went round it. And
being highly pleased, they offered excellent worship unto Matali, as unto
the lord of the celestials himself. And then the son of the Kuru king
duly enquired of him after the health of all the gods. And Matali also
greeted them. And having instructed the Parthas even as a father doth his
sons, he ascended that incomparable car, and returned to the lord of the
celestials.
"And when Matali had gone away, that foremost of the royal race, Sakra's
son, the high-souled destroyer of all foes made over unto his love, the
mother of Sutasoma, beautiful precious gems and ornaments having the
splendour of the sun, which had been presented to him by Sakra. Then,
sitting in the midst of those foremost of the Kurus, and those best of
the Brahmanas, effulgent like unto fire or the sun, he began to relate
all as it had happened, saying, "In this way, I have learnt weapons from
Sakra, Vayu, and the manifest Siva; and all the celestials with Indra
also have been pleased with me, on account of my good behaviour, and
concentration.'
"After having briefly narrated unto them his sojourn in heaven, Kiriti of
spotless deeds agreeably slept that night with the two sons of Madri."
