SECTION CLXVIII
"Arjuna continued, 'Then at places eulogised by the Maharshis, I
(proceeded, and at length) beheld the ocean--that inexhaustible lord of
waters. And like unto flowing cliffs were seen on it heaving billows, now
meeting together and now rolling away. And there (were seen) all around
barks by thousands filled with gems. And there were seen timingilas and
tortoises and makaras like unto rock submerged in water. And on all sides
round thousands of shells sunk in water appeared like star in the night
covered by light clouds. And thousands upon thousands of gem were
floating in heaps and a violent wind was blowing about in whirls--and
this was wonderful to behold. And having beheld that excellent lord of
all waters with powerful tides, I saw at a short distance the city of the
demons filled with the Danavas. And even there, eftsoons entering
underneath the earth, Matali skilled in guiding the car, sitting fast on
the chariot drove it with force; and he dashed on, frightening that city
with the rattling of his chariot. And hearing that rattling of the
chariot like unto the rumbling of the clouds in the sky, the Danavas,
thinking me to be the lord of the celestials, became agitated. And
thereupon they all, frightened at heart, stood holding in their hands
bows and arrows and swords and javelins and axes and maces and clubs.
Then having made arrangements for the defence of the city, the Danavas,
with minds alarmed, shut the gates, so that nothing could be discovered.
Thereupon taking my shell, Devadatta, of tremendous roars, I again and
again winded it with exceeding cheerfulness. And filling all the
firmament, those sounds produced echoes. Thereat mighty beings were
terrified and they hid (themselves). And then, O Bharata, all of them
adorned with ornaments, those offsprings of Diti--the
Nivata-Kavachas--made their appearance by thousands, donning diverse mail
and taking in their hands various weapons and equipped with mighty iron
javelins and maces and clubs and hatchets and sabres and discs and
sataghnis and bhusundis and variegated and ornamented swords. Then, after
deliberating much as to the course of the car, Matali began to guide the
steeds on a (piece of) level ground, O foremost of the Bharatas. And
owing to the swiftness of those fleet coursers conducted by him, I could
see nothing--and this was strange. Then the Danavas there began to sound
thousands of musical instruments, dissonant and of odd shapes. And at
those sounds, fishes by hundreds and by thousands, like unto hills,
having their senses bewildered by that noise, fled suddenly. And mighty
force flew at me, the demons discharging sharpened shafts by hundreds and
by thousands. And then, O Bharata, there ensued a dreadful conflict
between me and the demons, calculated to extinguish the Nivata-Kavachas.
And there came to the mighty battle the Devarshis and the Danavarshis and
the Brahmarshis and the Siddhas. And desirous of victory, the Munis
eulogised me with the same sweet-speeches that (they had eulogised) Indra
with, at the war, (which took place) for the sake of Tara.'"
