SECTION CLXIX
"Arjuna continued, 'Then, O Bharata, vehemently rushed at me in battle in
a body the Nivata-Kavachas, equipped with arms. And obstructing the
course of the car, and shouting loudly, those mighty charioteers, hemming
me in on all sides, covered me with showers of shafts. Then other demons
of mighty prowess, with darts and hatchets in their hands, began to throw
at me spears and axes. And that mighty discharge of darts, with numerous
maces and clubs incessantly hurled fell upon my car. And other dreadful
and grim-visaged smiters among the Nivata-Kavachas, furnished with bows
and sharpened weapons, ran at me in fight. And in the conflict, shooting
from the Gandiva sundry swift arrows coursing straight, I pierced each of
them with ten. And they were driven back by those stone-whetted shafts of
mine. Then on my steeds being swiftly driven by Matali, they began to
display various movements with the speed of the wind. And being skilfully
guided by Matali, they began to trample upon the sons of Diti. And
although the steeds yoked unto that mighty chariot numbered hundreds upon
hundreds, yet being deftly conducted by Matali, they began to move, as if
they were only a few. And by their tread, and by the rattling of the
chariot wheels and by the vollies of my shafts, the Danavas began to fall
by hundreds. And others accoutred in bows, being deprived of life, and
having their charioteers slain, were carried about by the horses. Then,
covering all sides and directions, all (the Danavas) skilled in striking
entered into the contest with various weapons, and thereat my mind became
afflicted. And I witnessed (this instance of) the marvellous prowess of
Matali, viz., that he guided those fiery steeds with ease. Then, O king,
in the conflict, with diverse fleet weapons I pierced by hundreds and by
thousands (demons) bearing arms. And, O slayer of foes, seeing me thus
range the field putting forth every exertion, the heroic charioteer of
Sakra was well-pleased. And oppressed by those steeds and that car, some
(of them) met with annihilation; and others desisted from fight; while
(other) Nivata-Kavachas, challenged by us in battle and being harassed
with shafts offered opposition unto me, by (discharging) mighty showers
of arrows. Thereupon, with hundreds and thousands of sundry fleet weapons
inspired with the mantras relating to Brahma's weapons, I swiftly began
to burn them. And being sore pressed by me, those mighty asuras waxing
wroth afflicted me together, by pouring torrents of clubs and darts and
swords. Then, O Bharata, I took up that favourite weapon of the lord of
the celestials, Maghavan by name, prime and of fiery energy and by the
energy of that weapon I cut into a thousand pieces the Tomaras, together
with the swords and the tridents hurled by them. And having cut off their
arms I in ire pierced them each with ten shafts. And in the field arrows
were shot from the Gandiva like unto rows of black-bees; and this Matali
admired. And their shafts also showered upon me; but those powerful
(arrows) I cut off with my shafts. Then on being struck the
Nivata-Kavachas again covered me on all sides with a mighty shower of
arrows. And having neutralised the force of the arrows by excellent swift
and flaming weapons capable of baffling arms, I pierced them by
thousands. And blood began to flow from their torn frames, even as in the
rainy season waters run down from the summits of mountains. And on being
wounded by my fleet and straight-coursing shafts of the touch of Indra's
thunder-bolt, they became greatly agitated. And their bodies were pierced
at hundreds of places; and the force of their arms diminished. Then the
Nivata-Kavachas fought me by (the help of) illusion.'"
