SECTION CLXV
Vaisampayana said, "Then when the night had been spent, Dhananjaya,
together with his brothers, paid homage unto Yudhishthira the just. And,
O Bharata, at this moment, proceeding from the celestials there arose
mighty and tremendous sounds of a musical instrument, and the rattling of
car-wheels, and the tolling of bells. And there at all the beasts and
beasts of prey and birds emitted separate cries. And from all sides in
cars resplendent as the sun, hosts of Gandharvas and Apsaras began to
follow that represser of foes, the lord of the celestials. And ascending
a car yoked with steeds, decorated with burnished gold, and roaring like
clouds, that king of the celestials, Purandara blazing in beauty came
unto the Parthas. And having arrived (at that place), he of a thousand
eyes descended from his car. And as soon as Yudhishthira the just saw
that high-souled one, he together with his brothers, approached that
graceful king of the immortals. And in accordance with the ordinance that
generous one duly worshipped him of immeasurable soul, in consequence
with his dignity. And then Dhananjaya possessed of prowess, having bowed
down unto Purandara, stood before the lord of the celestials in humble
guise, like unto a servant. And seeing the sinless Dhananjaya having
ascetic merit, bearing clotted hair, stand in humility before the lord of
celestials, Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti; of great energy, smelt (the
crown) of his head. And beholding Phalguna (in that attitude), he was
exceedingly glad; and by worshipping the king of the celestials, he
experienced the highest bliss. Then unto that strongminded monarch,
swimming in felicity, the intelligent lord of the celestials, Purandara,
spake, saying, Thou shalt rule the earth, O Pandava, Blessed be thou! Do
thou, O Kunti's son, again repair unto Kamyaka.'"That learned man who for
a year leading the Brahmacharya mode of life, subduing his senses and
observing vows, peruseth with rapt attention this meeting of Sakra with
the Pandavas, liveth a hundred years free from disturbances, and enjoying
happiness."'
