SECTION CLXXVI
Vaisampayana said, "When they had left their happy home in the beautiful
mountain abounding in cascades, and having birds, and the elephants of
the eight quarters, and the supernatural attendants of Kuvera (as
dwellers thereof), all happiness forsook those foremost of men of
Bharata's race. But afterwards on beholding Kuvera's favourite mountain,
Kailasa, appearing like clouds, the delight of those pre-eminent heroes
of the race of Bharata, became very great. And those foremost of heroic
men, equipped with scimitars and bows, proceeded contentedly, beholding
elevations and defiles, and dens of lions and craggy causeways and
innumerable water-falls and lowlands, in different places, as also other
great forests inhabited by countless deer and birds and elephants. And
they came upon beautiful woodlands and rivers and lakes and caves and
mountain caverns; and these frequently by day and night became the
dwelling place of those great men. And having dwelt in all sorts of
inaccessible places and crossing Kailasa of inconceivable grandeur, they
reached the excellent and surpassingly beautiful hermitage of
Vrishaparba. And meeting king Vrishaparba and received by him being they
became free from depression and then they accurately narrated in detail
to Vrishaparba the story of their sojourn in the mountains. And having
pleasantly passed one night in his sacred abode frequented by gods and
Maharshis, those great warriors proceeded smoothly towards the jujube
tree called Visala and took up their quarters there. Then all those
magnanimous men having reached the place of Narayana, continued to live
there, bereft of all sorrow, at beholding Kuvera's favourite lake,
frequented by gods and Siddhas. And viewing that lake, those foremost of
men, the sons of Pandu traversed that place, renouncing all grief even as
immaculate Brahmana rishis (do) on attaining a habitation in the Nandana
gardens. Then all those warriors having in due course happily lived at
Badari for one month, proceeded towards the realm of Suvahu, king of the
Kiratas, by following the same track by which they had come. And crossing
the difficult Himalayan regions, and the countries of China, Tukhara,
Darada and all the climes of Kulinda, rich in heaps of jewels, those
warlike men reached the capital of Suvahu. And hearing that those sons
and grandsons of kings had all reached his kingdom, Suvahu, elated with
joy, advanced (to meet them). Then the best of the Kurus welcomed him
also. And meeting king Suvahu, and being joined by all their charioteers
with Visoka at their head and by their attendants, Indrasena and others,
and also by the superintendents and servants of the kitchen, they stayed
there comfortably for one night. Then taking all the chariots and
chariot-men and dismissing Ghatotkacha together with his followers, they
next repaired to the monarch of mountains in the vicinity of the Yamuna.
In the midst of the mountain abounding in waterfalls and having grey and
orange-coloured slopes and summits covered with a sheet of snow, those
warlike men having then found the great forest of Visakhayupa like unto
the forest of Chitraratha and inhabited by wild boars and various kinds
of deer and birds, made it their home. Addicted to hunting as their chief
occupation, the sons of Pritha peacefully dwelt in that forest for one
year. There in a cavern of the mountain, Vrikodara, with a heart
afflicted with distraction and grief, came across a snake of huge
strength distressed with hunger and looking fierce like death itself. At
this crisis Yudhishthira, the best of pious men, became the protector of
Vrikodara and he, of infinite puissance, extricated Bhima whose whole
body had been fast gripped by the snake with its folds. And the twelfth
year of their sojourn in forests having arrived, those scions of the race
of Kuru, blazing in effulgence, and engaged in asceticism, always devoted
principally to the practice of archery, repaired cheerfully from that
Chitraratha-like forest to the borders of the desert, and desirous of
dwelling by the Saraswati they went there, and from the banks of that
river they reached the lake of Dwaitabana. Then seeing them enter
Dwaitabana, the dwellers of that place engaged in asceticism, religious
ordinances, and self-restraining exercises and in deep and devout
meditation and subsisting on things ground with stone (for want of teeth)
having procured grass-mats and water-vessels, advanced to meet them. The
holy fig, the rudaraksha, the rohitaka, the cane and the jujube, the
catechu, the sirisha, the bel and the inguda and the karira and pilu and
sami trees grew on the banks of the Saraswati. Wandering about with
contentment in (the vicinity of) the Saraswati which was, as it were, the
home of the celestials, and the favourite (resort) of Yakshas and
Gandharvas and Maharshis, those sons of kings lived there in happiness."
