SECTION CLXXIV
Vaisampayana continued, "And when the night had passed, Yudhishthira the
just, arose and together with his brothers, performed the necessary
duties. He then spake unto Arjuna, that delight of his mother, saying, 'O
Kaunteya, do thou show (me) those weapons with which thou vanquished the
Danavas.' Thereat, O king, the exceedingly powerful Dhananjaya, the son
of Pandu, duly practising extreme purity, showed those weapons, O
Bharata, which had been given unto him by the celestials. Dhananjaya
seated on the earth, as his chariot, which had the mountain for its pole,
the base of the axle and the cluster of beautiful-looking bamboo trees
for its socket-pole, looked resplendent with that celestial armour of
great lustre, took his bow Gandiva and the conch-shell given to him by
the gods, commenced to exhibit those celestial weapons in order. And as
those celestial weapons had been set, the Earth being oppressed with the
feet (of Arjuna), began to tremble with (its) trees; and the rivers and
the mighty main became vexed; and the rocks were riven; and the air was
hushed. And the sun did not shine; and fire did not flame; and by no
means did the Vedas of the twice-born once shine. And, O Janamejaya, the
creatures peopling the interior of the earth, on being afflicted, rose
and surrounded the Pandava, trembling with joined hands and contorted
countenances. And being burnt by those weapons, they besought Dhananjaya
(for their lives). Then the Brahmarshis, and the Siddhas, and the
Maharshis and the mobile beings--all these appeared (on the scene). And
the foremost Devarshis, and the celestials and the Yakshas and the
Rakshasas and the Gandharvas and the feathered tribes and the (other)
sky-ranging beings--all these appeared (on the scene). And the Great-sire
and all the Lokapalas and the divine Mahadeva, came thither, together
with their followers. Then, O great king, bearing unearthly variegated
blossoms Vayu (the Wind-god) fell to strewing them around the Pandava.
And sent by the celestials, the Gandharvas chanted various ballads; and,
O monarch, hosts of the Apsaras danced (there). At such a moment, O king,
sent by the celestials, Narada arrived (there) and addressed Partha in
these sweet words, 'O Arjuna, Arjuna, do thou not discharge the celestial
weapons. These should never be discharged when there is no object (fit).
And when there is an object (present), they should also by no means be
hurled, unless one is sore pressed; for, O son of the Kurus, to discharge
the weapons (without occasion), is fraught with great evil. And, O
Dhananjaya, being duly kept as thou hast been instructed to these
powerful weapons will doubtless conduce to thy strength and happiness.
But if they are not properly kept, they, O Pandava, will become the
instrument for the destruction of the three worlds. So thou shouldst not
act in this way again. O Ajatasatru, thou too wilt behold even these
weapons, when Partha will use them for grinding (thy) enemies in battle.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Having prevented Partha the immortals with
others that had come there, went to each his place, O foremost of men.
And, O Kaurava, after they had all gone, the Pandavas began to dwell
pleasantly in the same forest, together with Krishna."
