SECTION CLXLIII
Vaisampayana said, "Then the sons of Pandu again addressed Markandeya
saying, 'Thou hast told us of greatness of Brahmanas. We desire now to
hear of the greatness of the royal Kshatriyas!" Thus addressed by them,
the great Rishi Markandeya spoke, 'Listen now to the greatness of the
royal Kshatriyas. A certain king of the name of Suhotra belonging to the
Kuru race went on a visit to the great Rishis. And as he was returning
from that visit, he beheld king Sivi the son of Usinara, seated on his
car, and as each came before the other, each saluted the other as best
befitted his age and each regarding himself as the equal of the other in
respect of qualities, refused to give the way to the other. And at this
juncture Narada appeared there, and beholding what had happened, the
celestial Rishi asked, 'Why is it that ye both stand here blocking each
other's way?' And thus questioned both of them spoke to Narada saying, 'O
holy one, do not speak so. The sages of old have declared that the way
should be given to one who is superior or to him that is abler. We,
however, that stand blocking each other's way are equal to each other in
every respect. Judged properly there is no superiority amongst us.' Thus
addressed by them, Narada recited three slokas. (They are these), 'O thou
of the Kuru race, he that is wicked behaveth wickedly even unto him that
is humble; he also that is humble behaveth with humility and honestly
unto him that is wicked! He that is honest behaveth honestly even towards
the dishonest. Why should he not behave honestly towards him that is
honest? He that is honest regardeth the service that is done to him, as
if it were a hundred times greater than it is. Is this not current
amongst the gods themselves? Certainly it is the royal son of Usinara who
is possessed of goodness that is greater than thine. One should conquer
the mean by charity; the untruthful by truth, the man of wicked deeds by
forgiveness; and the dishonest by honesty. Both of you are large-hearted.
Let one amongst you stand aside, according to the indication of the above
slokas.' And having said so Narada became silent, and hearing what Narada
had said the king of the Kuru race walking round Sivi, and praising his
numerous achievements, gave him the way and went on in his course. It was
even thus that Narada had described the high blessedness of the royal
Kshatriyas.'"
