SECTION CCXIX
"Markandeya continued, 'He (Uktha) performed a severe penance lasting for
many years, with the view of having a pious son equal unto Brahma in
reputation. And when the invocation was made with the vyahriti hymns and
with the aid of the five sacred fires, Kasyapa, Vasistha, Prana, the son
of Prana, Chyavana, the son of Angiras, and Suvarchaka--there arose a
very bright energy (force) full of the animating (creative) principle,
and of five different colours. Its head was of the colour of the blazing
fire, its arms were bright like the sun and its skin and eyes were
golden-coloured and its feet, O Bharata, were black. Its five colours
were given to it by those five men by reason of their great penance. This
celestial being is therefore described as appertaining to five men, and
he is the progenitor of five tribes. After having performed a penance for
ten thousand years, that being of great ascetic merit produced the
terrible fire appertaining to the Pitris (manes) in order to begin the
work of creation, and from his head and mouth respectively he created
Vrihat and Rathantara (day and night) who quickly steal away (life, &c.).
He also created Siva from his navel, Indra from his might and wind and
fire from his soul, and from his two arms sprang the hymns Udatta and
Anudatta. He also produced the mind, and the five senses, and other
creatures. Having created these, he produced the five sons of the Pitris.
Of these Pranidhi was the son of Vrihadratha. Vrihadratha was the son of
Kasyapa. Bhanu was the godson of Chyavana, Saurabha, the son of
Suvarchaka, and Anudatta, the son of Prana. These twenty-five beings are
reputed (to have been created by him). Tapa also created fifteen other
gods who obstruct sacrifices[68]. They are Subhima, Bhima, Atibhima,
Bhimavala, Avala, Sumitra, Mitravana, Mitasina, Mitravardhana and
Mitradharaman,[69] and Surapravira, Vira, Suveka, Suravarchas and
Surahantri. These gods are divided into three classes of five each.
Located here in this world, they destroy the sacrifices of the gods in
heaven; they frustrate their objects and spoil their oblations of
clarified butter. They do this only to spite the sacred fires carrying
oblations to the gods. If the officiating priests are careful, they place
the oblations in their honour outside of the sacrificial altar. To that
particular place where the sacred fire may be placed, they cannot go.
They carry the oblation of their votaries by means of wings. When
appeased by hymns, they do not frustrate the sacrificial rites.
Vrihaduktha, another son of Tapa, belongs to the Earth. He is worshipped
here in this world by pious men performing Agnihotra sacrifices. Of the
son of Tapa who is known as Rathantara, it is said by officiating priests
that the sacrificial oblation offered in his honour is offered to
Mitravinda. The celebrated Tapa was thus very happy with his sons."
