SECTION CCXXII
"Markandeya continued, 'O sinless scion of Kuru's race, I have described
to thee the various branches of the race of Agni. Listen now to the story
of the birth of the intelligent Kartikeya. I shall tell thee of that
wonderful and famous and highly energetic son of the Adbhuta fire
begotten of the wives of the Brahmarshis. In ancient times the gods and
Asuras were very active in destroying one another. And the terrible
Asuras always succeeded in defeating the gods. And Purandara (Indra)
beholding the great slaughter of his armies by them and anxious to find
out a leader for the celestial host, thought within himself, 'I must find
out a mighty person who observing the ranks of the celestial army
shattered by the Danavas will be able to reorganize it with vigour.' He
then repaired to the Manasa mountains and was there deeply absorbed in
thought of nature, when he heard the heart-rending cries of a woman to
the effect, 'May some one come quick and rescue me, and either indicate a
husband for me, or be my husband himself.' Purandara said to her, 'Do not
be afraid, lady!' And having said these words, he saw Kesin (an Asura)
adorned with a crown and mace in hand standing even like a hill of metals
at a distance and holding that lady by the hand. Vasava addressed then
that Asura saying, 'Why art thou bent on behaving insolently to this
lady? Know that I am the god who wields the thunderbolt. Refrain thou
from doing any violence to this lady.' To him Kesin replied, 'Do thou, O
Sakra, leave her alone. I desire to possess her. Thinkest thou, O slayer
of Paka, that thou shalt be able to return home with thy life?' With
these words Kesin hurled his mace for slaying Indra. Vasava cut it up in
its course with his thunderbolt. Then Kesin, furious with rage, hurled a
huge mass of rock at him. Beholding that, he of a hundred sacrifices rent
it asunder with his thunderbolt, and it fell down upon the ground. And
Kesin himself was wounded by that falling mass of rock. Thus sorely
afflicted, he fled leaving the lady behind. And when the Asura was gone,
Indra said to that lady, 'Who and whose wife art thou, O lady with a
beautiful face, and what has brought thee here?'"
