SECTION CCXXVII
"Markandeya continued, 'Now hear of those terrible and curious-looking
followers of Skanda. A number of male children came into being when
Skanda was struck with the thunder-bolt,--those terrific creatures that
steal (spirit away) little children, whether born, or in the womb and a
number of female children too of great strength were born to him. Those
children adopted Visakha as their father. That adorable and dexterous
Bhadrasakha, having a face like that of a goat was at the time (of the
battle), surrounded by all his sons and daughters whom he guarded
carefully in the presence of the great mothers. And for this reason the
inhabitants of this earth call Skanda the father of Kumaras (little
children). Those persons who desire to have sons born to them, worship in
their places the powerful Rudra in the form of the Fire-god, and Uma in
the form of Swaha. And by that means they are blessed with sons. The
daughters begotten by the Fire-god, Tapa, went over to Skanda, who said
to them, 'What can I do for you?' Those girls replied, 'Do us this
favour; by thy blessing, may we become the good and respected mothers of
all the world!' He replied, 'Be it so.' And that liberal-minded being
repeated again and again, 'Ye shall be divided into Siva and Asiva.'[76]
And the mothers then departed, having first established Skanda's sonship,
Kaki, Halima, Malini, Vrinhila, Arya, Palala and Vaimitra, these were the
seven mothers of Sisu. They had a powerful, red-eyed, terrific, and very
turbulent son named Sisu born by the blessing of Skanda. He was reputed
as the eighth hero, born of the mothers of Skanda. But he is also known
as the ninth, when that being with the face of a goat, is included. Know
that the sixth face of Skanda was like that of a goat. That face, O king,
is situated in the middle of the six, and is regarded constantly by the
mother. That head by which Bhadrasakha created the divine energy, is
reputed to be the best of all his heads O ruler of men, these virtuous
wonderful events happened on the fifth day of the bright half of the
lunar month, and on the sixth, a very fierce and terrific battle was
fought at that place."
