SECTION CCXXV
"Markandeya continued, 'When that powerful, high-souled, and mighty being
was born, various kinds of fearful phenomena occurred. And the nature of
males and females, of heat and cold, and of such other pairs of
contraries, was reversed. And the planets, the cardinal points and the
firmaments became radiant with light and the earth began to rumble very
much. And the Rishis even, seeking the welfare of the world, while they
observed all these terrific prodigies on all sides, began with anxious
hearts to restore tranquillity in the universe. And those who used to
live in that Chitraratha forest said, This very miserable condition of
ours hath been brought about by Agni cohabiting with the six wives of the
seven Rishis.' Others again who had seen the goddess assume the disguise
of a bird said, 'This evil hath been brought about by a bird.' No one
ever imagined that Swaha was the authoress of that mischief. But having
heard that the (new born) male child was hers, she went to Skanda and
gradually revealed to him the fact that she was his mother. And those
seven Rishis, when they heard that a son of great power had been born (to
them), divorced their six wives with the exception of the adorable
Arundhati, because all the dwellers of that forest protested that those
six persons had been instrumental in bringing forth the child. Swaha too,
O king, said again and again to the seven Rishis, saying, 'Ye ascetics,
this child is mine, your wives are not his mother.'
The great Muni Viswamitra had, after the conclusion of the sacrifices of
the seven Rishis, followed unseen the god of fire, while the latter was
tortured with lust. He, therefore, knew everything as it happened and he
was the first to seek the protection of Mahasena. And he offered divine
prayers to Mahasena and all the thirteen auspicious rites appertaining to
childhood, such as the natal and other ceremonies, were all performed by
the great Muni in respect of that child. And for the good of the world he
promulgated the virtues of the six-faced Skanda, and performed ceremonies
in honour of the cock, the goddess Sakti, and the first followers of
Skanda. And for this reason he became a great favourite of the celestial
youth. That great Muni then informed the seven Rishis, of the
transformations of Swaha and told them that their wives were perfectly
innocent. But though thus informed the seven Rishis abandoned their
spouses unconditionally.
Markandeya continued, The celestials having heard of the prowess of
Skanda, all said to Vasava, 'O Sakra, do thou kill Skanda without delay
for his prowess is unbearable. And if thou dost not exterminate him, he
will conquer the three worlds with ourselves, and overpowering thee, will
himself become the mighty lord of the celestials.' Perplexed in mind,
Sakra replied unto them, 'This child is endowed with great prowess. He
can himself destroy the Creator of the Universe, in battle putting forth
his might. I venture not, therefore, to do away with him.' To this the
gods replied, 'Thou hast no manliness in thee, in that thou talkest in
this manner. Let the great Mothers of the Universe repair to-day to
Skanda. They can master at will any degree of energy. Let then kill this
child.' 'It shall be so.'--the mothers replied. And then they went away.
But on beholding that he was possessed of great might, they became
dispirited, and considering that he was invincible, they sought his
protection and said unto him, 'Do thou, O mighty being, become our
(adopted) son. We are full of affection for thee and desirous of giving
thee suck. Lo, the milk oozes from our breasts!' On hearing these words,
the mighty Mahasena became desirous of sucking their breasts and he
received them with due respect and acceded to their request. And that
mightiest of mighty creatures then beheld his father Agni come towards
him. And that god, who is the doer of all that is good, was duly honoured
by his son, and in company with the Mothers, he stayed there by the side
of Mahasena to tend him. And that lady amongst the Mothers who was born
of Anger[74] with a spike in hand kept watch over Skanda even like a
mother guarding her own offspring, and that irascible red-coloured
daughter of the Sea, who lived herself on blood, hugged Mahasena in her
breast and nursed him like a mother. And Agni transforming himself into a
trader with a goat's mouth and followed by numerous children began to
gratify that child of his with toys in that mountain abode of his."
