
SECTION LV
"Astika said, 'Soma and Varuna and Prajapati performed sacrifices of old
in Prayaga. But thy sacrifice, O foremost one of Bharata's race, O son of
Parikshit, is not inferior to any of those. Let those dear unto us be
blessed! Sakra performed a hundred sacrifices. But this sacrifice of
thine, O foremost one of Bharata's race, O son of Parikshit, is fully
equal to ten thousand sacrifices of Sakra. Let those dear unto us be
blessed! Like the sacrifice of Yama, of Harimedha, or of king Rantideva,
is the sacrifice of thine, O foremost one of Bharata's race, O son of
Parikshit. Let those dear unto us be blessed! Like the sacrifice of Maya,
of king Sasavindu, or of king Vaisravana, is this sacrifice of thine, O
foremost one of Bharata's race, O son of Satyavati, in which he himself
was the chief priest, is this sacrifice of Nriga, of Ajamida, of the son
of Dasaratha, is this sacrifice of thine, O foremost one of Bharata's
race, O son of Parikshit. Let those dear unto us be blessed! Like the
sacrifice of king Yudhishthira, the son of a god and belonging to Ajamida
race, heard of (even) in the heavens, is this sacrifice of thine. O
foremost one of Bharata's race, O son of Parikshit, let those dear unto
us be blessed! Like the sacrifice of Krishna (Dwaipayana), the son of
Satyavati, in which he himself was the chief priest, is this sacrifice of
thine, O foremost one of Bharata's race, O son of Parikshit Let those
dear unto us be blessed! These (Ritwiks and Sadasyas) that are here
engaged in making thy sacrifice, like unto that of the slayer of Vritra,
are of splendour equal to that of the sun. There now remains nothing for
them to know, and gifts made to them become inexhaustible (in merit). It
is my conviction that there is no Ritwik in all the worlds who is equal
to thy Ritwik, Dwaipayana. His disciples, becoming Ritwiks, competent for
their duties, travel over the earth. The high-souled bearer of libation
(viz., Agni), called also Vibhavasu and Chitrabhanu, having gold for his
vital seed and having his path, marked by black smoke, blazing up with
flames inclined to the right, beareth these thy libations of clarified
butter to the gods. In this world of men there is no other monarch equal
to thee in the protection of subjects. I am ever well-pleased with thy
abstinence. Indeed, thou art either Varuna, or Yama, the god of Justice.
Like Sakra himself, thunderbolt in hand, thou art, in this world, the
protector of all creatures. In this earth there is no man so great as
thou and no monarch who is thy equal in sacrifice. Thou art like
Khatwanga, Nabhaga, and Dilipa. In prowess thou art like Yayati and
Mandhatri. In splendour equal to the sun, and of excellent vows, thou art
O monarch, like Bhishma! Like Valmiki thou art of energy concealed. Like
Vasishtha thou hast controlled thy wrath. Like Indra is thy lordship. Thy
splendour also shines like that of Narayana. Like Yama art thou
conversant with the dispensation of justice. Thou art like Krishna
adorned with every virtue. Thou art the home of the good fortune that
belongs to the Vasus. Thou art also the refuge of the sacrifices. In
strength thou art equal to Damvodbhava. Like Rama (the son of Jamadagni)
thou art conversant with the scriptures and arms. In energy thou art
equal to Aurva and Trita. Thou inspirest terror by thy looks like
Bhagiratha.'
"Sauti said, 'Astika, having thus adored them, gratified them all, viz.,
the king, the Sadasyas, the Ritwiks and the sacrificial fire. And king
Janamejaya beholding the signs and indications manifested all around,
addressed them as follows.'"
