SECTION CCLVIII
Yudhishthira said, "Why did that high-souled one give away a drona of
corn? And, O eminently pious one, to whom and in what prescribed way did
he give it? Do thou tell me this. Surely, I consider the life of that
virtuous person as having borne fruit with whose practices the possessor
himself of the six attributes, witnessing everything, was well pleased."
"Vyasa said, 'There lived, O king, in Kurukshetra a virtuous man (sage),
Mudgala by name. And he was truthful, and free from malice, and of
subdued senses. And he used to lead the Sila and Unchha modes of
life.[86] And although living like a pigeon, yet that one of mighty
austerities entertained his guests, celebrated the sacrifice called
Istikrita, and performed other rites. And that sage together with his son
and wife, ate for a fortnight, and during the other fortnight led the
life of a pigeon, collecting a drona of corn. And celebrating the Darsa
and Paurnamasya sacrifices, that one devoid of guile, used to pass his
days by taking the food that remained after the deities and the guests
had eaten. And on auspicious lunar days, that lord of the three worlds,
Indra himself, accompanied by the celestials used, O mighty monarch, to
partake of the food offered at his sacrifice. And that one, having
adopted the life of a Muni, with a cheerful heart entertained his guests
also with food on such days. And as that high-souled one distributed his
food with alacrity, the remainder of the drona of corn increased as soon
as a guest appeared. And by virtue of the pure spirit in which the sage
gave a way, that food of his increased so much that hundreds upon
hundreds of learned Brahmanas were fed with it.
"And, O king, it came to pass that having heard of the virtuous Mudgala
observant of vows, the Muni Durvasa, having space alone for his
covering,[87] his accoutrements worn like that of maniac, and his head
bare of hair, came there, uttering, O Pandava various insulting words.
And having arrived there that best of Munis said unto the Brahmana. 'Know
thou, O foremost of Brahmanas, that I have come hither seeking for food.
Thereupon Mudgala said unto the sage, 'Thou art welcome!' And then
offering to that maniac of an ascetic affected by hunger, water to wash
his feet and mouth, that one observant of the vow of feeding guests,
respectfully placed before him excellent fare. Affected by hunger, the
frantic Rishi completely exhausted the food that had been offered unto
him. Thereupon, Mudgala furnished him again with food. Then having eaten
up all that food, he besmeared his body with the unclean orts and went
away as he had come. In this manner, during the next season, he came
again and ate up all the food supplied by that wise one leading the
Unchha mode of life. Thereupon, without partaking any food himself, the
sage Mudgala again became engaged in collecting corn, following the
Unchha mode. Hunger could not disturb his equanimity. Nor could anger,
nor guile, nor a sense of degradation, nor agitation, enter into the
heart of that best of Brahmanas leading the Unchha mode of life along
with his son and his wife. In this way, Durvasa having made up his mind,
during successive seasons presented himself for six several times before
that best of sages living according to the Unchha mode; yet that Muni
could not perceive any agitation in Mudgala's heart; and he found the
pure heart of the pure-souled ascetic always pure. Thereupon,
well-pleased, the sage addressed Mudgala, saying, There is not another
guileless and charitable being like thee on earth. The pangs of hunger
drive away to a distance the sense of righteousness and deprive people of
all patience. The tongue, loving delicacies, attracteth men towards them.
Life is sustained by food. The mind, moreover, is fickle, and it is hard
to keep it in subjection. The concentration of the mind and of the senses
surely constitutes ascetic austerities. It must be hard to renounce in a
pure spirit a thing earned by pains. Yet, O pious one, all this hath been
duly achieved by thee. In thy company we feel obliged and gratified.
Self-restraint, fortitude, justice, control of the senses and of
faculties, mercy, and virtue, all these are established in thee. Thou
hast by the deeds conquered the different worlds and have thereby
obtained admission into paths of beautitude. Ah! even the dwellers of
heaven are proclaiming thy mighty deeds of charity. O thou observant of
vows, thou shalt go to heaven even in thine own body.
"Whilst the Muni Durvasa was speaking thus, a celestial messenger
appeared before Mudgala, upon a car yoked with swans and cranes, hung
with a neat work of bells, scented with divine fragrance, painted
picturesquely, and possessed of the power of going everywhere at will.
And he addressed the Brahmana sage, saying, 'O sage, do thou ascend into
this chariot earned by thy acts. Thou hast attained the fruit of thy
asceticism!'
"As the messenger of the gods was speaking thus, the sage told him, 'O
divine messenger, I desire that thou mayst describe unto me the
attributes of those that reside there. What are their austerities, and
what their purposes? And, O messenger of the gods, what constitutes
happiness in heaven, and what are the disadvantages thereof? It is
declared by virtuous men of good lineage that friendship with pious
people is contracted by only walking with them seven paces. O lord, in
the name of that friendship I ask thee, 'Do thou without hesitation tell
me the truth, and that which is good for me now. Having heard thee, I
shall, according to thy words, ascertain the course I ought to follow.'"
