SECTION CCLV
Vaisampayana said, "While, O great king, Duryodhana was entering (the
city), the panegyrists eulogized the prince of unfailing prowess. And
others also eulogized that mighty bowman and foremost of kings. And
sprinkling over him fried paddy and sandal paste the citizens said, 'By
good luck it is, O king, that thy sacrifice hath been completed without
obstruction.' And some, more reckless of speech, that were present there,
said unto that lord of the earth, 'Surely this thy sacrifice cannot be
compared with Yudhishthira's: nor doth this come up to a sixteenth part
of that (sacrifice).' Thus spake unto that king some that were reckless
of consequences. His friends, however, said, This sacrifice of thine hath
surpassed all others. Yayati and Nahusha, and Mandhata and Bharata,
having been sanctified by celebrating such a sacrifice, have all gone to
heaven.' Hearing such agreeable words from his friends, that monarch, O
bull of the Bharata's race, well-pleased, entered the city and finally
his own abode. Then, O king, worshipping the feet of his father and
mother and of others headed by Bhishma, Drona and Kripa, and of the wise
Vidura, and worshipped in turn by his younger brothers, that delighter of
brothers sat down upon an excellent seat, surrounded by the latter. And
the Suta's son, rising up, said, 'By good luck it is, O foremost of the
Bharata race, that this mighty sacrifice of thine hath been brought to a
close. When, however, the sons of Pritha shall have been slain in battle
and thou wilt have completed the Rajasuya sacrifice, once again, O lord
of men, shall I honour thee thus.' Then that mighty king, the illustrious
son of Dhritarashtra, replied unto him, 'Truly hath this been spoken by
thee. When, O foremost of men, the wicked-minded Pandavas have been
slain, and when also the grand Rajasuya hath been celebrated by me, then
thou shalt again, O hero, honour me thus.' And having said this, O
Bharata, the Kaurava embraced Karna, and began, O mighty king, to think
of the Rajasuya, that foremost of sacrifices. And that best of kings also
addressed the Kurus around him, saying, 'When shall I, ye Kauravas,
having slain all the Pandavas, celebrate that costly and foremost of
sacrifices, the Rajasuya.' Then spake Karna unto him, saying, 'Hear me, O
elephant among kings! So long as I do not slay Arjuna, I shall not allow
any one to wash my feet, nor shall I taste meat. And I shall observe the
Asura vow[84] and whoever may solicit me (for any thing), I never shall
say, 'I have it not.' When Karna had thus vowed to slay Phalguna in
battle, those mighty charioteers and bowmen, the sons of Dhritarashtra,
sent up a loud cheer; and Dhritarashtra's sons thought that the Pandavas
had already been conquered. Then that chief of kings, the graceful
Duryodhana, leaving those bulls among men, entered his apartment, like
the lord Kuvera entering the garden of Chitraratha. And all those mighty
bowmen also, O Bharata, went to their respective quarters.
"Meanwhile those mighty bowmen, the Pandavas, excited by the words the
messenger had spoken, became anxious, and they did not (from that time)
experience the least happiness. Intelligence, further, O foremost of
kings, had been brought by spies regarding the vow of the Suta's son to
slay Vijaya. Hearing this, O lord of men, Dharma's son became exceedingly
anxious. And considering Karna of the impenetrable mail to be of
wonderful prowess, and remembering all their woes, he knew no peace. And
that high-souled one filled with anxiety, made up his mind to abandon the
woods about Dwaitavana abounding with ferocious animals.
"Meanwhile the royal son of Dhritarashtra began to rule the earth, along
with his heroic brothers as also with Bhishma and Drona and Kripa. And
with the assistance of the Suta's son crowned with martial glory,
Duryodhana remained ever intent on the welfare of the rulers of the
earth, and he worshipped the foremost of Brahmanas by celebrating
sacrifices with profuse gifts. And that hero and subduer of foes, O king,
was engaged in doing good to his brothers, concluding for certain in his
mind that giving and enjoying are the only use of riches."
