
SECTION LVII
"Saunaka said, 'O son of a Suta, I desire to hear the names of all those
snakes that fell into the fire of this snake-sacrifice!'
"Sauti replied, 'Many thousands and tens of thousands and billions of
snakes fell into the fire. O most excellent Brahmana, so great is the
number that I am unable to count them all. So far, however, as I
remember, hear the names I mention of the principal snakes cast into the
fire. Hear first the names of the principal ones of Vasuki's race alone,
of colour blue, red and white of terrible form and huge body and deadly
poison. Helpless and miserable and afflicted with their mother's curse,
they fell into the sacrificial fire like libations of butter.
"Kotisa, Manasa, Purna, Cala, Pala Halmaka, Pichchala, Kaunapa, Cakra,
Kalavega, Prakalana, Hiranyavahu, Carana, Kakshaka, Kaladantaka--these
snakes born of Vasuki, fell into the fire. And, O Brahmana, numerous
other snakes well-born, and of terrible form and great strength, were
burnt in the blazing fire. I shall now mention those born in the race of
Takshaka. Hear thou their names. Puchchandaka, Mandalaka, Pindasektri,
Ravenaka; Uchochikha, Carava, Bhangas, Vilwatejas, Virohana; Sili,
Salakara, Muka, Sukumara, Pravepana, Mudgara and Sisuroman, Suroman and
Mahahanu. These snakes born of Takshaka fell into the fire. And Paravata,
Parijata, Pandara, Harina, Krisa, Vihanga, Sarabha, Meda, Pramoda,
Sauhatapana--these born in the race of Airavata fell into the fire. Now
hear, O best of Brahmanas, the names of the snakes I mention born in the
race of Kauravya: Eraka, Kundala Veni, Veniskandha, Kumaraka, Vahuka,
Sringavera, Dhurtaka, Pratara and Astaka. There born in the race of
Kauravya fell into the fire. Now hear the names I mention, in order, of
those snakes endued with the speed of the wind and with virulent poison,
born in the race of Dhritarashtra: Sankukarna, Pitharaka, Kuthara,
Sukhana, and Shechaka; Purnangada, Purnamukha, Prahasa, Sakuni, Dari,
Amahatha, Kumathaka, Sushena, Vyaya, Bhairava, Mundavedanga, Pisanga,
Udraparaka, Rishabha, Vegavat, Pindaraka; Raktanga, Sarvasaranga,
Samriddha, Patha and Vasaka; Varahaka, Viranaka, Suchitra, Chitravegika,
Parasara, Tarunaka, Maniskandha and Aruni.
"O Brahmana, thus I have recited the names of the principal snakes known
widely for their achievements--I have not been able to name all, the
number being countless. The sons of these snakes, the sons of those sons,
that were burnt having fallen into the fire, I am unable to mention. They
are so many! Some of three heads, some of seven, others of ten, of poison
like unto the fire at the end of the yuga and terrible in form,--they
were burnt by thousands!
"Many others, of huge bodies, of great speed, tall as mountain summits,
of the length of a yama, of a yojana, and of two yojanas, capable of
assuming at will any form and of mastering at will any degree of
strength, of poison like unto blazing fire, afflicted by the curse of a
mother, were burnt in that great 'sacrifice.'"
