SECTION CCLXXIV
"Markandeya said, 'Then the Brahmarshis, the Siddhas and the Devarshis,
with Havyavaha as their spokesman, sought the protection of Brahma. And
Agni said, 'That powerful son of Visrava, the Ten-headed cannot be slain
on account of thy boon! Endued with great might he oppresseth in every
possible way the creatures of the earth. Protect us, therefore, O
adorable one! There is none else save thee to protect us!'
"Brahma said, 'O Agni, he cannot be conquered in battle by either the
gods or the Asuras! I have already ordained that which is needful for
that purpose. Indeed his death is near! Urged by me, the four-headed God
hath already been incarnate for that object. Even Vishnu, that foremost
of smiters will achieve that object!'
"Markandeya continued, 'Then the Grandsire also asked Sakra, in their
presence, 'Be thou, with all the celestials, born on earth! And beget ye
on monkeys and bears, heroic sons possessed of great strength and capable
of assuming any form at will as allies of Vishnu!' And at this, the gods,
the Gandharvas and the Danavas quickly assembled to take counsel as to
how they should be born on earth according to their respective parts. And
in their presence the boon-giving god commanded a Gandharvi, by name
Dundubhi saying, 'Go there for accomplishing this object!' And Dundubhi
hearing these words of the Grandsire was born in the world of men as the
hunchbacked Manthara. And all the principal celestials, with Sakra and
others begot offspring upon the wives of the foremost of monkeys and
bears. And those sons equalled their sires in strength and fame. And they
were capable of splitting mountain peaks and their weapons were stones
and trees of the Sala and the Tala species. And their bodies were hard as
adamant, and they were possessed of very great strength. And they were
all skilled in war and capable of mustering any measure of energy at
will. And they were equal to a thousand elephants in might, and they
resembled the wind in speed. And some of them lived wherever they liked,
while others lived in forests. And the adorable Creator of the Universe,
having ordained all this, instructed Manthara as to what she would have
to do. And Manthara quick as thought, understood all his words, and went
hither and thither ever engaged in fomenting quarrels."
