SECTION CCLXXXIII
"Markandeya said, 'And while those troops (thus withdrawn) were reposing
themselves in their quarters, many little Rakshasas and Pisachas owning
Ravana as their leader, penetrated amongst them. And among these were
Parvana, Patana, Jambha, Khara, Krodha-vasa, Hari, Praruja, Aruja and
Praghasa, and others. And as these wicked ones were penetrating (the
monkey host) in their invisible forms, Vibhishana, who had the knowledge
thereof, broke the spell of their invisibility. And once seen, O king, by
the powerful and long-leaping monkeys, they were all slain and prostrated
on the earth, deprived of life. And unable to endure this, Ravana marched
out at the head of his troops. And surrounded by his terrible army of
Rakshasas and Pisachas, Ravana who was conversant with the rules of
warfare like a second Usanas invested the monkey host, having disposed
his troops in that array which is named after Usanas himself. And
beholding Ravana advancing with his army disposed in that array, Rama,
following the mode recommended by Vrihaspati, disposed his troops in
counter array for opposing that wanderer of the night. And coming up
quickly, Ravana began to fight with Rama. And Lakshmana singled out
Indrajit, and Sugriva singled out Virupakshya, and Nikharvata fought with
Tara, and Nala with Tunda, and Patusa with Panasa. And each warrior,
advancing up to him whom he regarded as his match, began to fight with
him on that field of battle, relying on the strength of his own arms, and
that encounter, so frightful to timid persons, soon became terrible and
fierce like that between the gods and the Asuras in the days of old. And
Ravana covered Rama with a shower of darts and lances and swords, and
Rama also afflicted Ravana with his whetted arrows of iron furnished with
the sharpest points, and in the same way Lakshmana smote the contending
Indrajit with arrows capable of penetrating into the most vital parts and
Indrajit also smote Sumitra's son with an arrowy shower. And Vibhishana
showered upon Prahasta and Prahasta showered upon Vibhishana, without any
regard for each other a thick downpour of winged arrows furnished with
the sharpest points. And thus between those mighty warriors there came
about an encounter of celestial weapons of great force, at which the
three worlds with their mobile and immobile creatures were sorely
distressed."
