
SECTION V
(Pauloma Parva continued)
"Saunaka said, 'Child, thy father formerly read the whole of the Puranas,
O son of Lomaharshana, and the Bharata with Krishna-Dwaipayana. Hast thou
also made them thy study? In those ancient records are chronicled
interesting stories and the history of the first generations of the wise
men, all of which we heard being rehearsed by thy sire. In the first
place, I am desirous of hearing the history of the race of Bhrigu.
Recount thou that history, we shall attentively listen to thee."
"Sauti answered, 'By me hath been acquired all that was formerly studied
by the high-souled Brahmanas including Vaisampayana and repeated by them;
by me hath been acquired all that had been studied by my father. O
descendant of the Bhrigu race, attend then to so much as relateth to the
exalted race of Bhrigu, revered by Indra and all the gods, by the tribes
of Rishis and Maruts (Winds). O great Muni, I shall first properly
recount the story of this family, as told in the Puranas.
"The great and blessed saint Bhrigu, we are informed, was produced by the
self-existing Brahma from the fire at the sacrifice of Varuna. And Bhrigu
had a son, named Chyavana, whom he dearly loved. And to Chyavana was born
a virtuous son called Pramati. And Pramati had a son named Ruru by
Ghritachi (the celestial dancer). And to Ruru also by his wife
Pramadvara, was born a son, whose name was Sunaka. He was, O Saunaka, thy
great ancestor exceedingly virtuous in his ways. He was devoted to
asceticism, of great reputation, proficient in law, and eminent among
those having a knowledge of the Vedas. He was virtuous, truthful, and of
well-regulated fare.'
"Saunaka said, 'O son of Suta, I ask thee why the illustrious son of
Bhrigu was named Chyavana. Do tell me all.'
"Sauti replied, 'Bhrigu had a wife named Puloma whom he dearly loved. She
became big with child by Bhrigu. And one day while the virtuous continent
Puloma was in that condition, Bhrigu, great among those that are true to
their religion, leaving her at home went out to perform his ablutions. It
was then that the Rakshasa called Puloma came to Bhrigu's abode. And
entering the Rishi's abode, the Rakshasa saw the wife of Bhrigu,
irreproachable in everything. And seeing her he became filled with lust
and lost his senses. The beautiful Puloma entertained the Rakshasa thus
arrived, with roots and fruits of the forest. And the Rakshasa who burnt
with desire upon seeing her, became very much delighted and resolved, O
good sage, to carry her away who was so blameless in every respect.
'My design is accomplished,' said the Rakshasa, and so seizing that
beautiful matron he carried her away. And, indeed, she of agreeable
smiles, had been betrothed by her father himself, to him, although the
former subsequently bestowed her, according to due rites, on Bhrigu. O
thou of the Bhrigu race, this wound rankled deep in the Rakshasa's mind
and he thought the present moment very opportune for carrying the lady
away.
"And the Rakshasa saw the apartment in which the sacrificial fire was
kept burning brightly. The Rakshasa then asked the flaming element 'Tell
me, O Agni, whose wife this woman rightfully is. Thou art the mouth of
gods; therefore thou art bound to answer my question. This lady of
superior complexion had been first accepted by me as wife, but her father
subsequently bestowed her on the false Bhrigu. Tell me truly if this fair
one can be regarded as the wife of Bhrigu, for having found her alone, I
have resolved to take her away by force from the hermitage. My heart
burneth with rage when I reflect that Bhrigu hath got possession of this
woman of slender waist, first betrothed to me.'"
"Sauti continued, 'In this manner the Rakshasa asked the flaming god of
fire again and again whether the lady was Bhrigu's wife. And the god was
afraid to return an answer. 'Thou, O god of fire,' said he, residest
constantly within every creature, as witness of her or his merits and
demerits. O thou respected one, then answer my question truly. Has not
Bhrigu appropriated her who was chosen by me as my wife? Thou shouldst
declare truly whether, therefore, she is my wife by first choice. After
thy answer as to whether she is the wife of Bhrigu, I will bear her away
from this hermitage even in sight of thee. Therefore answer thou truly.'"
"Sauti continued, 'The Seven flamed god having heard these words of the
Rakshasa became exceedingly distressed, being afraid of telling a
falsehood and equally afraid of Bhrigu's curse. And the god at length
made answer in words that came out slowly. 'This Puloma was, indeed,
first chosen by thee, O Rakshasa, but she was not taken by thee with holy
rites and invocations. But this far-famed lady was bestowed by her father
on Bhrigu as a gift from desire of blessing. She was not bestowed on thee
O Rakshasa, this lady was duly made by the Rishi Bhrigu his wife with
Vedic rites in my presence. This is she--I know her. I dare not speak a
falsehood. O thou best of the Rakshasas, falsehood is never respected in
this world.'"
(Pauloma Parva continued)
(Pauloma Parva continued)
(Pauloma Parva continued)
(Pauloma Parva continued)
(Pauloma Parva continued)
(Pauloma Parva continued)
(Pauloma Parva continued)
