SECTION CCLXL
"Markandeya said, 'It was thus, O mighty-armed one, that Rama of
immeasurable energy had suffered of old such excessive calamity in
consequence of his exile in the woods! O tiger among men, do not grieve,
for, O chastiser of foes, thou art Kshatriya! Thou too treadest in the
path in which strength of arms is to be put forth,--the path that leadeth
to tangible rewards. Thou hast not even a particle of sin. Even the
celestials with Indra at their head, and the Asuras have to tread in the
path that is trod by thee! It was after such afflictions that the wielder
of the thunderbolt, aided by the Maruts, slew Vritra, and the invincible
Namuchi and the Rakshasi of long tongue! He that hath assistance, always
secureth the accomplishment of all his purposes! What is that which
cannot be vanquished in battle by him that hath Dhananjaya for his
brother? This Bhima, also, of terrible prowess, is the foremost of mighty
persons. The heroic and youthful sons of Madravati again are mighty
bowmen. With allies such as these, why dost thou despair, O chastiser of
foes? These are capable of vanquishing the army of the wielder himself of
the thunderbolt with the Maruts in the midst. Having these mighty bowmen
of celestial forms for thy allies, thou, O bull of Bharata race, art sure
to conquer in battle all thy foes! Behold, this Krishna, the daughter of
Drupada, forcibly abducted by the wicked-minded Saindhava from pride of
strength and energy, hath been brought back by these mighty warriors
after achieving terrible feats! Behold, king Jayadratha was vanquished
and lay powerless before thee! The princess of Videha was rescued with
almost no allies by Rama after the slaughter in battle of the Ten-necked
Rakshasa of terrible prowess! Indeed, the allies of Rama (in that
contest) were monkeys and black-faced bears, creatures that were not even
human! Think of all this, O king in thy mind! Therefore, O foremost of
Kurus, grieve not for all (that hath occurred), O bull of the Bharata
race! Illustrious persons like thee never indulge in sorrow, O smiter of
foes!'
Vaisampayana continued, "It was thus that the king was comforted by
Markandeya. And then that high-souled one, casting off his sorrows, once
more spoke unto Markandeya."
