SECTION CCLXXXIX
"Markandeya said, 'Having slain Ravana, that wretched king of the
Rakshasas and foe of the celestials, Rama with his friends and Sumitra's
son rejoiced exceedingly. And after the Ten-necked (Rakshasa) hath been
slain, the celestials with the Rishis at their head, worshipped Rama of
mighty arms, blessing and uttering the word Jaya repeatedly. And all the
celestials and the Gandharvas and the denizens of the celestial regions
gratified Rama of eyes like lotus leaves, with hymns and flowery showers.
And having duly worshipped Rama, they all went away to those regions
whence they had come. And, O thou of unfading glory, the firmament at
that time looked as if a great festival was being celebrated.
"And having slain the Ten-necked Rakshasa, the lord Rama of worldwide
fame, that conqueror of hostile cities, bestowed Lanka on Vibhishana.
Then that old and wise counsellor (of Ravana) known by the name of
Avindhya, with Sita walking before him but behind Vibhishana who was at
the front, came out of the city. And with great humility Avindhya said
unto the illustrious descendant of Kakutstha, 'O illustrious one, accept
thou this goddess, Janaka's daughter of excellent conduct!' Hearing these
words, the descendant of Ikshwaku's race alighted from his excellent
chariot and beheld Sita bathed in tears. And beholding that beautiful
lady seated within her vehicle, afflicted with grief, besmeared with
filth, with matted locks on head, and attired in dirty robes, Rama,
afraid of the loss of his honour, said unto her, 'Daughter of Videha, go
withersover thou likest! Thou art now free! What should have been done by
me, hath been done! O blessed lady, owning me for thy husband, it is not
meet that thou shouldst grow old in the abode of the Rakshasa! It is for
this I have slain that wanderer of the night! But how can one like us,
acquainted with every truth of morality embrace even for a moment a woman
that had fallen into other's hands? O princess of Mithila whether thou
art chaste or unchaste, I dare not enjoy thee, now that thou art like
sacrificial butter lapped by a dog!' Hearing these cruel words, that
adorable girl suddenly fell down in great affliction of heart, like a
plantain tree severed from its roots. And the colour that was suffusing
her face in consequence of the joy she had felt, quickly disappeared,
like watery particles on a mirror blown thereon by the breath of the
mouth. And hearing these words of Rama, all the monkeys also with
Lakshmana became still as dead. Then the divine and pure-souled Brahma of
four faces, that Creator of the Universe himself sprung from a lotus,
showed himself on his car to Raghu's son. And Sakra and Agni and Vayu,
and Yama and Varuna and the illustrious Lord of the Yakshas, and the holy
Rishis, and king Dasaratha also in a celestial and effulgent form and on
car drawn by swans, showed themselves. And then the firmament crowded
with celestials and Gandharvas became as beautiful as the autumnal welkin
spangled with stars. And rising up from the ground, the blessed and
famous princess of Videha, in the midst of those present spoke unto Rama
of wide chest, these words, 'O prince, I impute no fault to thee, for
thou art well acquainted with the behaviour that one should adopt towards
both men and women. But hear thou these words of mine! The ever-moving
Air is always present within every creature. If I have sinned, let him
forsake my vital forces! If I have sinned, Oh, then let Fire, and Water,
and Space, and Earth, like Air (whom I have already invoked), also
forsake my vital forces! And as, O hero, I have never, even in my dreams,
cherished the image of any other person, so be thou my lord as appointed
by the gods.' After Sita had spoken, a sacred voice, resounding through
the whole of that region, was heard in the skies, gladdening the hearts
of the high-souled monkeys. And the Wind-god was heard to say, O son of
Raghu, what Sita hath said is true! I am the god of Wind. The princess of
Mithila is sinless! Therefore, O king, be united with thy wife!' And the
god of Fire said, 'O son of Raghu, I dwell within the bodies of all
creatures! O descendant of Kakutstha, the princess of Mithila is not
guilty of even the minutest fault!' And Varuna then said, 'O son of
Raghu, the humours in every creature's body derive their existence from
me! I tell thee, let the princess of Mithila be accepted by thee!' And
Brahma himself then said, 'O descendant of Kakutstha, O son, in thee that
art honest and pure and conversant with the duties of royal sages, this
conduct is not strange. Listen, however, to these words of mine! Thou
hast, O hero, slain this enemy of the gods, the Gandharvas, the Nagas,
the Yakshas, the Danavas, and the great Rishis! It was through my grace
that he had hitherto been unslayable of all creatures. And indeed, it was
for some reason that I had tolerated him for some time! The wretch,
however, abducted Sita for his own destruction. And as regards Sita, I
protected her through Nalakuvera's curse. For that person had cursed
Ravana of old, saying, that if he ever approached an unwilling woman, his
head should certainly be split into a hundred fragments. Let no
suspicion, therefore, be thine! O thou of great glory, accept thy wife!
Thou hast indeed, achieved a mighty feat for the benefit of the gods, O
thou that art of divine effulgence!' And last of all Dasaratha said, 'I
have been gratified with thee, O child! Blessed be thou, I am thy father
Dasaratha! I command thee to take back thy wife, and rule thy kingdom, O
thou foremost of men!' Rama then replied, 'If thou art my father, I
salute thee with reverence, O king of kings! I shall indeed, return, at
thy command, to the delightful city of Ayodhya!'
"Markandeya continued, 'Thus addressed, his father, O bull of the Bharata
race, gladly answered Rama, the corners of whose eyes were of a reddish
hue, saying, 'Return to Ayodhya and rule thou that kingdom! O thou of
great glory, thy fourteen years (of exile) have been completed.' Thus
addressed by Dasaratha, Rama bowed to the gods, and saluted by his
friends he was united with his wife, like the Lord of the celestials with
the daughter of Puloman. And that chastiser of foes then gave a boon to
Avindhya. And he also bestowed both riches and honours on the Rakshasa
woman named Trijata. And when Brahma with all the celestials having India
at their head, said unto Rama, 'O thou that ownest Kausalya for thy
mother, what boons after thy heart shall we grant thee?' Rama, thereupon,
prayed them to grant him firm adherence to virtues and invincibility in
respect of all foes. And he also asked for the restoration to life of all
those monkeys that had been slain by the Rakshasas, and after Brahma had
said--So be it, those monkeys, O king, restored to life, rose up from the
field of battle, and Sita too, of great good fortune, granted unto
Hanuman a boon, saying, 'Let thy life, O son, last as long as (the fame
of) Rama's achievements! And, O Hanuman of yellow eyes, let celestial
viands and drinks be ever available to thee through my grace!'
"Then the celestials with Indra at their head all disappeared in the very
sight of those warriors of spotless achievements. And beholding Rama
united with the daughter of Janaka, the charioteer of Sakra, highly
pleased, addressed him in the midst of friends, and said these words, 'O
thou of prowess that can never be baffled thou hast dispelled the sorrow
of the celestials, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Asuras, the Nagas,
and human beings! As long, therefore, as the Earth will hold together, so
long will all creatures with the celestials, the Asuras, the Gandharvas,
the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, and the Pannagas, speak of thee.' And having
said these words unto Rama, Matali worshipped that son of Raghu, and
having obtained the leave of that foremost of wielders of weapons, he
went away, on that same chariot of solar effulgence. And Rama also, with
Sumatra's son and Vibhishana, and accompanied by all the monkeys with
Sugriva at their head, placing Sita in the van and having made
arrangements for the protection of Lanka, recrossed the ocean by the same
bridge. And he rode on that beautiful and sky-ranging chariot called the
Pushpaka that was capable of going everywhere at the will of the rider.
And that subduer of passions was surrounded by his principal counsellors
in order of precedence. And arriving at that part of the sea-shore where
he had formerly laid himself down, the virtuous king, with all the
monkeys, pitched his temporary abode. And the son of Raghu then, bringing
the monkeys before him in due time, worshipped them all, and gratifying
them with presents of jewels and gems, dismissed them one after another.
And after all the monkey-chiefs, and the apes with bovine tails, and the
bears, had gone away, Rama re-entered Kishkindhya with Sugriva. And
accompanied by both Vibhishana and Sugriva, Rama re-entered Kishkindhya
riding on the Pushpaka car and showing the princess of Videha the woods
along the way. And having arrived at Kishkindhya, Rama, that foremost of
all smiters, installed the successful Angada as prince-regent of the
kingdom. And accompanied by the same friends as also by Sumitra's son,
Rama proceeded towards his city along the same path by which he had come.
And having reached the city of Ayodhya, the king despatched Hanuman
thence as envoy to Bharata. And Hanuman, having ascertained Bharata's
intentions from external indications, gave him the good news (of Rama's
arrival). And after the son of Pavana had come back, Rama entered
Nandigrama. And having entered that town, Rama beheld Bharata besmeared
with filth and attired in rags and seated with his elder brother's
sandals placed before him. And being united, O bull of Bharata race, with
both Bharata and Shatrughna, the mighty son of Raghu, along with
Sumitra's son, began to rejoice exceedingly. And Bharata and Shatrughna
also, united with their eldest brother, and beholding Sita, both derived
great pleasure. And Bharata then, after having worshipped his returned
brother, made over to him with great pleasure, the kingdom that had been
in his hands as a sacred trust. And Vasishtha and Vamadeva then together
installed that hero in the sovereignty (of Ayodhya) at the eighth
Muhurta[105] of the day under the asterism called Sravana. And after his
installation was over, Rama gave leave to well-pleased Sugriva the king
of the monkeys, along with all his followers, as also to rejoicing
Vibhishana of Pulastya's race, to return to their respective abodes. And
having worshipped them with various articles of enjoyment, and done
everything that was suitable to the occasion, Rama dismissed those
friends of his with a sorrowful heart. And the son of Raghu then, having
worshiped that Pushpaka chariot, joyfully gave it back unto Vaisravana.
And then assisted by the celestial Rishi (Vasishtha), Rama performed on
the banks of the Gomati ten horse-sacrifices without obstruction of any
kind and with treble presents unto Brahmanas.'"
