SECTION XV
"Vaisampayana said, 'Rejected thus by the princess, Kichaka, afflicted
with maddening lust and forgetting all sense of propriety, addressed
Sudeshna saying, 'Do thou, Kekaya's daughter, so act that thy Sairindhri
may come into my arms. Do thou, O Sudeshna, adopt the means by which the
damsel of the gait of an elephant may accept me; I am dying of absorbing
desire.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing his profuse lamentations, that gentle
lady, the intelligent queen of Virata, was touched with pity. And having
taken counsel with her own self and reflected on Kichaka's purpose and on
the anxiety of Krishna, Sudeshna addressed the Suta's son in these words,
'Do thou, on the occasion of some festival, procure viands and wines for
me. I shall then send my Sairindhri to thee on the pretence of bringing
wine. And when she will repair thither do thou in solitude, free from
interruption, humour her as thou likest. Thus soothed, she may incline
her mind to thee.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed, he went out of his sister's
apartments. And he soon procured wines well-filtered and worthy of a
king. And employing skilled cooks, he prepared many and various kinds of
choice viands and delicious drinks and many and various kinds of meat of
different degrees of excellence. And when all this had been done, that
gentle lady Sudeshna, as previously counselled by Kichaka, desired her
Sairindhri to repair to Kichaka's abode, saying, 'Get up, O Sairindhri
and repair to Kichaka's abode to bring wine, for, O beauteous lady, I am
afflicted with thirst.' Thereupon the Sairindhri replied, 'O princess, I
shall not be able to repair to Kichaka's apartments. Thou thyself
knowest, O queen, how shameless he is. O thou of faultless limbs, O
beauteous lady, in thy palace I shall not be able to lead a lustful life,
becoming faithless to my husbands. Thou rememberest, O gentle lady, O
beautiful one, the conditions I had set down before entering thy house. O
thou of tresses ending in graceful curls, the foolish Kichaka afflicted
by the god of desire, will, on seeing me, offer me insult. Therefore, I
will not go to his quarters. Thou hast, O princess, many maids under
thee. Do thou, good betide thee, send one of them. For, surely, Kichaka
will insult me.' Sudeshna said, 'Sent by me, from my abode, surely he
will not harm thee.' And having said this, she handed over a golden
vessel furnished with a cover. And filled with apprehension, and weeping,
Draupadi mentally prayed for the protection of the gods, and set out for
Kichaka's abode for fetching wine. And she said, 'As I do not know
another person save my husbands, by virtue of that Truth let Kichaka not
be able to overpower me although I may approach his presence.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'And that helpless damsel then adored Surya for
a moment. And Surya, having considered all that she urged, commanded a
Rakshasa to protect her invisibly. And from that time the Rakshasa began
to attend upon that blameless lady under any circumstances. And beholding
Krishna in his presence like a frightened doe, the Suta rose up from his
seat, and felt the joy that is felt by a person wishing to cross to the
other shore, when he obtains a boat.'"
