SECTION XI
"Vaisampayana said, 'Next appeared at the gate of the ramparts another
person of enormous size and exquisite beauty decked in the ornaments of
women, and wearing large ear-rings and beautiful conch-bracelets overlaid
with gold. And that mighty-armed individual with long and abundant hair
floating about his neck, resembled an elephant in gait. And shaking the
very earth with his tread, he approached Virata and stood in his court.
And beholding the son of the great Indra, shining with exquisite lustre
and having the gait of a mighty elephant,--that grinder of foes having
his true form concealed in disguise, entering the council-hall and
advancing towards the monarch, the king addressed all his courtiers,
saying, 'Whence doth this person come? I have never heard of him before.'
And when the men present spoke of the newcomer as one unknown to them,
the king wonderingly said, 'Possessed of great strength, thou art like
unto a celestial, and young and of darkish hue, thou resemblest the
leader of a herd of elephants. Wearing conch-bracelets overlaid with
gold, a braid, and ear-rings, thou shinest yet like one amongst those
that riding on chariots wander about equipped with mail and bow and
arrows and decked with garlands and fine hair. I am old and desirous of
relinquishing my burden. Be thou like my son, or rule thou like myself
all the Matsyas. It seemeth to me that such a person as thou can never be
of the neuter sex.'
"Arjuna said, 'I sing, dance, and play on instruments. I am proficient in
dance and skilled in song. O lord of men, assign me unto (the princess)
Uttara. I shall be dancing-master to the royal maiden. As to how I have
come by this form, what will it avail thee to hear the account which will
only augment my pain? Know me, O king of men, to be Vrihannala, a son or
daughter without father or mother.'
"Virata said, 'O Vrihannala, I give thee what thou desirest. Instruct my
daughter, and those like her, in dancing. To me, however, this office
seemeth unworthy of thee. Thou deserves! (the dominion of) the entire
earth girt round by the ocean.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'The king of the Matsyas then tested Vrihannala
in dancing, music, and other fine arts, and consulting with his various
ministers forthwith caused him to be examined by women. And learning that
this impotency was of a permanent nature, he sent him to the maiden's
apartments. And there the mighty Arjuna began giving lessons in singing
and instrumental music to the daughter of Virata, her friends, and her
waiting-maids, and soon won their good graces. And in this manner the
self-possessed Arjuna lived there in disguise, partaking of pleasures in
their company, and unknown to the people within or without the palace.'"
