SECTION XXII
"Bhima said, 'I will, O timid one, do even as thou sayest. I will
presently slay Kichaka with all his friends. O Yajnaseni of sweet smiles,
tomorrow evening, renouncing sorrow and grief, manage to have a meeting
with Kichaka. The dancing-hall that the king of the Matsya hath caused to
be erected is used by the girls for dancing during the day. They repair,
however, to their homes at night. There in that hall, is an excellent and
well-placed wooden bed-stead. Even there I will make him see the spirits
of his deceased grandsires. But, O beautiful one, when thou holdest
converse with him, thou must manage it so that others may not espy thee."
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having thus conversed with others, and shed
tears in grief, they waited for the dawn of that night with painful
impatience. And when the night had passed away, Kichaka, rising in the
morning, went to the palace, and accosted Draupadi saying, 'Throwing thee
down in the court I kicked thee in the presence of the king. Attacked by
mighty self, thou couldst not obtain protection. This Virata is in name
only the king of the Matsyas. Commanding the forces of this realm it is
I, who am the real lord of the Matsyas. Do thou, O timid one, accept me
cheerfully. I shall become thy slave. And, O thou of graceful hips, I
will immediately give thee a hundred nishkas, and engage a hundred male
and a hundred female servants (to tend thee), and will also bestow on
thee cars yoked with she-mules. O timid lady, let our union take place.'
Draupadi replied, 'O Kichaka, know even this is my condition. Neither thy
friends nor thy brothers should know thy union with me. I am a terror of
detection by those illustrious Gandharvas. Promise me this, and I yield
to thee.' Hearing this Kichaka said, 'I will, O thou of graceful hips, do
even as thou sayest. Afflicted by the god of love, I will, O beauteous
damsel, alone repair to thy abode for union with thee, O thou of thighs
round and tapering like the trunks of the plantain,--so that those
Gandharvas, effulgent as the sun, may not come to know of this act of
thine.' Draupadi said, 'Do thou, when it is dark, go to the dancing-hall
erected by the king of the Matsyas where the girls dance during the day,
repairing to their respective homes at night. The Gandharvas do not know
that place. We shall then without doubt, escape all censure.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Reflecting on the subject of her conversation
with Kichaka, that half a day seemed to Krishna as long as a whole month.
And the stupid Kichaka also, not knowing that it was Death that had
assumed the form of a Sairindhri, returning home experienced the greatest
delight. And deprived of sense by lust, Kichaka became speedily engaged
in embellishing his person with unguents and garlands and ornaments. And
while he was doing all this, thinking of that damsel of large eyes, the
day seemed to him to be without an end. And the beauty of Kichaka, who
was about to forsake his beauty for ever, seemed to heighten, like the
wick of a burning lamp about to expire. And reposing the fullest
confidence in Draupadi, Kichaka, deprived of his senses by lust and
absorbed in the contemplation of expected meeting, did not even perceive
that the day had departed. Meanwhile, the beautiful Draupadi approaching
her husband Bhima of the Kuru race, stood before him in the kitchen. And
that lady with tresses ending in beautiful curls then spake unto him,
saying, 'O chastiser of foes, even as thou hadst directed, I have given
Kichaka to understand that our meeting will take place in the
dancing-hall. Alone will he come at night to the empty hall. Slay him
there, O thou of mighty arms. Do thou, O son of Kunti, repair to that
dancing-hall, and take the life, O Pandava, of Kichaka, that son of a
Suta intoxicated with vanity. From vanity alone, that son of a Suta
slights the Gandharvas. O best of smiters, lift him up from the earth
even as Krishna had lifted up the Naga (Kaliya) from the Yamuna. O
Pandava, afflicted as I am with grief, wipe thou my tears, and blessed be
thou, protect thy own honour and that of thy race.'
"Bhima said, 'Welcome, O beauteous lady, Except the glad tidings thou
bringest me, I need, O thou of exceeding beauty, no other aid whatever.
The delight that I feel, O thou of great beauty, on hearing from thee
about my coming encounter with Kichaka, is equal to what I felt in
slaying Hidimva. I swear unto thee by Truth, by my brothers, and by
morality, that I will slay Kichaka even as the lord of the celestials
slew Vritra. Whether secretly or openly, I will crush Kichaka, and if the
Matsyas fight for him, then I will slay them too. And slaying Duryodhana
afterwards, I shall win back the earth. Let Yudhishthira, the son of
Kunti, continue to pay homage unto the king of Matsya.' Hearing these
words of Bhima, Draupadi said, 'In order that, O lord, thou mayst not
have to renounce the truth already pledged to me, do thou, O hero, slay
Kichaka in secret.' Bhima assuring her said, 'Even today I shall slay
Kichaka together with his friends unknown to others during the darkness
of the night. I shall, O faultless lady, crush, even as an elephant
crusheth a vela fruit, [16] the head of the wicked Kichaka who wisheth
for what is unattainable by him!'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Repairing first to the place of assignation at
night, Bhima sat down, disguising himself. And he waited there in
expectation of Kichaka, like a lion lying in wait for a deer. And
Kichaka, having embellished his person as he chose, came to the
dancing-hall at the appointed time in the hope of meeting Panchali. And
thinking of the assignation, he entered the chamber. And having entered
that hall enveloped in deep gloom, that wretch of wicked soul came upon
Bhima of incomparable prowess, who had come a little before and who was
waiting in a corner. And as an insect approacheth towards a flaming fire,
or a puny animal towards a lion, Kichaka approached Bhima, lying down in
a bed and burning in anger at the thought of the insult offered to
Krishna, as if he were the Suta's Death. And having approached Bhima,
Kichaka possessed by lust, and his heart and soul filled with ecstacy
smilingly said, 'O thou of pencilled eye-brows, to thee I have already
given many and various kinds of wealth from the stores earned by me, as
well as hundred maids and many fine robes, and also a mansion with an
inner apartment adorned with beauteous and lovely and youthful maid
servants and embellished by every kind of sports and amusements And
having set all those apart for thee, I have speedily come hither. And all
on a sudden, women have begun to praise me, saying, 'There is not in this
world any other person like unto thee in beauty and dress!' Hearing this,
Bhima said, 'It is well that thou art handsome, and it is well thou
praisest thyself. I think, however, that thou hadst never before this
such pleasurable touch! Thou hast an acute touch, and knowest the ways of
gallantry. Skilled in the art of love-making, thou art a favourite with
women. There is none like thee in this world!'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Saying this, that son of Kunti, the
mighty-armed Bhima of terrible prowess, suddenly rose up, and laughingly
said, 'Thy sister, O wretch, shall today behold thee dragged by me to the
ground, like a mighty elephant, huge as a mountain, dragged to the ground
by a lion. Thyself slain Sairindhri will live in peace, and we, her
husbands, will also live in peace.' Saying this, the mighty Bhima seized
Kichaka by the hairs of his head, which were adorned with garlands. And
thus seized with force by the hair, that foremost of mighty persons,
Kichaka, quickly freed his hair and grasped the arms of Bhima. And then
between those lions among men, fired with wrath, between that chief of
the Kichaka clan, and that best of men, there ensued a hand-to-hand
encounter, like that between two powerful elephants for a female elephant
in the season of spring, or like that which happened in days of yore
between those lions among monkeys, the brothers Vali and Sugriva. And
both equally infuriate and both eager for victory, both those combatants
raised their arms resembling snakes furnished with five hoods, and
attacked each other with their nails and teeth, wrought up to frenzy of
wrath. Impetuously assailed by the powerful Kichaka in that encounter,
the resolute Bhima did not waver a single step. And locked in each
other's embraces and dragging each other, they fought on like two mighty
bulls. And having nails and teeth for their weapons, the encounter
between them was fierce and terrible like that of two furious tigers. And
felling each other in fury, they encountered each other like a couple of
elephants with rent temples. And the mighty Bhima then seized Kichaka,
and Kichaka, that foremost of strong persons threw Bhima down with
violence. And as those mighty combatants fought on, the crash of their
arms produced a loud noise that resembled the clatter of splitting
bamboos. Then Vrikodara throwing Kichaka down by main force within the
room, began to toss him about furiously even as a hurricane tosseth a
tree. And attacked thus in battle by the powerful Bhima, Kichaka grew
weak and began to tremble. For all that, however, he tugged at the
Pandava to the best of his power. And attacking Bhima, and making him
wave a little, the mighty Kichaka struck him with his knees and brought
him down to the ground. And overthrown by the powerful Kichaka, Bhima
quickly rose up like Yama himself with mace in hand. And thus that
powerful Suta and the Pandava, intoxicated with strength and challenging
each other, grappled with each other at midnight in that solitary place.
And as they roared at each other in wrath, that excellent and strong
edifice began to shake every moment. And slapped on the chest by the
mighty Bhima, Kichaka fired with wrath moved not a single pace. And
bearing for a moment only that onslaught incapable of being born on
earth, the Suta, overpowered by Bhima's might, became enfeebled. And
seeing him waning weak, Bhima endued with great strength forcibly drew
Kichaka towards his breast, and began to press hard. And breathing hard
again and again in wrath, that best of victors, Vrikodara, forcibly
seized Kichaka by the hair. And having seized Kichaka, the mighty 'Bhima
began to roar like a hungry tiger that hath killed a large animal. And
finding him exceedingly exhausted, Vrikodara bound him fast with his
arms, as one binds a beast with a cord. And then Bhima began for a long
while, to whirl the senseless Kichaka, who began to roar frightfully like
a broken trumpet.[17] And in order to pacify Krishna's wrath Vrikodara
grasped Kichaka's throat with his arms and began to squeeze it. And
assailing with his knees the waist of that worst of the Kichakas, all the
limbs of whose body had been broken into fragments and whose eye-lids
were closed, Vrikodara slew him, as one would slay a beast. And beholding
Kichaka entirely motionless, the son of Pandu began to roll him about on
the ground. And Bhima then said, 'Slaying this wretch who intended to
violate our wife,--this thorn in the side of Sairindhri, I am freed from
the debt I owed to my brothers, and have attained perfect peace.' And
having said this, that foremost of men, with eyes red in wrath,
relinquished his hold of Kichaka, whose dress and ornaments had been
thrown off his person, whose eyes were rolling, and whose body was yet
trembling. And that foremost of mighty persons, squeezing his own hands,
and biting his lips in rage, again attacked his adversary and thrust his
arms and legs and neck and head into his body like the wielder of the
Pinaka reducing into shapeless mass the deer, which form sacrifice had
assumed in order to escape his ire. And having; crushed all his limbs,
and reduced him into a ball of flesh, the mighty Bhimasena showed him
unto Krishna. And endued with mighty energy that hero then addressed
Draupadi, that foremost of all women, saying, 'Come princess of Panchala,
and see what hath become of that lustful wretch!' And saying this, Bhima
of terrible prowess began to press with his feet the body of that wicked
wight. And lighting a torch then and showing Draupadi the body of
Kichaka, that hero addressed her, saying, 'O thou of tresses ending in
beautiful curls, those that solicit thee, endued as thou art with an
excellent disposition and every virtue, will be slain by me even as this
Kichaka hath been, O timid one.' And having accomplished that difficult
task so highly agreeable to Krishna--having indeed slain Kichaka and
thereby pacified his wrath, Bhima bade farewell to Krishna, the daughter
of Drupada, and quickly went back to the kitchen. And Draupadi also, that
best of women, having caused Kichaka to be slain had her grief removed
and experienced the greatest delight. And addressing the keepers of the
dancing-hall, she said, 'Come ye and behold Kichaka who had violated
after other people's wives lieth down here, slain by my Gandharva
husbands.' And hearing these words the guards of the dancing hall soon
came by thousands to that spot, torches in hand. And repairing to that
room, they beheld the lifeless Kichaka thrown on the ground, drenched
with blood. And beholding him without arms and legs, they were filled
with grief. And as they gazed at Kichaka, they were struck with
amazement. And seeing that superhuman act, viz., the overthrow of
Kichaka, they said, 'Where is his neck, and where are his legs?' And
beholding him in this plight they all concluded that he had been killed
by a Gandharva.'"
SECTION XXII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then all the relatives of Kichaka, arriving at that
place, beheld him there and began to wail aloud, surrounding him on all
sides. And beholding Kichaka with every limb mangled, and lying like a
tortoise dragged to dry ground from the water, all of them were overcome
with exceeding fright, and the bristles of their bodies stood on end. And
seeing him crushed all over by Bhima, like a Danava by Indra, they
proceeded to take him outside, for performing his funeral obsequies. And
then those persons of the Suta clan thus assembled together espied
Krishna of faultless limbs hard by, who stood reclining on a pillar. And
all the Kichakas assembled there, exclaimed, 'Let this unchaste woman be
slain for whom Kichaka hath himself lost his life. Or, without slaying
her here, let us cremate her with him that had lusted after her,--for it
behoveth us to accomplish in every way what is agreeable to that deceased
son of Suta.' And then they addressed Virata, saying, 'It is for her sake
that Kichaka hath lost his life. Let him, therefore, be cremated along
with her. It behoveth thee to grant this permission.' Thus addressed by
them, king Virata, O monarch, knowing fully well the prowess of the Suta
gave his assent to Sairindhri being burnt along with the Suta's son. And
at this, the Kichakas approaching the frightened and stupefied Krishna of
lotus-like eyes, seized her with violence. And binding that damsel of
slender-waist and placing her upon the bier, they set out with great
energy towards the cemetary. And, O king, while thus forcibly carried
towards the cemetary by those sons of the Suta tribe, the blameless and
chaste Krishna living under the protections of her lords, then wailed
aloud for the help of her husbands, saying, 'Oh, let Jaya, and Jayanta,
and Vijaya and Jayatsena, and Jayadvala listen to my words. The Sutas are
taking me away. Let those illustrious Gandharvas endued with speed of
hand, the clatter of whose cars is loud and the twang of whose bowstrings
in the midst of the mighty conflict are heard like the roar of thunder,
listen to my words,--the Sutas are taking me away!'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing those sorrowful words and lamentations
of Krishna, Bhima, without a moment's reflection started up from his bed
and said, 'I have heard, O Sairindhri the words thou hast spoken. Thou
hast, therefore, O timid lady, no more fear at the hands of the Sutas.
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said this, the mighty-armed Bhima
desirous of slaying the Kichakas, began to swell his body. And carefully
changing his attire, he went out of the palace by a wrong egress. And
climbing over a wall by the aid of a tree, he proceeded towards the
cemetary whither the Kichakas had gone. And having leapt over the wall,
and gone out of the excellent city, Bhima impetuously rushed to where the
Sutas were. And, O monarch, proceeding towards the funeral pyre he beheld
a large tree, tall as palmyra-palm, with gigantic shoulders and withered
top. And that slayer of foes grasping with his arms that tree measuring
ten Vyamas, uprooted it, even like an elephant, and placed it upon his
shoulders. And taking up that tree with trunk and branches and measuring
ten Vyamas, that mighty hero rushed towards the Sutas, like Yama himself,
mace in hand. And by the impetus of his rush[18] banians and peepals and
Kinsukas falling down on the earth lay in clusters. And beholding that
Gandharva approach them like a lion in fury, all the Sutas trembling with
fear and greatly distressed, became panic-struck. And they addressed each
other, saying, 'Lo, the powerful Gandharva cometh hither, filled with
rage, and with an upraised tree in hand. Let Sairindhri, therefore, from
whom this danger of ours hath arisen, be set free.' And beholding the
tree that had been uprooted by Bhimasena, they set Draupadi free and ran
breathlessly towards the city And seeing them run away, Bhima, that
mighty son of the Wind-god, despatched, O foremost of kings, by means of
that tree, a hundred and five of them unto the abode of Yama, like the
wielder of the thunderbolt slaying the Danavas. And setting Draupadi free
from her bonds, he then, O king, comforted her. And that mighty-armed and
irrepressible Vrikodara, the son of Pandu, then addressed the distressed
princess of Panchala with face bathed in tears, saying, 'Thus, O timid
one, are they slain that wrong thee without cause. Return, O Krishna, to
the city. Thou hast no longer any fear; I myself will go to the Virata's
kitchen by another route.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'It was thus, O Bharata, that a hundred and five
of those Kichakas were slain. And their corpses lay on the ground, making
the place look like a great forest overspread with uprooted trees after a
hurricane. Thus fell those hundred and five Kichakas. And including
Virata's general slain before, the slaughtered Sutas numbered one hundred
and six. And beholding that exceedingly wonderful feat, men and women
that assembled together, were filled with astonishment. And the power of
speech, O Bharata, was suspended in every one.'"
