SECTION XXXIV
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed by Yudhishthira Susarman was
overwhelmed with shame and hung down his head. And liberated (from
slavery), he went to king Virata, and having saluted the monarch, took
his departure. And the Pandavas also replying on the might of their own
arms, and endued with modesty and observant of vows, having slain their
enemies and liberated Susarman, passed that night happily on the field of
battle. And Virata gratified those mighty warriors, the sons of Kunti,
possessed of super-human prowess with wealth and honour. And Virata said,
"All these gems of mine are now as much mine as yours. Do ye according to
your pleasure live here happily. And ye smiter of foes in battle, I will
bestow on you damsels decked with ornaments, wealth in plenty, and other
things that ye may like. Delivered from perils today by your prowess, I
am now crowned with victory. Do ye all become the lords of the Matsyas.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'And when the king of the Matsyas had addressed
them thus, those descendants of the Kurus with Yudhishthira at their
head, joining their hands, severally replied unto him saying, 'We are
well-pleased with all that thou sayest, O monarch. We, however, have been
much gratified that thou hast today been freed from thy foes.' Thus
answered, that foremost of kings, Virata the lord of the Matsyas, again
addressed Yudhishthira, saying, 'Come, we will install thee in
sovereignty of the Matsyas. And we will also bestow on thee things that
are rare on earth and are objects of desire, for thou deservest
everything at our hands. O foremost of Brahmanas of the Vaiyaghra order I
will bestow on thee gems and kine and gold and rubies and pearls. I bow
unto thee. It is owing to thee that I once more behold today my sons and
kingdom. Afflicted and threatened as I had been with disaster and danger,
it is through thy prowess that I have not succumbed to the foe.' Then
Yudhishthira again addressed the Matsyas, saying, 'Well-pleased are we
with the delightful words that thou hast spoken. Mayst thou be ever
happy, always practising humanity towards all creatures. Let messengers
now, at thy command, speedily repair into the city, in order to
communicate the glad tidings to our friends, and proclaim thy victory.
Hearing these words of him, king Matsya ordered the messengers, saying,'
'Do ye repair to the city and proclaim my victory in battle. And let
damsels and courtesons, decked in ornaments, come out of the city with
every kind of musical instruments.' Hearing this command uttered by the
king of the Matsyas, the men, laying the mandate on their head, all
departed with cheerful hearts. And having repaired to the city that very
night, they proclaimed at the hour of sunrise the victory of the king
about the city-gates.'"
