SECTION XXXVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus despatched by her elder brother, the far-famed
daughter of king Matsya, adorned with a golden necklace, ever obedient to
her brother and possessed of a waist slender as that of the wasp,[36]
endued with the splendour of Lakshmi herself,[37] decked with the plumes
of the peacock of slender make and graceful limbs, her hips encircled by
a zone of pearls, her eye-lashes slightly curved, and her form endued
with every grace, hastily repaired to the dancing-hall like a flash of
lightning rushing towards a mass of dark clouds.[38] And the faultless
and auspicious daughter of Virata, of fine teeth and slender-waist, of
thighs close unto each other and each like the trunk of an elephant, her
person embellished with an excellent garland, sought the son of Pritha
like a she-elephant seeking her mate. And like unto a precious gem or the
very embodiment of prosperity of Indra, of exceeding beauty and large
eyes, that charming and adored and celebrated damsel saluted Arjuna. And
saluted by her, Partha asked that maiden of close thighs and golden
complexion, saying 'What brings thee hither, a damsel decked in a
necklace of gold? Why art thou in such a hurry, O gazelle-eyed maiden?
Why is thy face, O beauteous lady, so cheerless? Tell me all this without
delay!'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Beholding, O king, his friend, the princess of
large-eyes (in that plight), her friend (Arjuna) cheerfully enquired of
her (in these words) the cause of her arrival there and then. And having
approached that bull among men, the princess, standing in the midst of
her female attendants, the displaying proper modesty[39], addressed him,
saying, 'The kine of this realm, O Vrihannala, are being driven away by
the Kurus, and it is to conquer them that my brother will set out bow in
hand. Not long ago his own charioteer was slain in battle, and there is
none equal unto the one slain that can act as my brother's charioteer.
And unto him striving to obtain a charioteer, Sairindhri,
O Vrihannala, hath spoken about thy skill in the management of steeds.
Thou wert formerly the favourite charioteer of Arjuna, and it was with
thee that that bull among the sons of Pandu had alone subjugated the
whole earth. Do thou, therefore, O Vrihannala, act as the charioteer of
my brother. (By this time) our kine have surely been driven away by the
Kurus to a great distance. Requested by me if thou dost not act up to my
words, I who am asking this service of thee out of affection, will give
up my life!' Thus addressed by this friend of graceful hips, that
oppressor of foes, endued with immeasurable prowess, went into the
prince's presence. And like unto a she-elephant running after her young
one, the princess possessed of large eyes followed that hero advancing
with hasty steps like unto an elephant with rent temples. And beholding
him from a distance, the prince himself said, 'With thee as his
charioteer, Dhananjaya the son of Kunti had gratified Agni at the
Khandava forest and subjugated the whole world! The Sairindhri hath
spoken of thee to me. She knoweth the Pandavas. Do thou, therefore, O
Vrihannala, hold, as thou didst, the reins of my steeds, desirous as I am
of righting with the Kurus and rescuing my bovine wealth. Thou wert
formerly the beloved charioteer of Arjuna and it was with thee that that
bull among the sons of Pandu had alone subjugated the whole earth!' Thus
addressed, Vrihannala replied unto the prince, saying, 'What ability have
I to act as a charioteer in the field of battle? If it is song or dance
of musical instruments or such other things, I can entertain thee
therewith, but where is my skill for becoming a charioteer?'
"Uttara said, 'O Vrihannala, be thou a singer or a dancer, hold thou (for
the present), without loss of time, the reins of my excellent steeds,
mounting upon my car!'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Although that oppressor of foes, the son of
Pandu, was acquainted with everything, yet in the presence of Uttara, he
began to make many mistakes for the sake of fun. And when he sought to
put the coat of mail on his body by raising it upwards, the large-eyed
maidens, beholding it, burst out into a loud laughter. And seeing him
quite ignorant of putting on armour, Uttara himself equipped Vrihannala
with a costly coat of mail. And casing his own person in an excellent
armour of solar effulgence, and hoisting his standard bearing the figure
of a lion, the prince caused Vrihannala to become his charioteer. And
with Vrihannala to hold his reins, the hero set out, taking with him many
costly bows and a large number of beautiful arrows. And his friend,
Uttara and her maidens then said unto Vrihannala, 'Do thou, O Vrihannala,
bring for our dolls (when thou comest back) various kinds of good and
fine cloths after vanquishing the Kurus assembled for battle of whom
Bhishma and Drona are foremost!' Thus addressed, Partha the son of Pandu,
in a voice deep as the roar of the clouds, smilingly said unto that bevy
of fair maidens. If, thus 'Uttara can vanquish those mighty warriors in
battle, I will certainly bring excellent and beautiful cloths.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said these words, the heroic Arjuna
urged the steeds towards the Kuru army over which floated innumerable
flags. Just, however, as they were starting elderly dames and maidens,
and Brahmanas of rigid vows, beholding Uttara seated on his excellent car
with Vrihannala as charioteer and under that great banner hoisted on
high, walked round the car to bless the hero. And the women said, 'Let
the victory that Arjuna treading like a bull had achieved of old on the
occasion of burning the forest of Khandava, be thine, O Vrihannala, when
thou encounterest the Kurus today with prince Uttara.'"
