SECTION XLVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'King Duryodhana then, on the field of battle said
unto Bhishma, and unto Drona--that tiger among warriors, and unto
Kripa--that mighty car-warrior, these words, 'Both myself and Kama had
said this unto the preceptors[54] I refer to the subject again, for I am
not satisfied with having said it once. Even this was the pledge of the
sons of Pandu that if defeated (at dice) they would reside to our
knowledge in countries and woods for twelve years, and one more year
unknown to us. That thirteenth year, instead of being over, is yet
running. Vibhatsu, therefore, who is still to live undiscovered hath
appeared before us. And if Vibhatsu hath come before the term of exile is
at end, the Pandavas shall have to pass another twelve years in the
woods. Whether it is due to forgetfulness (on their part) induced by
desire of dominion, or whether it is a mistake of ours, it behoveth
Bhishma to calculate the shortness or excess (of the promised period).
When an object of desire may or may not be attained, a doubt necessarily
attaches to one of the alternatives, and what is decided in one way often
ends differently. [55] Even moralists are puzzled in judging of their own
acts. [56] As regards ourselves, we have come hither to fight with the
Matsyas and to seize their kine stationed towards the north. If,
meanwhile, it is Arjuna that hath come, what fault can attach to us? We
have come hither to fight against the Matsyas on behalf of the Trigartas;
and as numerous were the acts represented unto us of the oppressions
committed by the Matsyas. it was for this that we promised aid to the
Trigartas who were overcome with fear. And it was agreed between us that
they should first seize, on the afternoon of the seventh lunar day, the
enormous wealth of kine that the Matsyas have, and that we should, at
sunrise of the eighteen day of the moon, seize these kine when the king
of the Matsyas would be pursuing those first seized. It may be that the
Trigartas are now bringing a way the kine, or being defeated, are coming
towards us for negotiating with the king of the Matsyas. Or, it may be,
that having driven the Trigartas off, the king of the Matsyas, at the
head of this people and his whole army of fierce warriors, appeareth on
the scene and advanceth to make night-attacks upon us. It may be that
some one leader among them, endued with mighty energy, is advancing for
vanquishing us, or, it may be that the king himself of the Matsyas is
come. But be it the king of the Matsyas or Vibhatsu, we must all fight
him. Even this hath been our pledge. Why are all these of foremost
car-warriors,--Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and Vikarna and Drona's
son,--now sitting on their cars, panic-stricken? At present there is
nothing better than fighting. Therefore, make up your minds. If, for the
cattle we have seized, an encounter takes place with the divine wielder
himself of the thunderbolt or even with Yama, who is there that will be
liable to reach Hastinapura? Pierced by the shafts (of the foe), how will
the foot-soldiers, in flying through the deep forest with their backs on
the field, escape with life, when escape for the cavalry is doubtful?
Hearing these words of Duryodhana, Karna said, 'Disregarding the
preceptor, make all arrangements. He knoweth well the intentions of the
Pandavas and striketh terror in our hearts. I see that his affection for
Arjuna is very great. Seeing him only coming, he chanteth his praises.
Make ye such arrangements that our troops may not break. Everything is in
confusion for Drona's having only heard the neigh of (Arjuna's) steeds.
Make ye such arrangements that these troops, come to a distant land in
this hot season and in the midst of this mighty forest, may not fall into
confusion and be subjugated by the foe. The Pandavas are always the
special favourites of the preceptor. The selfish Pandavas have stationed
Drona amongst us. Indeed, he betrayeth himself by his speech. Who would
ever extol a person upon hearing the neigh only of his steeds? Horses
always neigh, whether walking or standing, the winds blow at all times;
and Indra also always showereth rain. The roar of the clouds may
frequently be heard. What hath Partha to do with these, and why is he to
be praised for these? All this (on Drona's part), therefore, is due only
to either the desire of doing good to Arjuna or to his wrath and hatred
towards us. Preceptors are wise, and sinless, and very kind to all
creatures. They, however, should never be consulted at times of peril. It
is in luxurious palaces, and assemblies and pleasure-gardens, that
learned men, capable of making speeches, seem to be in their place.
Performing many wonderful things, in the assembly, it is there that
learned men find their place, or even there where sacrificial utensils
and their proper placing and washing are needed. In a knowledge of the
lapses of others, in studying the characters of men, in the science of
horses and elephants and cars, in treating the diseases of asses and
camels and goats and sheeps and kine, in planning buildings and gateways,
and in pointing out the defects of food and drink, the learned are truly
in their own sphere. Disregarding learned men that extol the heroism of
the foe, make ye such arrangements that the foe may be destroyed. Placing
the kine securely, array the troops in order of battle. Place guards in
proper places so that we may fight the foe.'"
