SECTION XXI
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having heard his words, Bhishma, senior in wisdom,
and endued with great effulgence, paid honours to him, and then spoke
words suitable to the occasion. And he said, 'How fortunate that they are
all well, with Krishna! How fortunate that they have procured aid, and
that they are inclined to a virtuous course! How fortunate that those
scions of Kuru's race desire peace with their cousins! There is no doubt
that what thou hast said is true. Thy words, however, are exceedingly
sharp,--the reason, I suppose, being that thou art a Brahmana. No doubt,
the sons of Pandu were much harassed both here and in woods. No doubt, by
law they are entitled to get all the property of their father. Arjuna,
the son of Pritha, is strong trained in weapons, and is a great
car-warrior. Who, in sooth, can withstand in battle Dhananjaya the son of
Pandu. Even the wielder himself of the thunderbolt cannot,--other bowmen
are hardly worth mention. My belief is that he is a match for all the
three worlds!' And while Bhishma was thus speaking, Karna wrathfully and
insolently interrupted his words, and looking at Duryodhana said, 'There
is no creature in the world, O Brahmana, who is not informed of all these
facts. What is the good of repeating them again and again? On behalf of
Duryodhana, Sakuni formerly won in game of dice. Yudhishthira, the son of
Pandu went to the woods according to a stipulation. He is now paying no
regard to that stipulation, but confident of aid from the Matsyas and
Panchalas, he wisheth to get back his ancestral throne. O learned man,
Duryodhana would not yield even a single foot of land if thou appealest
to his fears, but if justice requires, he would give up the whole earth
even to a foe. If they wish to get back their ancestral throne, they
should pass the specified period of time in the forest as had been
stipulated. Afterwards let them live as the dependants of Duryodhana,
safe and sound. From dull-headedness, however, let them not turn their
mind towards an absolutely unrighteous course. If, nevertheless,
abandoning the path of virtue, they desire war, then when they encounter
in battle these praise-worthy Kurus, they will remember these my words.'
"Bhishma said, 'What is the use of thy talking, O Radha's son? Thou
shouldst remember that occasion when Pritha's son, single-handed,
over-powered in battle six car-warriors. If we do not act as this
Brahmana hath said, to be sure, we shall be all slain by him in battle!"
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Dhritarashtra pacified Bhishma with words
of entreaty, rebuked the son of Radha, and spoke the following words,
What Bhishma, Santanu's son, hath said is salutary for us, as also for
the Pandavas, and likewise for the whole universe. I shall, however,
after deliberation, send Sanjaya to the sons of Pandu. So thou needst not
wait. Go thou to the son of Pandu this very day.' The Kaurava chief then
honoured Drupada's priest and sent him back to the Pandavas. And
summoning Sanjaya to the council-hall, he addressed him in the following
words."
