SECTION XVII
"Salya said, 'Now when the great Indra, the intelligent chief of the
gods, was deliberating with the guardians of the world and other deities
upon the means of slaying Nahusha, there appeared at that spot the
venerable ascetic Agastya. And Agastya honoured the lord of the gods and
said, 'How fortunate that thou art flourishing after the destruction of
that being of universal form, as also that of Vritra. And how fortunate.
O Purandara, Nahusha hath been hurled from the throne of heaven. How
fortunate, O slayer of Vala, that I behold thee with all thy enemies
killed.'
"Indra said, 'Hath thy journey hither been pleasant, O great saint, I am
delighted to see thee. Accept from me water for washing thy feet and
face, as also the Arghya and the cow.'
"Salya continued, 'Indra, well-pleased, began to question that best of
saints and greatest of Brahmanas when he was seated on a seat after
receiving due honours, thus, O revered saint, O best of Brahmanas, I wish
to have it recited by thee how Nahusha of vicious soul was hurled from
heaven.'
"Agastya said, 'Listen, O Indra, to the pleasant narrative how the wicked
and vicious Nahusha, intoxicated with pride of strength, had been hurled
from heaven. The pure-spirited Brahmanas and celestial saints, while
carrying him, weary with toil, questioned that vicious one, O best of
victors, saying, 'O Indra, there are certain hymns in the Vedas, directed
to be recited while sprinkling the cows. Are they authentic or not?
Nahusha, who had lost his senses by the operation of the Tamas, told them
that they were not authentic.' The saints then said, 'Thou art tending
towards unrighteousness; thou takest not to the righteous path. The
greatest saints have formerly said they are authentic, O Indra.' And
incited by Untruth, he touched me on my head with his foot. At this, O
lord of Sachi, he became divested of power and of good looks. Then, as he
was agitated and overpowered with fear, I spoke to him, 'Since thou hast
pronounced as spurious the unexceptionable hymns of the Veda which have
been recited by Brahmarsis (Brahmana saints), and since thou hast touched
my head with thy foot, and since thou, O ignorant wretch, hast turned
these unapproachable saints, equal to Brahma, into animals for carrying
thee, therefore, O wretch, be divested of thy lustre, and being hurled
headlong, fall thou from heaven, the effect of all thy good deeds being
exhausted. For ten thousand years, thou shalt, in the form of an enormous
snake, roam over the earth. When that period is full, thou mayst come
back to heaven. Thus hath that wretch been hurled from the throne of
heaven, O repressor of foes.' How fortunate, O Indra, that we are
flourishing now. That thorn of the Brahmanas hath been killed. O lord of
Sachi, repair thou to heaven, protect the worlds, subdue thy senses,
subdue thy foes, and be glorified by the great saints.'
"Salya continued, 'Then, O ruler of men, the gods, and the bands of great
saints were exceedingly pleased. And so also were the Pitris, the
Yakshas, the Snakes, the Rakshasas, the Gandharvas, and all the bands of
celestial nymphs. And the tanks, the rivers, the mountains, and the seas
also were highly pleased. And all came up and said, 'How fortunate, O
slayer of foes, that thou art flourishing! How fortunate, that the
intelligent Agastya hath killed the vicious Nahusha! How fortunate that
the vile individual hath been turned into a snake to roam over the
earth!'"
earth!'"
