SECTION XLIII
"Dhritarashtra said, 'What is the object of asceticism (mauna)? Of the
two kinds of mauna (viz., the restraining of speech and meditation),
which is approved by thee? O learned one, tell me the true aspect of
mauna. Can a person of learning attain to a state of quietude and
emancipation (moksha) by that mauna? O Muni, how also is asceticism
(mauna) to be practised here?'
"Sanat-sujata said, 'Since the Supreme Soul cannot be penetrated by both
the Vedas and the mind, it is for this that Soul itself is called mauna.
That from which both the Vedic syllable Om and this one (ordinary sounds)
have arisen, that One, O king, is displayed as the Word.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'Is he that knoweth both the Rig and the Yajus
Vedas, is he that knoweth the Sama Veda, sullied by sins or not when he
commiteth sins?'
"Sanat-sujata said, 'I tell thee truly that the man that hath not
restrained his senses is not rescued from his sinful acts by either the
Sama or the Rig, or the Yajus Veda. The Vedas never rescue from sin the
deceitful person living by deceit. On the other hand, like newfledged
birds forsaking their nest, the Vedas forsake such a person at the end.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'O thou that hast restrained thy senses, if, indeed,
the Vedas are not competent to rescue a person without the aid of virtue,
whence then is this delusion of the Brahmanas that the Vedas are always
destructive of sins?'
"Sanat-sujata said, 'O magnanimous one, this universe hath sprung from
that Supreme Soul by the union of Conditions respecting name, form, and
other attributes. The Vedas also, pointing it out duly, declare the same,
and inculcate that the Supreme Soul and the universe are different and
not identical. It is for attaining to that Supreme Soul that asceticism
and sacrifices are ordained, and it is by these two that the man of
learning earneth virtue. Destroying sin by virtue, his soul is
enlightened by knowledge. The man of knowledge, by the aid of knowledge,
attaineth to the Supreme Soul. Otherwise, he that coveteth the four
objects of human pursuit, taking with him all that he doth here, enjoyeth
their fruits hereafter, and (as those fruits) are not everlasting cometh
back to the region of action (when the enjoyment is over). Indeed, the
fruits of ascetic austerities performed in this world have to be enjoyed
in the other world (as regards those persons who have not obtained the
mastery of their souls). As regards those Brahmanas employed in ascetic
practices (who have the mastery of their souls), even these regions are
capable of yielding fruits.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'O Sanat-sujata, how can ascetic austerities which
are all of the same kind, be sometimes successful and sometimes
unsuccessful? Tell us this in order that we may know it!'
"Sanat-sujata said, 'That asceticism which is not stained by (desire and
other) faults is said to be capable of procuring emancipation, and is,
therefore, successful, while the asceticism that is stained by vanity and
want of true devotion is regarded unsuccessful. All thy enquiries, O
Kshatriya, touch the very root of asceticism. It is by asceticism that
they that are learned, know Brahman and win immortality!'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'I have listened to what thou hast said about
asceticism unstained by faults, and by which I have succeeded in knowing
an eternal mystery. Tell me now, O Sanat-sujata, about asceticism that is
stained by faults!'
"Sanat-sujata said, 'O king, the twelve, including anger, as also the
thirteen kinds of wickedness, are the faults of asceticism that is
stained. Anger, lust, avarice, ignorance of right and wrong, discontent,
cruelty, malice, vanity, grief, love of pleasure, envy, and speaking ill
of others, are generally the faults of human beings. These twelve should
always be avoided by men. Any one amongst these can singly effect the
destruction of men, O bull among men. Indeed, every one of these wait for
opportunity in respect of men, like a hunter expectant of opportunities
in respect of deer. Assertion of one's own superiority, desire of
enjoying others' wives, humiliating others from excess of pride,
wrathfulness, fickleness, and refusing to maintain those worthy of being
maintained, these six acts of wickedness are always practised by sinful
men defying all dangers here and hereafter. He that regards the
gratification of lust to be one of life's aims, he that is exceedingly
proud, he that grieves having given away, he that never spends money, he
that persecutes his subjects by exacting hateful taxes, he that delights
in the humiliation of others, and he that hates his own wives,--these
seven are others that are also called wicked. Righteousness, truth
(abstention from injury and truthfulness of speech), self-restraint,
asceticism, delight in the happiness of others, modesty, forbearance,
love of others, sacrifices, gifts, perseverance, knowledge of the
scriptures,--these twelve constitute the practices of Brahmanas. He that
succeeds in acquiring these twelve, becomes competent to sway the entire
earth. He that is endued with three, two, or even one, of these, should
be regarded of heavenly prosperity. Self-restraint, renunciation, and
knowledge of Self,--in these are emancipation. Those Brahmanas that are
endued with wisdom, say, that these are attributes in which truth
predominates. Self-restraint is constituted by eighteen virtues. Breaches
and non-observance of ordained acts and omissions, falsehood, malice,
lust, wealth, love of (sensual) pleasure, anger, grief, thirst, avarice,
deceit, joy in the misery of others, envy, injuring others, regret,
aversion from pious acts, forgetfulness of duty, calumniating others, and
vanity-he that is freed from these (eighteen) vices; is said by the
righteous to be self-restrained. The eighteen faults (that have been
enumerated) constitute what is called mada or pride. Renunciation is of
six kinds. The reverse of those six again are faults called mada. (The
faults, therefore, that go by the name of mada are eighteen and six). The
six kinds of renunciation are all commendable. The third only is
difficult of practice, but by that all sorrow is overcome. Indeed, if
that kind of renunciation be accomplished in practice, he that
accomplishes it overcomes all the pairs of contraries in the world.
'The six kinds of renunciation are all commendable. They are these: The
first is never experiencing joy on occasions of prosperity. The second is
the abandonment of sacrifices, prayers, and pious acts. That which is
called the third, O king, is the abandonment of desire or withdrawing
from the world. Indeed, it is in consequence of this third kind of
renunciation of desire, which is evidenced by the abandonment of all
objects of enjoyment (without enjoying them) and not their abandonment
after having enjoyed them to the fill, nor by abandonment after
acquisition, nor by abandonment only after one has become incompetent to
enjoy from loss of appetite. The fourth kind of renunciation consists in
this: One should not grieve nor suffer his self to be afflicted by grief
when one's actions fail, notwithstanding one's possession of all the
virtues and all kinds of wealth. Or, when anything disagreeable happens,
one feeleth no pain. The fifth kind of renunciation consists in not
soliciting even one's sons, wives, and others that may all be very dear.
The sixth kind consists in giving away to a deserving person who
solicits, which act of gifts is always productive of merit. By these
again, one acquires the knowledge of Self. As regards this last
attribute, it involves eight qualities. These are truth, meditation,
distinction of subject and object, capacity for drawing inferences,
withdrawal from the world, never taking what belongeth to others, the
practices of Brahmacharya vows (abstinence), and non-acceptance (of
gifts).
'So also the attribute of mada (the opposite of dama or self-restraint)
hath faults which have all been indicated (in the scriptures). These
faults should be avoided. I have spoken (to thee) of renunciation and
self-knowledge. And as, self-Knowledge hath eight virtues, so the want of
it hath eight faults. Those faults should be avoided. O Bharata, he that
is liberated from this five senses, mind, the past and the future,
becomes happy. O king, let thy soul be devoted to truth; all the worlds
are established on truth; indeed, self-control, renunciation, and
self-knowledge are said to have truth for their foremost attribute.
Avoiding (these) faults, one should practise asceticism here. The
Ordainer hath ordained that truth alone should be the vow of the
righteous. Asceticism, that is dissociated from these faults and endued
with these virtues, becomes the source of great prosperity, I have now
briefly told these about that sin-destroying and sacred subject which
thou hadst asked me and which is capable of liberating a person from
birth, death, and decrepitude.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'With Akhyana (Puranas) as their fifth, the Vedas
declare the Supreme Soul to be this universe consisting of mobile and
immobile things. Others regard four God-heads; and others three; others
again regard two; and others only one; and others regard Brahman alone as
the sole existent object (there being nothing else possessing a separate
existence). Amongst these, which should I know to be really possessed of
the knowledge of Brahman.'
"Sanat-sujata, 'There is but one Brahman which is Truth's self. It is
from ignorance of that One, that god-heads have been conceived to be
diverse. But who is there, O king, that hath attained to Truth's self or
Brahman? Man regardeth himself wise without knowing that One Object of
knowledge, and from desire of happiness is engaged in study and the
practices of charity and sacrifices. They have deviated from Truth
(Brahman) and entertain purposes corresponding (with their state) and
hence relying on the truth of Vedic texts thereof perform sacrifices.
Some perform (or attain the object of) sacrifices by the mind
(meditation), some by words (recitation of particular prayers, or Yapa);
and some by acts (actual consummation of the Yatishtoma and other costly
rites). The person, however, who seeketh Brahman through Truth, obtaineth
his desired objects at home. When however, one's purposes become abortive
(through absence of knowledge of Self), one should adopt vows of silence
and such like, called Dikshavrata. Indeed, Diksha cometh from the root
Diksha, meaning the observance of vows. As regards those that have
knowledge of Self, with them Truth is the highest object of pursuit.'
'The fruits of knowledge are visible; asceticism yieldeth fruits
hereafter. A Brahmana who (without knowledge and asceticism) hath only
read much should only be known as a great reader. Therefore, O Kshatriya,
never think that one can be a Brahman (Brahman-knowing) by only reading
the scriptures. He, on the other hand, should be known by thee to be
possessed of the knowledge of the Brahman who doth not deviate from
Truth. O Kshatriya, the verses that were recited by Atharvan to a
conclave of great sages, in days of old, are known by the name of
Chhandas. They are not be regarded as acquainted with the Chhandas who
have only read through the Vedas, without having attained to the
knowledge of Him who is known through the Vedas. The Chhandas, O best of
men, become the means of obtaining Brahman independently and without the
necessity of anything foreign. They cannot be regarded as acquainted with
the Chhandas who are acquainted only with the modes of sacrifice enjoined
in the Vedas. On the other hand, having waited upon those that are
acquainted with the Vedas, have not the righteous attained to the Object
that is knowable by the Vedas? There is none who hath truly caught the
sense of the Vedas or there may be some who have, O king, caught the
sense. He that hath only read the Vedas, doth not know the Object
knowable by them. He, however, that is established in Truth, know the
Object knowable by the Vedas. Amongst those faculties which lead to
perception of the body as the acting agent, there is none by which true
knowledge may be acquired. By the mind alone one cannot acquire the
knowledge of Self and Not-Self. Indeed, he that knoweth Self also knoweth
what is Not-self. He, on the other hand, that knoweth only what is
Not-self, doth not know Truth. He, again, that knoweth the proofs,
knoweth also that which is sought to be proved. But what that Object in
its nature is (which is sought to be proved) is not known to either the
Vedas or those that are acquainted with the Vedas. For all that, however,
those Brahmanas that are (truly) acquainted with the Vedas succeed in
obtaining a knowledge of the Object knowable (by the Vedas) through the
Vedas. As the branch of a particular tree is sometimes resorted to for
pointing out the lunar digit of the first day of the lighted fortnight so
the Vedas are used for indicating the highest attributes of the Supreme
Soul. I know him to be a Brahmana (possessing a knowledge of Brahman) who
expoundeth the doubts of others, having himself mastered all his own
doubts, and who is possessed of the knowledge of Self. One cannot find
what the Soul is by seeking in the East, the South, the West, the North,
or in the subsidiary directions or horizontally. Very rarely can it be
found in him who regardeth this body be to Self. Beyond the conception of
even the Vedas, the man of Yoga-meditation only can behold the Supreme.
Completely restraining all thy senses and thy mind also seek thou that
Brahman which is known to reside in thy own Soul. He is not a Muni who
practiseth only Yoga-meditation; nor he who liveth only in the woods
(having retired from the world). He, however, is a Muni and is superior
to all who knoweth his own nature. In consequence of one's being able to
expound every object (Vyakarana), one is said to be endued with universal
knowledge (Vaiyakarana); and, indeed, the science itself is called
Vyakarana owing to its being able to expound every object to its very
root (which is Brahman). The man who beholdeth all the regions as present
before his eyes, is said to be possessed of universal knowledge. He that
stayeth in Truth and knoweth Brahman is said to be a Brahmana, and a
Brahmana, possesseth universal knowledge. A Kshatriya also, that
practises such virtues, may behold Brahman. He may also attain to that
high state by ascending step by step, according to what is indicated in
the Vedas. Knowing it for certain, I tell thee this.'"
