SECTION XLII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then the illustrious and wise king Dhritarashtra,
having applauded the words spoken by Vidura, questioned Sanat-sujata in
secret, desirous of obtaining the highest of all knowledge. And the king
questioned the Rishi saying, 'O Sanat-sujata, I hear that thou art of the
opinion that there is no Death. Again it is said that the gods and the
Asuras, practise ascetic austerities in order to avoid death. Of these
two opinions, then, which is true?'
"Sanat-sujata said, 'Some say, death is avertable by particular acts;
others' opinion there is no death; thou hast asked me which of these is
true. Listen to me, O king, as I discourse to thee on this, so that thy
doubts may be removed. Know, O Kshatriya, that both of these are true.
The learned are of opinion that death results from ignorance. I say that
ignorance is Death, and so the absence of ignorance (Knowledge) is
immortality. It is from ignorance that the Asuras became subject to
defeat and death, and it is from the absence of ignorance that the gods
have attained the nature of Brahman. Death doth not devour creatures like
a tiger; its form itself is unascertainable. Besides this, some imagine
Yama to be Death. This, however, is due to the weakness of the mind. The
pursuit of Brahman or self-knowledge is immortality. That (imaginary) god
(Yama) holdeth his sway in the region of the Pitris, being the source of
bliss to the virtuous and of woe to the sinful. It is at his command that
death in the form of wrath, ignorance, and covetousness, occurreth among
men. Swayed by pride, men always walk in unrighteous path. None amongst
them succeeds in attaining to his real nature. With their understanding
clouded, and themselves swayed by there passions, they cast off their
bodies and repeatedly fall into hell. They are always followed by their
senses. It is for this that ignorance receives the name of death. Those
men that desire the fruits of action when the time cometh for enjoying
those fruits, proceed to heaven, casting off their bodies. Hence they
cannot avoid death. Embodied creatures, from inability to attain the
knowledge of Brahman and from their connection with earthly enjoyments,
are obliged to sojourn in a cycle of re-births, up and down and around,
The natural inclination of man towards pursuits that are unreal is alone
the cause of the senses being led to error. The soul that is constantly
affected by the pursuit of objects that are unreal, remembering only that
with which it is always engaged, adoreth only earthly enjoyments that
surround it. The desire of enjoyments first killeth men. Lust and wrath
soon follow behind it. These three, viz., the desire of enjoyments, lust,
and wrath, lead foolish men to death. They, however, that have conquered
their souls, succeed by self-restraint, to escape death. He that hath
conquered his soul without suffering himself to be excited by his
ambitious desire, conquereth these, regarding them as of no value, by the
aid of self-knowledge. Ignorance, assuming the form of Yama, cannot
devour that learned man who controlled his desires in this manner. That
man who followeth his desires is destroyed along with his desires. He,
however, that can renounce desire, can certainly drive away all kinds of
woe. Desire is, indeed, ignorance and darkness and hell in respect of all
creatures, for swayed by it they lose their senses. As intoxicated
persons in walking along a street reel towards ruts and holes, so men
under the influence of desire, misled by deluding joys, run towards
destruction. What can death do to a person whose soul hath not been
confounded or misled by desire? To him, death hath no terrors, like a
tiger made of straw. Therefore, O Kshatriya, if the existence of desire,
which is ignorance, is to be destroyed, no wish, not even the slightest
one, is either to be thought of or pursued. That soul, which is in thy
body, associated as it is with wrath and covetousness and filled with
ignorance, that is death. Knowing that death arises in this way, he that
relies on knowledge, entertaineth no fear of death. Indeed, as the body
is destroyed when brought under the influence of death, so death itself
is destroyed when it comes under the influence of knowledge.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'The Vedas declare the emancipating capacity of
those highly sacred and eternal regions, that are said to be obtainable
by the regenerate classes by prayers and sacrifices. Knowing this, why
should not a learned person have recourse to (religious) acts?'[3]
"Sanat-sujata said, 'Indeed, he that is without knowledge proceedeth
thither by the path indicated by thee, and the Vedas also declare that
thither are both bliss and emancipation. But he that regardeth the
material body to be self, if he succeeds in renouncing desire, at once
attaineth emancipation (or Brahman). If, however, one seeketh
emancipation without renouncing desire, one must have to proceed along
the (prescribed) route of action, taking care to destroy the chances of
his retracing the routes that he hath once passed over.'[4]
"Dhritarashtra said, 'Who is it that urgeth that Unborn and Ancient One?
If, again, it is He that is all this Universe in consequence of His
having entered everything (without desire as He is) what can be His
action, or his happiness? O learned sage, tell me all this truly.'[5]
"Sanat-sujata said, 'There is great objection in completely identifying
(as here) the two that are different Creatures always spring from the
union of Conditions (with what in its essence is without Conditions).
This view doth not detract from the supremacy of the Unborn and the
Ancient One. As for men, they also originate in the union of Conditions.
All this that appears is nothing but that everlasting Supreme Soul.
Indeed, the universe is created by the Supreme Soul itself undergoing
transformations. The Vedas to attribute this power (of
self-transformation) to the Supreme Soul. For the identity, again, of the
power and its possessor, both the Vedas and others are the authority.'[6]
"Dhritarashtra said, 'In this world, some practise virtue, and some
renounce action or Karma (adopting what is called Sannyasa Yoga).
(Respecting those that practise virtue) I ask, is virtue competent to
destroy vice, or is it itself destroyed by vice?'
"Sanat-sujata said, 'The fruits of virtue and of (perfect) inaction are
both serviceable in that respect (i.e., for procuring emancipation).
Indeed, both are sure means for the attainment of emancipation. The man,
however, that is wise, achieveth success by knowledge (inaction). On the
other hand, the materialist acquireth merit (by action) and (as the
consequence thereof) emancipation. He hath also (in course of his
pursuit) to incur sin. Having obtained again fruits of both virtue and
vice which are transitory, (heaven having its end as also hell in respect
of the virtuous and the sinful), the man of action becometh once more
addicted to action as the consequence of his own previous virtues and
vices. The man of action, however, who possesseth intelligence,
destroyeth his sins by his virtuous acts. Virtue, therefore, is strong,
and hence the success of the man of action.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'Tell me, according to their gradation, of those
eternal regions that are said to be attainable, as the fruits of their
own virtuous acts, by regenerate persons, engaged in the practice of
virtue. Speak unto me of others' regions also of a similar kind. O
learned sire, I do not wish to hear of actions (towards which man's heart
naturally inclineth, however interdicted or sinful they may be).'
"Sanat-sujata said, 'Those regenerate persons that take pride in their
Yoga practices, like strong men in their own strength, departing hence,
shine in the region of Brahman. Those regenerate persons that proudly
exert in performing sacrifices and other Vedic rites, as the fruit of
that knowledge which is theirs, in consequence of those acts, freed from
this world, proceed to that region which is the abode of the deities.
There are others, again, conversant with the Vedas, who are of opinion
that the performance of the sacrifices and rites (ordained by the Vedas)
is obligatory (their non-performance being sinful). Wedded to external
forms, though seeking the development of the inner self (for they
practise these rites for only virtue's sake and not for the
accomplishment of particular aims), these persons should not be regarded
very highly (although some respect should be theirs). Wherever, again,
food and drink worthy of a Brahmana are abundant, like grass and reeds in
a spot during the rainy season, there should the Yogin seek for his
livelihood (without afflicting the householder of scanty means); by no
means should he afflict his own self by hunger and thirst. In a place,
where there may be both inconvenience and danger to one, for one's
aversion, to disclose one's superiority, he that doth not proclaim his
superiority is better than he that doth. The food offered by that person
who is not pained at the sight of another disclosing his superiority, and
who never eateth without offering the prescribed share to Brahmanas and
guests, is approved by the righteous. As a dog oftentimes devoureth its
own evacuations to its injury, so those Yogins devour their own vomit who
procure their livelihood by disclosing their pre-eminence. The wise know
him for a Brahmana, who, living in the midst of kindred, wishes his
religious practices to remain always unknown to them. What other Brahmana
deserveth to know the Supreme Soul, that is unconditioned, without
attributes, unchangeable, one and alone, and without duality of any kind?
In consequence of such practices, a Kshatriya can know the Supreme Soul
and behold it in his own soul. He that regardeth the Soul to be the
acting and feeling Self,--what sins are not committed by that thief who
robbeth the soul of its attributes? A Brahmana should be without
exertion, should never accept gifts, should win the respect of the
righteous, should be quiet, and though conversant with the Vedas should
seem to be otherwise, for then only may he attain to knowledge and know
Brahman. They that are poor in earthly but rich in heavenly wealth and
sacrifices, become unconquerable and fearless, and they should be
regarded as embodiments of Brahman. That person even, in this world, who
(by performing sacrifices) succeedeth in meeting with the gods that
bestow all kinds of desirable objects (on performers of sacrifices), is
not equal to him that knoweth Brahman for the performer of sacrifices
hath to undergo exertions (while he that knoweth Brahman attaineth to Him
without such exertions). He was said to be really honoured, who,
destitute of actions, is honoured by the deities. He should never regard
himself as honoured who is honoured by others. One should not, therefore,
grieveth when one is not honoured by others. People act according to
their nature just as they open and shut their eyelids; and it is only the
learned that pay respect to others. The man that is respected should
think so. They again, in this world, that are foolish, apt to sin, and
adepts in deceit, never pay respect to those that are worthy of respect;
on the other hand, they always show disrespect to such persons. The
world's esteem and asceticism (practices of Mauna), can never exist
together. Know that this world is for those that are candidates for
esteem, while the other world is for those that are devoted to
asceticism. Here, in this world, O Kshatriya, happiness (the world's
esteem) resides in worldly prosperity. The latter, however, is an
impediment (to heavenly bliss). Heavenly prosperity, on the other hand,
is unattainable by one that is without true wisdom. The righteous say
that there are various kinds of gates, all difficult of being guarded,
for giving access to the last kind of prosperity. These are truth,
uprightness, modesty, self-control, purity of mind and conduct and
knowledge (of the Vedas). These six are destructive of vanity and
ignorance.'"
