SECTION XLV
"Sanat-sujata said, 'Sorrow, anger, covetousness, lust, ignorance,
laziness, malice, self-importance, continuous desire of gain, affection,
jealousy and evil speech,--these twelve, O monarch, are grave faults that
are destructive of men's lives. Each of these, O monarch, wait for
opportunities to seize mankind. Afflicted by them, men lose their senses
and commit sinful acts. He that is covetous, he that is fierce, he that
is harsh of speech, he that is garrulous, he that is given to nursing
anger, he that is boastful,--these six of wicked disposition, on
obtaining wealth, cannot treat others with courtesy. He that regardeth
sensual gratification as the end of life, he that is self-conceited, he
that boasteth having made a gift, he that never spendeth, he that is weak
in mind, he that is given to self-admiration, and he that hateth his own
wife,--these seven are counted as wicked men of sinful habits.
Righteousness, truth, asceticism, self-restraint, contentment, modesty,
renunciation, love of others, gift, acquaintance with the scriptures,
patience, and forgiveness,--these twelve are the practices of a Brahmana.
He that doth not fall off from these twelve, may sway the entire earth.
He that is endued with three, or two, or even one, of these, doth never
regard anything as his own to the exclusion of others. Self-restraint,
renunciation, and knowledge,--in these reside emancipation. These are the
attributes of Brahmanas endued with wisdom and regarding Brahman as the
highest of all objects of attainment. True or false, it is not laudable
for a Brahmana to speak ill of others; they that do this have hell for
their abode. Mada hath eighteen faults which have not yet been enumerated
by me. They are ill-will towards others, throwing obstacles in the way of
virtuous acts, detraction, falsehood in speech, lust, anger, dependence,
speaking ill of others, finding out the faults of others for report,
waste of wealth, quarrel, insolence, cruelty to living creatures, malice,
ignorance, disregard of those that are worthy of regard, loss of the
senses of right and wrong, and always seeking to injure others. A wise
man, therefore, should not give way to mada, for the accompaniments of
mada are censurable. Friendship is said to possess six indications;
firstly, friends delight in the prosperity of friends, and secondly, are
distressed at their adversity. If any one asketh for anything which is
dear to his heart, but which should not be asked for, a true friend
surely giveth away even that. Fourthly, a true friend who is of a
righteous disposition, when asked, can give away his very prosperity, his
beloved sons, and even his own wife. Fifthly, a friend should not dwell
in the house of a friend, on whom he may have bestowed everything, but
should enjoy what he earneth himself. Sixthly, a friend stoppeth not to
sacrifice his own good (for his friend). The man of wealth who seeketh to
acquire those good qualities, and who becometh charitable and righteous
restraineth his five senses from their respective objects. Such restraint
of the senses is asceticism. When it groweth in degree, it is capable of
winning regions of bliss hereafter (unlike Knowledge which leadeth to
success even here). They that have fallen off from patience (and are
incapable, therefore, of attaining to Knowledge) acquire such asceticism
in consequence of the purpose they entertain, viz., the attainment of
bliss in the high regions hereafter. In consequence of his ability to
grasp that Truth (Brahman) from which sacrifices flow, the Yogin is
capable of performing sacrifices by the mind. Another performeth
sacrifices by Words (Yapa) and another by Work. Truth (Brahman) resides
in him who knoweth Brahman as vested with attributes. It dwelleth more
completely in him who knoweth Brahman as divested of attributes. Listen
now to something else from me. This high and celebrated philosophy should
be taught (to disciples). All other systems are only a farrago of words.
The whole of this (universe) is established in this Yoga-philosophy. They
that are acquainted with it are not subjected to death. O king, one
cannot, by Work, however well-accomplished, attain to Truth (Brahman).
The man that is destitute of knowledge even if he poureth homa libations
or performeth sacrifices, can never, by Work, O king, attain to
immortality (emancipation). Nor doth he enjoy great happiness at the end.
Restraining all the external senses and alone, one should seek Brahman.
Giving up Work, one should not exert mentally. One should also (while
thus engaged) avoid experiencing joy at praise or anger at blame. O
Kshatriya, by conducting himself in this way according to the successive
steps indicated in the Vedas, one may, even here, attain to Brahman.
This, O learned one, is all that I tell thee.'"
