SECTION LXVI
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having addressed Suyodhana thus, the highly blessed
and wise Dhritarashtra again asked Sanjaya, saying, 'Tell me, O Sanjaya,
what thou hast not yet said, viz., what Arjuna told thee after the
conclusion of Vasudeva's speech, for great is my curiosity to hear it.'
"Sanjaya said, 'Having heard the words spoken by Vasudeva, the
irresistible Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, when the opportunity came,
said these words in the hearing of Vasudeva. 'O Sanjaya, our grandsire,
the son of Santanu, and Dhritarashtra, and Drona, and Kripa, and Karna,
and king Vahlika, and Drona's son, and Somadatta, and Sakuni the son of
Suvala; and Dussasana, and Sala, and Purumitra, and Vivingsati; Vikarna,
and Chitrasena, and king Jayatsena, and Vinda and Anuvinda, the two
chiefs of Avanti, and Bhurisravas, and king Bhagadatta, and king
Jarasandha and other rulers of the earth, assembled there to fight for
the good of the Kauravas, are all on the eve of death. They have been
assembled by Dhritarashtra's son for being offered up as libations on the
blazing Pandava-fire. In my name, Sanjaya, enquire after the welfare of
those assembled kings according to their respective ranks, paying them
proper regard at the same time. Thou shouldest also, O Sanjaya, say this,
in the presence of all kings, unto Suyodhana-that foremost of all sinful
men. Wrathful and wicked, of sinful soul and exceedingly covetous, do
thou, O Sanjaya, see that that fool with his counsellors hears all that I
say.' And with this preface, Pritha's son Dhananjaya, endued with great
wisdom, and possessed of large eyes with red corners, glancing at
Vasudeva, then spoke unto me these words pregnant with both virtue and
profit, 'Thou hast already heard the measured words spoken by the
high-souled chief of the Madhu's race. Say unto the assembled kings that
those are also my words. And say this also for me, unto those kings,--Do
ye together try to act in such a way that libations may not have to be
poured into the arrowy fire of the great sacrifice of battle, in which
the rattle of car-wheels will sound as mantras, and the rank-routing bow
will act as the ladle. If, indeed, ye do not give up unto Yudhishthira,
that slayer of foes, his own share in the kingdom asked back by him, I
shall then, by means of my arrows, send all of you, with cavalry,
infantry, and elephants, into the inauspicious regions of departed
spirits.' Then bidding adieu unto Dhananjaya and Hari of four arms and
bowing unto them both, I have with great speed come hither to convey
those words of grave import to thee, O thou that art endued with
effulgence equal that of the very gods.'
