SECTION LXX
"Dhritarashtra said, 'I request thee, O Sanjaya, to tell me again of the
lotus-eyed Krishna; for, by being acquainted with the import of his
names, I may, O son, obtain that most exalted of male beings.'
"Sanjaya said, 'The auspicious names (of Kesava) have been previously
heard by me. Of those I will tell thee as many as I know. Kesava,
however, is immeasurable, being above the power of speech to describe. He
is called Vasudeva in consequence of his enveloping all creatures with
the screen of illusion, or of his glorious splendour, or of his being the
support and resting-place of the gods. He is called Vishnu because of his
all-pervading nature. He is called Madava, O Bharata, because of his
practising as a Muni, concentration of mind on truth and Yoga-absorption.
He is called Madhusudana because of his having slain the Asura Madhu, and
also because of his being the substance of the twenty-four objects of
knowledge. Born of the Sattwata race, he is called Krishna because he
uniteth in himself what are implied by the two words Krishi which
signifieth 'what existeth' and na which signifieth 'eternal peace'. He is
called Pundarikaksha from Pundarika implying his high and eternal abode,
and Aksha implying 'indestructible'; and he is called Janardana because
he striketh fear into the hearts of all wicked beings. He is called
Sattwata, because the attribute of Sattwa is never dissociated from him
and also because he is never dissociated from it; and he is called
Vrishabhakshana from Vrishabha implying the 'Vedas' and ikshana implying
'eye', the union of the two signifying that the Vedas are his eyes, or
the Vedas are the eyes through which he may be seen, That conqueror of
hosts is called Aja, or unborn', because he hath not taken his birth from
any being in the ordinary way. That Supreme Soul is called Damodara
because unlike the gods his effulgence is increate and his own, and also
because he hath self-control and great splendour. He is called
Hrishikesa, from Hrishika meaning 'eternal happiness' and Isa meaning
'the six divine attributes', the union signifying one having joy,
happiness, and divinity. He is called Mahavahu, because he upholdeth the
earth and the sky with his two arms. He is called Adhakshaja, because he
never falleth down or suffereth any deterioration, and is called Narayana
from his being the refuge of all human beings. He is called Purusottama
from Puru implying 'he that createth and preserveth' and so meaning 'he
that destroyeth, the union signifying one that createth, preserveth, and
destroyeth the universe'. He possesseth a knowledge of all things, and,
therefore, is called Sarva, Krishna is always in Truth and Truth is
always in him, and Govinda is Truth's Truth. Therefore, he is called
Satya. He is called Vishnu because of his prowess, and Jishnu because of
his success. He is called Ananta from his eternity, and Govinda from his
knowledge of speech of every kind. He maketh the unreal appear as real
and thereby beguileth all creatures. Possessed of such attributes, ever
devoted to righteousness, and endued with divinity, the slayer of Madhu,
that mighty-armed one incapable of decay, will come hither for preventing
the slaughter of the Kurus.'"
