SECTION LXXXV
"Vaisampayana said, 'Meanwhile, understanding from his spies that the
slayer of Madhu had set out, Dhritarashtra, with his hair standing erect,
respectfully addressing the mighty-armed Bhishma and Dorna and Sanjaya
and the illustrious Vidura, said these words unto Duryodhana and his
counsellors, 'O scion of Kuru's race, strange and wonderful is the news
that we hear. Men, women and children, are talking of it. Others are
speaking of it respectfully, and others again assembled together. Within
houses where men congregate and in open spots, people and discussing it.
All say that Dasarha of great prowess will come hither for the sake of
Pandavas. The slayer of Madhu is, by all means, deserving of honour and
worship at our hands. He is the Lord of all creatures, and on him resteth
the course of every thing in the universe. Indeed, intelligence and
prowess and wisdom and energy, all reside in Madhava. Worthy of honour at
the hands of all righteous persons he is the foremost of all men, and is,
indeed, eternal Virtue. If worshipped he is sure to bestow happiness; and
if not worshipped fie is sure to inflict misery. If that smiter of foes,
Dasarha be gratified with our offerings, all our wishes may be obtained
by us, through his grace, in the midst of the kings. O chastiser of foes,
make without loss of time every arrangement for his reception. Let
pavilions be set up on the road, furnished with every object of
enjoyment. O mighty-armed son of Gandhari, make such arrangements that he
may be gratified with thee. What doth Bhishma think in this matter?' At
this, Bhishma and others, all applauding those words of king
Dhritarashtra, said,--'Excellent.' King Duryodhana then, understanding
their wishes, ordered delightful sites to be chosen for the erection of
pavilions. Many pavilions were thereupon constructed abounding with gems
of every kind, at proper intervals and at delightful spots. And the king
sent thither handsome seats endued with excellent qualities, beautiful
girls, and scents and ornaments, and fine robes, and excellent viands,
and drink of diverse qualities, and fragrant garlands of many kinds. And
the king of the Kurus took especial care to erect, for the reception of
Krishna, a highly beautiful pavilion at Vrikasthala, full of precious
gems. And having made all these arrangements that were god-like and much
above the capacity of human beings, king Duryodhana informed
Dhritarashtra of the same. Kesava, however, of Dasarha's race, arrived at
the capital of the Kurus, without casting a single glance at all those
pavilions and all those gems of diverse kinds.'"
