
SECTION LXXIX
"Sukra continued, 'Know, then, O Devayani, that he that mindeth not the
evil speeches of others, conquereth everything! The wise say that he is a
true charioteer who without slackening holdeth tightly the reins of his
horses. He, therefore, is the true man that subdueth, without indulging
in his rising wrath. Know thou, O Devayani, that by him is everything
conquered, who calmly subdueth his rising anger. He is regarded as a man
who by having recourse to forgiveness, shaketh off his rising anger like
a snake casting off its slough He that suppresseth his anger, he that
regardeth not the evil speeches of others, he that becometh not angry,
though there be cause, certainly acquireth the four objects for which we
live (viz., virtue, profit, desire, and salvation) Between him that
performeth without fatigue sacrifices every month for a hundred years,
and him that never feeleth angry at anything, he that feeleth not wrath
is certainly the higher. Boys and girls, unable to distinguish between
right and wrong, quarrel with each other. The wise never imitate them.'
Devayani, on hearing this speech of her father, said, 'O father, I know,
also what the difference is between anger and forgiveness as regards the
power of each. But when a disciple behaveth disrespectfully, he should
never be forgiven by the preceptor if the latter is really desirous of
benefiting the former. Therefore, I do not desire to live any longer in a
country where evil behaviour is at a premium. The wise man desirous of
good, should not dwell among those sinfully inclined men who always speak
ill of good behaviour and high birth. But there should one live,--indeed,
that hath been said to be the best of dwelling places,--where good
behaviour and purity of birth are known and respected. The cruel words
uttered by Vrishaparvan's daughter burn my heart even as men, desirous of
kindling a fire, burn the dry fuel. I do not think anything more
miserable for a man in the three worlds than to adore one's enemies
blessed with good fortune, himself possessing none. It hath been indeed
said by the learned that for such a man even death would be better.'"
