
SECTION VII
"Sauti said, 'the god of fire enraged at the curse of Bhrigu, thus
addressed the Rishi, 'What meaneth this rashness, O Brahmana, that thou
hast displayed towards me? What transgression can be imputed to me who
was labouring to do justice and speak the truth impartially? Being asked
I gave the true answer. A witness who when interrogated about a fact of
which he hath knowledge, representeth otherwise than it is, ruineth his
ancestors and descendants both to the seventh generation. He, too, who,
being fully cognisant of all the particulars of an affair, doth not
disclose what he knoweth, when asked, is undoubtedly stained with guilt.
I can also curse thee, but Brahmanas are held by me in high respect.
Although these are known to thee, O Brahmana, I will yet speak of them,
so please attend! Having, by ascetic power, multiplied myself, I am
present in various forms, in places of the daily homa, at sacrifices
extending for years, in places where holy rites are performed (such as
marriage, etc.), and at other sacrifices. With the butter that is poured
upon my flame according to the injunctions prescribed in the Vedas, the
Devas and the Pitris are appeased. The Devas are the waters; the Pitris
are also the waters. The Devas have with the Pitris an equal right to the
sacrifices called Darshas and Purnamasas. The Devas therefore are the
Pitris and the Pitris, the Devas. They are identical beings, worshipped
together and also separately at the changes of the moon. The Devas and
the Pitris eat what is poured upon me. I am therefore called the mouth of
the Devas and the Pitris. At the new moon the Pitris, and at the full
moon the Devas, are fed through my mouth, eating of the clarified butter
that is poured on me. Being, as I am, their mouth, how am I to be an
eater of all things (clean and unclean)?
"Then Agni, alter reflecting for a while, withdrew himself from all
places; from places of the daily homa of the Brahmanas, from all
long-extending sacrifices, from places of holy rites, and from other
ceremonies. Without their Oms and Vashats, and deprived of their Swadhas
and Swahas (sacrificial mantras during offerings), the whole body of
creatures became much distressed at the loss of their (sacrificial) fire.
The Rishis in great anxiety went to the gods and addressed them thus, 'Ye
immaculate beings! The three regions of the universe are confounded at
the cessation of their sacrifices and ceremonies in consequence of the
loss of fire! Ordain what is to be done in tins matter, so that there may
be no loss of time.' Then the Rishis and the gods went together to the
presence of Brahma. And they represented to him all about the curse on
Agni and the consequent interruption of all ceremonies. And they said, 'O
thou greatly fortunate! Once Agni hath been cursed by Bhrigu for some
reason. Indeed, being the mouth of the gods and also the first who eateth
of what is offered in sacrifices, the eater also of the sacrificial
butter, how will Agni be reduced to the condition of one who eateth of
all things promiscuously?' And the creator of the universe hearing these
words of theirs summoned Agni to his presence. And Brahma addressed Agni,
the creator of all and eternal as himself, in these gentle words, 'Thou
art the creator of the worlds and thou art their destroyer! Thou
preserves! the three worlds and thou art the promoter of all sacrifices
and ceremonies! Therefore behave thyself so that ceremonies be not
interrupted. And, O thou eater of the sacrificial butter, why dost thou
act so foolishly, being, as thou art, the Lord of all? Thou alone art
always pure in the universe and thou art its stay! Thou shall not, with
all thy body, be reduced to the state of one who eateth of all things
promiscuously. O thou of flames, the flame that is in thy viler parts
shall alone eat of all things alike. The body of thine which eateth of
flesh (being in the stomach of all carnivorous animals) shall also eat of
all things promiscuously. And as every thing touched by the sun's rays
becometh pure, so shall everything be pure that shall be burnt by thy
flames. Thou art, O fire, the supreme energy born of thy own power. Then,
O Lord, by that power of thine make the Rishi's curse come true. Continue
to 'receive thy own portion and that of the gods, offered at thy mouth.'
'Sauti continued, 'Then Agni replied to the Grandfather, 'So be it.' And
he then went away to obey the command of the supreme Lord. The gods and
the Rishis also returned in delight to the place whence they had come.
And the Rishis began to perform as before their ceremonies and
sacrifices. And the gods in heaven and all creatures of the world
rejoiced exceedingly. And Agni too rejoiced in that he was free from the
prospect of sin.
"Thus, O possessor of the six attributes, had Agni been cursed in the
days of yore by Bhrigu. And such is the ancient history connected with
the destruction of the Rakshasa, Pauloma and the birth of Chyavana.'"
Thus endeth the seventh section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva of
the blessed Mahabharata.
