SECTION CI
"Narada said, 'This region belongeth to the birds, all of whom possess
excellent feathers. They all subsist on snakes. They never feel any
fatigue in putting forth their prowess, or in making journeys, or in
bearing burthens. This race, O charioteer, hath multiplied from the six
sons of Garuda. They are Sumukha, Sunaman, Sunetra, Suvarchas, Suanch and
that prince of birds called Suvala. Born of Kasyapa's line and enhancing
the glory of Vinata's race, many winged creatures, the foremost of their
species, have by begetting children founded and increased a thousand
dynasties of birds, all endued with nobility of blood. All these
creatures are endued with great prosperity, have the auspicious whirl
called Sreevatsa, possess great wealth, and are inspired with great
might. By their acts they may be said to belong to the Kshatriya order,
but they are all without any compassion, subsisting as they do on snakes.
They never attain to spiritual enlightenment in consequence of their
preying on their kinsmen. I will now enumerate the chiefs by their names,
listen to me, O Matali. This race is much regarded in consequence of the
favour that, is shown to it by Vishnu. They all worship Vishnu, and
Vishnu is their protector. Vishnu always dwelleth in their hearts, and
Vishnu is their great refuge. These then are their names--Suvarnachuda,
Nagasin Daruna, Chandatundaka, Anala, Vaisalaksha, Kundalin, Pankajit,
Vajraviskambha, Vainateya, Vamana, Vatavega, Disachakshu, Nimisha,
Animisha, Trirava, Saptarava, Valmiki, Dipaka, Daityadwipa, Saridwipa,
Sarasa, Padmaketana, Sumukha, Chitraketu, Chitravara, Anagha, Meshahrit,
Kumuda, Daksha, Sarpanta, Somabhojana, Gurubhara, Kapota, Suryanetra,
Chirantaka, Vishnudharman, Kumara, Parivarha, Hari, Suswara, Madhuparka,
Hemavarna, Malaya, Matariswan, Nisakara and Divakara. These sons of
Garuda that I name dwell in only a single province of this region. I have
mentioned those only that have won distinction by might, fame and
achievements. If thou likest none here, come, we will go hence, O Matali.
I will take thee to another region where thou mayest find an eligible
husband for thy daughter.'"
