SECTION XCIX
"Narada continued, 'Here in the very centre of the world of the Nagas is
situated the city known by the name of Patalam. Celebrated over all the
universe, it is worshipped by the Daityas and the Danavas. Creatures
inhabiting the earth, if brought hither by force of the water's current,
shriek loudly, afflicted with fear. Here the fire known by the name of
the Asura-fire[8] and which is fed by water, continually blazeth forth.
Held fast by the flat of the celestials, it moveth not, regarding itself
as bound and confined. It was here that' the gods, having first
vanquished and slain their foes, quaffed the Amrita and deposited the
residue. It is from this place that the waning and waxing of the moon are
seen. It is here that son of Aditi, the Horse-headed (Vishnu), on the
recurrence of every auspicious occasion, riseth, filling at such times
the universe, otherwise called Suvarna,[9] with the sound of Vedic hymns
and Mantras. And because all watery forms such as the Moon and others
shower their water on the region, therefore hath this excellent region
been called Patala.[10] It is from here that the celestial elephant
Airavata, for the benefit of the universe, taketh up cool water in order
to impart it to the clouds, and it is that water which Indra poureth down
as rain. Here dwell diverse kinds of aquatic animals, of various shapes
such as the Timi and others, which subsist on the rays of the moon. O
charioteer, here are many kinds of creatures that die during the day,
being pierced by the rays of the sun, but all of whom revive in the
night, the reason being that the moon, rising here every day, laying
those deceased creatures with Amrita by means of rays, that constitute
his arms, resuscitate them by that touch. Deprived of their prosperity by
Vasava, it is here that many sinful Danavas live confined, defeated by
him and afflicted by Time. It was here that the Lord of creatures--that
great Master of all created things--Mahadeva--had practised the severest
of ascetic austerities for the benefit of all creatures. Here dwell many
regenerate and great Rishis observant of vows called 'Go' and emaciated
with the recitation and study of the Vedas, and who, having suspended the
vital air called Prana, have attained to heaven by force of their
austerities. A man is said to adopt the vow called Go, when he sleepeth
wherever he listeth, and when he subsisteth on anything that others place
before him, and is clad with robes that others may supply. Here in the
race of the celebrated elephant Supratika were born those best of
elephants known by the names of Airavata, Vamana, Kumuda and Anjana, the
first being the king of his tribe. Look, O Matali, if there be any
bridegroom here, that is distinguished by the possession of superior
merits, for then I will go to him for respectfully soliciting him to
accept thy daughter. Behold, here lieth an egg in these waters, blazing
with beauty. From the commencement of the creation it is here. It moveth
not, nor doth it burst. I have never heard any body speaking of its birth
or nature. Nobody knoweth who its father or mother is. It is said, O
Matali, that when the end of the world cometh, mighty fire burst forth
from within it, and spreading consumeth the three worlds with all their
mobile and immobile objects.' Hearing those words of Narada, Matali
answered him, saying, 'No one here seems to me to be eligible. Let us go
hence, therefore, without delay!'"
