SECTION CVI
"Janamejaya said, 'Interminably wedded to evil, blinded by avarice,
addicted to wicked courses, resolved upon bringing destruction on his
head, inspiring grief in the hearts of kinsmen, enhancing the woes of
friends, afflicting all his well-wishers, augmenting the joys of foes,
and treading the wrong path, why did not his friends seek to restrain
him, and why also did not that great friend (of Kuru's race), the holy
One; with tranquil soul, or the Grandsire tell him anything from
affection?'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Yes, the holy one did speak. Bhishma also spoke what
was beneficial. And Narada too said much. Listen to all that these said.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Narada said, 'Persons that listen to the
counsels of friends are rare. Friends again are rare that offer
beneficial counsels, for a friend (in need of counsel) is never there
where a friend (offering counsel) is. O son of Kuru's race, I think, the
word of friends ought to be listened to. Obstinacy ought to be avoided;
for it is fraught with great evil. In this connection is cited an old
story regarding Galava's having met with disgrace through obstinacy. In
ancient times, in order to test Viswamitra, who was then engaged in
ascetic austerities Dharma personally came to him, having assumed the
form of the Rishi, Vasishtha. Thus assuming, O Bharata, the form of the
one of the seven Rishis, and feigning himself hungry and desirous of
eating, he came, O king, to the hermitage of Kausika. Thereupon,
Viswamitra struck with awe, began to cook Charu (which was a preparation
of rice and milk). And in consequence of the care he took in preparing
that excellent food, he could not properly wait upon his guest. And it
was not till after the guest had dined on the food offered by the other
hermits that Viswamitra succeeded in approaching him with the Charu he
had cooked and which was still steaming. 'I have already dined; wait
here,'--were the words that the holy one said. And having said that the
holy one went away. And thereupon, the illustrious Viswamitra, O king,
waited there. And bearing that food on his head and holding it with his
arms, that ascetic of rigid vow stood in his hermitage, still as a post,
subsisting on air. And as he stood there, an ascetic of the name of
Galava, from motives of respect and reverence and from affection and
desire of doing what was agreeable, began to wait upon him. And after a
hundred years had passed away, Dharma, again assuming the form of
Vasishtha, came to Kausika from desire of eating. And beholding the great
Rishi Viswamitra, who was endued with high wisdom, standing there with
that food on his head, himself subsisting all the while on air, Dharma
accepted that food which was still warm and fresh. And having eaten that
food, the god said,--Gratified am I, O regenerate Rishi. And saying this,
he went away. And at those words of Dharma, Viswamitra divested of
Kshatriyahood because endued with the status of a Brahmana and was filled
with delight[12]. And pleased as he was with the services and devotion of
his discipline, the ascetic Galava, Viswamitra, addressed him and said,
'With my leave, O Galava, go whithersoever thou mayest wish.' Thus
commanded by his preceptor, Galava, highly pleased, said in a sweet voice
unto Viswamitra of great effulgence, What final gift shall I make thee in
consequence of thy services as preceptor? O giver of honours, it is in
consequence of the (final) present that a sacrifice becometh successful.
The giver of such gifts obtains emancipation. Indeed, these gifts
constitute the fruit (that one enjoys in heaven). They are regarded as
peace and tranquillity personified. What, therefore, shall I procure for
my preceptor? Oh, let that be said. 'The illustrious Viswamitra knew that
he had really been conquered by Galava by means of the latter's services,
and the Rishi, therefore, sought to dismiss him by repeatedly saying,
'Go, Go.' But thou repeatedly commanded by Viswamitra to go away, Galava
still addressed him saying, 'What shall I give?' And seeing this
obstinacy on the part of ascetic Galava, Viswamitra felt a slight rise of
anger and at last said, 'Give me eight hundred steeds, every one of which
should be as white as the rays of the moon, and every one of which should
have one ear black. Go now, O Galava, and tarry not.'"
