SECTION CXVI
"Narada said, 'That best of monarchs, king Haryyaswa, after reflecting
for a long while and breathing a long and hot sigh about the birth of a
son, at last said, 'Those six limbs[16] that ought to be high are high in
this maiden. Those seven, again, that ought to be slender are slender in
her. Those three, again, which ought to be deep are deep in her. And
lastly, those five that ought to be red are red in her. It seems that she
is worth being looked at by even the gods and the Asuras, and is
accomplished in all the arts and sciences. Possessed of all auspicious
signs, she will certainly bring forth many children. She is even capable
of bringing forth a son who may become an emperor. Having regard to my
wealth, tell me, O foremost of Brahmanas, what should be her dower.'
Galava said, 'Give me eight hundred steeds, born in a good country, of
lunar whiteness, and each with one ear black in hue. This auspicious and
large-eyed maiden will then become the mother of thy sons, like the
fire-stick becoming the genetrix of fire.'"
"Narada continued, 'Hearing these words, that royal sage, king Haryyaswa,
filled with sorrow, but blinded by lust, addressed Galava, that foremost
of Rishis, saying, 'I have only two hundred steeds about me of the kind
wanted by thee, although of other kinds all worthy of sacrifice, I have
many thousand moving about (in my dominions), O Galava, I desire to beget
only one son upon this damsel. Kindly grant this request of mine.'
Hearing these words of the king, that damsel said unto Galava, 'A reciter
of Brahma granted me a boon that I would after each delivery, be a maiden
again. Give me away, therefore, to this king, accepting his excellent
steeds. In this way, full eight hundred steeds may be obtained by thee
from four kings in succession, and I also may have four sons. Collect
thou the wealth intended for thy preceptor, in this way. Even this is
what I think. It depends, however, oil thee, O Brahmana, as to how thou
shouldst act.' Thus addressed by that maiden, the Muni Galava said these
words unto king Haryyaswa, 'O Haryyaswa, O best of men, accept this
damsel for a fourth part of the dower that I have settled, and beget only
one son upon her.' Taking then that maiden and worshipping Galava, the
king in due time and place had by her a son of the kind wished for. And
the son so born came to be called by the name of Vasumanas. Richer than
all the wealthy kings of the earth, and resembling one of the Vasus
themselves he became a king and giver of great wealth.
'After some time, intelligent Galava came back and approaching the
delighted Haryyaswa, said unto him, 'Thou hast, O king obtained a son.
Indeed, this child is like the sun himself in splendour. The time hath
come, O foremost of men, for me to go to some other king for alms.'
Hearing these words, Haryyaswa who was even truthful in speech and steady
in acts of manliness, and remembering that the balance of six hundred
steeds could not be made up by him, gave Madhavi back to Galava. And
Madhavi also, abandoning that blazing, kingly prosperity, and once more
becoming a maiden, followed the footsteps of Galava. And Galava too,
saying, 'Let the steeds remain with thee' then went, accompanied by the
maiden, to king Divodasa.'"
