SECTION CVIII
"Garuda said, 'O Galava, commanded I have been by God, who is the cause
of all knowledge. I ask thee, towards which quarter shall I first take
thee to see what lie there? The eastern, the southern, the western, or
the northern, towards which, O best of regenerate persons, shall I go, O
Galava? That quarter towards which Surya the illuminator of the universe
first riseth; where, at eve, the Sadhyas engage in their ascetic
austerities; where that Intelligence, which pervades the whole universe
first springeth; where the two eyes of Dharma, as well as he himself, are
stationed; where the clarified butter first poured in sacrifice
subsequently flowed all around; that quarter, O best of all regenerate
persons, is the gate of Day and Time. There the daughters of Daksha, in
primeval times, gave birth to their children. There the sons of Kasyapa
first multiplied. That quarter is the source of all the prosperity of the
gods, for it was there that Sakra was first anointed as the king of the
celestials. It was there, O regenerate Rishi, that both Indra and the
gods underwent their ascetic penances. It is for this, O Brahmana, that
this quarter is called Purva (the first). And because in the earliest of
times this quarter was overspread by the Suras, it is for this that it is
called Purva. The gods, desirous of prosperity, performed all their
religious ceremonies here. It was here that the divine Creator of the
universe first sang the Vedas. It was here that the Gayatri was first
preached by Surya unto the reciters of that sacred hymn. It was here, O
best of Brahmanas, that the Yajurvedas  were delivered by Surya (unto
Yajnavalkya). It was here that the Soma juice, sanctified by boons, was
first drunk in sacrifices by Suras. It was here that the Homa-fires,
(gratified by mantras), first drank articles of cognate origin.[13] It
was here that Varuna first repaired to the nether regions, and attained
to all his prosperity. It was here, O bull among the twice-born, that the
birth, growth, and death of the ancient Vasishtha took place. Here first
grew the hundred different branches of Om![14] It was here that the
smoke-eating Munis are the smoke of sacrificial fires. It was in that
region that myriads of boars and other animals were killed by Sakra and
offered as sacrificial portions unto the gods. It is here that the
thousand-rayed sun, arising, consumeth, out of ire, all those that are
wicked and ungrateful among men and the Asuras. This is the gate of the
three worlds. This is the path of heaven and felicity. This quarter is
called Purva (east). We will go hither, if it pleaseth thee. I shall
always do what is agreeable to him who is my friend. Tell me, O Galava,
if any other quarter pleaseth thee, for we will then go there. Listen now
to what I say of another quarter.'"
