SECTION CXLIII
"Sanjaya said, 'Hearing these beneficial and auspicious words of Kesava,
Karna worshipped Krishna, the slayer of Madhu, and said these words,
'Knowing (everything), why dost thou yet, O thou of mighty arms, seek to
beguile me? The destruction of the whole earth that is at hand for its
cause, Sakuni, and myself, and Dussasana, and king Duryodhana, the son of
Dhritarashtra. Without doubt, O Krishna, a great and fierce battle is at
hand between the Pandavas and the Kurus which will cover the earth with
bloody mire. All the kings and princes following the lead of Duryodhana,
consumed by the fire of weapons will proceed to the abode of Yama.
Diverse frightful visions are seen, O slayer of Madhu, and many terrible
portents, and fierce disturbances also. All these omens, making the hairs
(of the spectators) stand on their ends, indicate, O thou of Vrishni's
race, the defeat of Dhritarashtra's son and the victory of Yudhishthira.
That fierce planet of great effulgence, Sanaischara (Saturn), is
afflicting the constellation called Rohini, in order to afflict greatly
the creatures of the earth. The planet Angaraka (Mars), wheeling, O
slayer of Madhu, towards the constellation Jeshthya, approacheth towards
Anuradhas, indicating a great slaughter of friends. Without doubt, O
Krishna, a terrible calamity approacheth the Kurus when specially, O thou
of Vrishni's race, the planet Mahapat afflicteth the constellation
Chitra. The spot on the lunar disc hath changed its position; and Rahu
also approacheth towards the sun. Meteors are falling from the sky with
loud noise and trembling motion. The elephants are sending forth
frightful cries, while the steeds, O Madhava, are shedding tears, without
taking any delight in food and drink. They say, O thou of mighty arms,
that on the appearance of these portents, a terrible calamity
approacheth, productive of a great slaughter. O Kesava, amongst the
steeds, elephants and soldiers, in all the divisions of Duryodhana's
army, it is seen, O slayer of Madhu, that while small is the food these
take, ample is the excreta they evacuate. The wise have said that this is
an indication of defect. The elephants and steeds of the Pandavas, O
Krishna, all seem to be cheerful, while all the animals wheel along their
right. This also is an indication of their success. The same animal, O
Kesava, pass by the left side of Duryodhana's army, while incorporeal
voices are constantly heard (over their heads). All this is an indication
of defeat. All auspicious birds, such as peacocks, swans, cranes,
Chatakas, Jivajivas, and large flights of Vakas, follow the Pandavas,
while vultures, Kankas, hawks, Rakshasas, wolves and bees, in flights and
herds, follow the Kauravas. The drums in the army of Dhritarashtra's son
yield no sounds, while those of the Pandavas yield sounds without being
struck. The wells in the midst of Duryodhana's encampment send forth loud
roars like those of huge bulls. All this is an indication of defeat. The
gods are showering flesh and blood, O Madhava, on Duryodhana's soldiers.
Vapoury edifices of great effulgence with high walls, deep trenches, and
handsome porches, are suddenly appearing in the skies (over the Kuru
encampment). A black circle surrounding the solar disc appears to the
view. Both twilights at sunrise and sunset indicate great terrors. The
jackals yell hideously. All this is an indication of defeat. Diverse
birds, each having but one wing, one eye, and one leg, utter terrible
cries. All this, O slayer of Madhu, indicates defeat. Fierce birds with
black wings and red legs hover over the Kuru encampment at nightfall. All
this is an indication of defeat. The soldiers of Duryodhana betray hatred
for Brahmanas first, and then for their preceptors, and then for all
their affectionate servants. The, eastern horizon of (Duryodhana's
encampment) appeareth red; the southern of the hue of weapons; and
western, O slayer of Madhu, of an earthy hue. All the quarters around
Duryodhana's encampment seem, O Madhava, to be ablaze. In the appearance
of all these portents, great is the danger that is indicated.
'I have in a vision, O Achyuta, beheld Yudhishthira ascending with his
brothers a palace supported by a thousand columns. All of them appeared
with white head-gears and in white robes. And all of them appeared to me
to be seated on white seats. In the midst of the same vision, thou, O
Janardana, wast beheld by me to be employed in enveloping the blood-dyed
earth with weapons. Yudhishthira at the same time, of immeasurable
energy, ascending upon a heap of bones, was gladly eating buttered payasa
of a golden cup. I further beheld Yudhishthira to be employed in
swallowing the earth handed over to him by thee. This indicates that he
will verily rule the earth I beheld that tiger among men, Vrikodara, of
fierce deeds, standing on the summit, mace in hand, and as if devouring
this earth. This plainly indicates that he will slay all of us in fierce
battle. It is known to me, O lord of the senses, that victory is there
where righteousness is. I saw also Dhananjaya, the wielder of Gandiva,
seated on the back of a white elephant, with thee, O lord of the senses,
and blazing forth with great beauty. I have no doubt, O Krishna, that ye
will slay in battle all the kings headed by Duryodhana. I saw Nakula and
Sahadeva and that mighty car-warrior Satyaki, adorned with white
bracelets, white cuirasses, white garlands, and white robes. This tiger
among men were seated upon excellent vehicles borne on the shoulders of
men. And I saw that umbrellas were held over the heads of all the three.
Amongst the soldiers of Dhritarashtra's son, these three, O Janardana,
were beheld by me decked with white head-gears. Know, O Kesava, that
those three were Aswatthaman, Kripa, and Kritavarman of Satwata's race.
All other kings, O Madhava, were seen by me to have blood-red head-ears.
I saw also, O thou of mighty arms, that those mighty car-warriors Bhishma
and Drona, ascending on a vehicle drawn by camels, and by myself, and
Dhritarashtra's son, proceeded, O lord, to the quarter, O Janardana,
ruled by Agastya. This indicates that we shall soon have to proceed to
Yama's abode. I have no doubt that myself and the other kings, indeed,
the entire assemblage of Kshatriyas shall have to enter into the Gandiva
fire.'
"Krishna said, 'Indeed, the destruction of the earth is at hand when my
words, O Karna, do not become acceptable to thy heart. O sire, when the
destruction of all creatures approacheth, wrong assuming the semblance of
right leaveth not the heart.'
"Karna said, 'If, O Krishna, we come out of this great battle that will
be so destructive of heroic Kshatriyas, with life, then, O thou of mighty
arms may we meet here again. Otherwise, O Krishna, we shall certainly
meet in heaven. O sinless one, it seemeth to me now that there only it is
possible for us to meet.'
"Sanjaya said, 'Having spoken these words, Karna closely pressed Madhava
to his bosom. Dismissed by Kesava, he then descended from the car. And
riding on his own car decked with gold, Radha's son greatly dejected,
came back with us!'"
