SECTION CXLI
"Karna said, 'Without doubt, O Kesava, thou hast said these words from
thy love, affection, and friendship for me, as also in consequence of thy
desire of doing me good, O thou of Vrishni's race. I know all that thou
hast said unto me. Morally, I am the son of Pandu, as also in consequence
of the injunctions of the scriptures, as thou, O Krishna, thinkest. My
mother, while a maiden, bore me in her womb, O Janardana, through her
connection with Surya. And at the command of Surya himself, she abandoned
me as soon as I was born. Even thus, O Krishna, I came into the world.
Morally, therefore, I am the son of Pandu. Kunti, however, abandoned me
without thinking of my welfare. The Suta, Adhiratha, as soon as he beheld
me, took me to his home, and from her affection for me, Radha's breasts
were filled with milk that very day, and she, O Madhava, cleansed my
urine and evacuations. How can one like us, conversant with duties and
ever engaged in listening to scriptures deprive her of her Pinda? So also
Adhiratha of the Suta class regardeth me as a son, and I too, from
affection, always regard him as (my) father. O Madhava, that Adhiratha, O
Janardana, from paternal affection caused all the rites of infancy to be
performed on my person, according to the rules prescribed in the
scriptures. It is that Adhiratha, again, who caused the name Vasusena to
be bestowed upon me by the Brahmanas. When also I attained to youth, I
married wives according to his selections. Through them have been born my
sons and grandsons, O Janardana. My heart also, O Krishna, and all the
bonds of affection and love, are fixed on them. From joy or fear. O
Govinda. I cannot venture to destroy those bonds even for the sake of the
whole earth or heaps of gold. In consequence also of my connection with
Duryodhana of Dhritarashtra's race, I have, O Krishna, enjoyed
sovereignty for thirteen years, without a thorn on my side. I have
performed many sacrifices, always however in connection with persons of
the Suta tribe. All my family rites and marriage rites have been
performed with the Sutas. Obtaining me, O Krishna, Duryodhana hath, O
thou of Vrishni's race, made this preparations for an armed encounter and
provoked hostilities with the sons of Pandu. And it is for this, O
Achyuta, that in the battle (that will ensue), I, O Krishna, have been
chosen as the great antagonist of Arjuna to advance against him in a
single combat. For the sake of death, or the ties of blood, or fear, or
temptation, I cannot venture, O Janardana, to behave falsely towards the
intelligent son of Dhritarashtra. If I do not now engage in a single
combat with Arjuna, this will, O Hrishikesa, be inglorious for both
myself and Partha. Without doubt, O slayer of Madhu, thou hast told me
all this for doing me good. The Pandavas also, obedient as they are to
thee, will, without doubt, do all that thou hast said. Thou must,
however, conceal this our discourse for the present, O slayer of Madhu.
Therein lies our benefit, I think, O delighter of all the Yadavas. If
king Yudhishthira, of virtuous soul and well-controlled senses, cometh to
know me as the firstborn son of Kunti, he will never accept the kingdom.
If, again, O slayer of Madhu, this mighty and swelling empire becometh
mine. I shall, O repressor of foes, certainly make it over to Duryodhana
only. Let Yudhishthira of virtuous soul become king for ever. He that
hath Hrishikesa for his guide, and Dhananjaya and that mighty car-warrior
Bhima for his combatants, as also Nakula and Sahadeva, and the sons of
Draupadi, is fit, O Madhava, to rule over the whole earth.
Dhrishtadyumna, the prince of the Panchalas, that mighty car-warrior
Satyaki, Uttamaujas, Yudhamanyu, the prince of Somakas who is devoted to
truth, the ruler of the Chedis, Chekitana, the invincible Sikhandin, the
Kekaya brothers, all of the hue of Indragopaka insects, Bhimasena's uncle
Kuntibhoja of high soul and possessed of steeds endued with the colours
of the rainbow, the mighty car-warrior Syenajit, Sanka the son of Virata,
and thyself, O Janardana, like an ocean,--great is this assemblage, O
Krishna, of Kshatriyas (that hath been made by Yudhishthira). This
blazing kingdom, celebrated among all the kings of the earth, is already
won (by Yudhishthira). O thou of Vrishni's race, a great sacrifice of
arms is about to be celebrated by Dhritarashtra's son. Thou, O Janardana,
wilt be the Upadrashtri of that sacrifice. The office of Adhyaryu also, O
Krishna, in that sacrifice, will be thine. The ape-bannered Vibhatsu
accoutred in mail will be the Hotri (his bow), Gandiva will be the
sacrificial ladle, and the prowess of the warriors will be the clarified
butter (that is to be consumed). The weapons called Aindra, Pasupata,
Brahma, and Sthunakarna, applied by Arjuna, will, O Madhava, be the
mantras (of that sacrifice). Resembling his father, or perhaps, excelling
him in prowess, Subhadra's son (Abhimanyu) will be the chief Vedic hymn
to be chanted. That destroyer of elephant ranks that utterer of fierce
roars in battle, that tiger among men, the exceedingly mighty Bhima, will
be Udgatri and Prastotri in this sacrifice. King Yudhishthira of virtuous
Soul, ever engaged in Yapa and Homa, will himself be the Brahma of that
sacrifice. The sounds of conchs, tabors, and drums, and the leonine
roaring rising high in the welkin, will be the calls upon the invited to
eat. The two sons of Madri, Nakula and Sahadeva, of great fame and
prowess, will be the slayers of the sacrificial animals; rows of bright
cars furnished with standards of variegated hue, will, O Govinda, be
stakes (for tying the animals), O Janardana, in this sacrifice. Barbed
arrows and Nalikas, and long shafts, and arrows with heads like calf's
tooth, will play the part of spoons (wherewith to distribute the Soma
juice) while Tomaras will be the vessels of Soma, and bows will be
pavitras. The swords will be Kapalas, the heads (of slain warriors) the
Purodasas and the blood of warriors the clarified butter. O Krishna, in
this sacrifice. The lances and bright maces (of the warriors) will be
pokers (for stirring the sacrificial fire) and the corner stakes (for
keeping the fire-wood from falling down). The disciples of Drona and
Kripa, the son of Saradwat, will be the Sadasyas (assisting priests). The
arrows shot by the wielder of Gandiva and by (other) mighty car-warriors,
and by Drona and Drona's son, will play the part of ladles for
distributing the Soma. Satyaki will discharge the duties of the chief
assistant of the Adhyaryu. Of this sacrifice, Dhritarashtra's son will be
installed as the performer, while this vast army will be his wife. O thou
of mighty arms, when the nocturnal rites of sacrifice will begin, the
mighty Ghatotkacha will play the part of the slayer of (devoted) victims.
The mighty Dhrishtadyumna, who sprang into life from the sacrificial
fire, having for its mouth the rites celebrated with mantras, will, O
Krishna, be the Dakshina of that sacrifice. For those harsh words, O
Krishna, that I said before unto the sons of Pandu for the gratification
of Dhritarashtra's son,--for that wicked conduct of mine,--I am consumed
with repentance. When O Krishna, thou wilt behold me slain by Arjuna,
then will the Punachiti of this sacrifice commence. When the (second) son
of Pandu will drink the blood of the loudly roaring Dussasana, then will
the Soma-drinking of this sacrifice have taken place! When the two
princes of Panchala (Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandin) will overthrow Drona
and Bhishma, then, O Janardana, will this sacrifice be suspended for an
interval. When mighty Bhimasena will slay Duryodhana, then, O Madhava,
will this sacrifice of Dhritarashtra's son be concluded. When the wives
of Dhritarashtra's sons and grandsons assembled together, deprived, O
Kesava, of their husbands and sons and without protectors, will indulge
in lamentations with Gandhari in their midst, on the field of battle
haunted by dogs and vultures and other carnivorous birds, then, O
Janardana, will the final bath of this sacrifice take place.
'I pray to thee, O bull of the Kshatriya race, let not the Kshatriyas,
old in learning and old in years, perish miserably, O Janardana, for thy
sake. Oh, let this swelling host of Kshatriyas perish by means of weapons
on that most sacred of all spots in the three worlds, viz. Kurukshetra, O
Kesava. O thou of eyes like lotus-leaves, accomplish on this spot what
thou hast in thy mind, so that, O thou of Vrishni's race, the whole
Kshatriya order may attain to heaven. As long, O Janardana, as the hills
and the rivers will last, so long will the fame of these achievements
last. The Brahmanas will recite this great war of the Bharatas. The fame,
O thou of Vrishni's race, that they achieve in battles is the wealth that
Kshatriyas own. O Kesava, bring Kunti's son (Arjuna) before me for
battle, keeping for ever this our discourse a secret, O chastiser of
foes.'"
