SECTION CLI
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Janardana, king Yudhishthira
the Just, of virtuous soul, addressed his brothers in the presence of
Kesava and said, 'Ye have heard all that had happened in the court of the
assembled Kurus. Ye have also understood the words uttered by Kesava. Ye,
best of men, draw up, therefore, my troops now in battle-array in which
they are to fight. Here are seven Akshauhinis of troops assembled for our
victory. Hear the names of those seven celebrated warriors that would
lead those seven Akshauhinis. They are Drupada, and Virata, and
Dhristadyumna, and Sikhandin, and Satyaki, Chekitana, and Bhimasena of
great energy. Those heroes will be the leaders of my troops. All of them
are conversant with the Vedas. Endued with great bravery, all of them
have practised excellent vows. Possessed of modesty, all of them are
conversant with policy, and accomplished in war. Well-skilled in arrows
and weapons, all of them are competent in the use of every kind of
weapon. Tell us now, O Sahadeva, O son of Kuru's race, who that warrior,
is conversant with all kinds of battle-array, that may become the leader
of these seven and may also withstand in battle Bhishma who is like unto
a fire having arrows for its flames. Give us thy own opinion, O tiger
among men, as who is fit to be our generalissimo.'
"Sahadeva said, 'Closely related to us, sympathising with us in our
distress, endued with great might, conversant with every virtue, skilled
in weapons, and irresistible in battle, the mighty king of the Matsyas,
Virata, relying upon whom we hope to recover our share of the kingdom,
will be able to bear in battle both Bhishma and all those mighty
car-warriors.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'After Sahadeva had said this, eloquent Nakula
then said these words, 'He that in years, in knowledge of scriptures, in
perseverance, in family and birth, is respectable; he that is endued with
modesty, strength, and prosperity; he that is well-versed in all branches
of learning; he that studied the science of weapons (with the sage
Bharadwaja); he, who is irresistible and firmly devoted to truth; he that
always challenges Drona and mighty Bhishma; he that belongs to one of the
foremost of royal houses; he that is a famous leader of hosts; he that
resembles a tree of hundred branches in consequence of sons and grandsons
that surround him; that king, who, with his wife, performed, moved by
wrath, the austerest of penances for the destruction of Drona; that hero,
who is an ornament of assemblies; that bull among monarchs who always
cherishes us like a father; that father-in-law of ours, Drupada, should
be our generalissimo. It is my opinion that he will be able to withstand
both Drona and Bhishma rushing to battle, for that king is the friend of
Angira's descendant Drona and is conversant with celestial weapons.'
'After the two sons of Madri had thus expressed their individual
opinions, Vasava's son, Savyasachin, who was equal to Vasava himself,
said these words, 'This celestial person of the hue of fire and endued
with mighty arms, who sprang into life through the power of ascetic
penances and the gratification of sages; who issued from the sacrificial
fire-hole armed with bow and sword, accoutred in armour of steel, mounted
on a car unto which were yoked excellent steeds of the best breed, and
the clatter of whose car-wheels was as deep as the roar of mighty masses
of clouds; this hero endued with that energy and strength and resembling
the very lion in his frame of body and prowess, and possessed of leonine
shoulders, arms, chest, and voice like the lion's roar; this hero of
great effulgence; this warrior of handsome brows, fine teeth, round
cheeks, long arms, of stout make, excellent thighs, large expansive eyes,
excellent legs, and strong frame; this prince who is incapable of being
penetrated by weapons of any kind, and who looks like an elephant with
rent temples; this Dhrishtadyumna, truthful in speech, and with passions
under control, was born for the destruction of Drona. It is this
Dhrishtadyumna, I think, that will be able to bear Bhishma's arrows which
strike with the vehemence of the thunderbolt and look like snakes with
blazing mouths, which resemble the messengers of Yama in speed, and fall
like flames of fire (consuming everything they touch), and which were
borne before by Rama alone in battle. I do not, O king, see the man
except Dhrishtadyumna, who is able to withstand Bhishma of great vows.
This is just what I think. Endued with great lightness of hand and
conversant with all the modes of warfare, accoutred in coat of mail that
is incapable of being penetrated by weapons, this handsome hero,
resembling the leader of a herd of elephants, is according to my opinion,
fit to be our generalissimo.'
"Bhima then said, 'That son of Drupada, Sikhandin, who is born for the
destruction of Bhishma, as is said, 'O king, by the sages and Siddhas
assembled together, whose form on the field of battle, while displaying
celestial weapons, will be seen by men to resemble that of the
illustrious Rama himself, I see not, O king, the person who is able to
pierce with weapons that Sikhandin, when he is stationed for battle on
his car, accoutred in mail. Except the heroic Sikhandin, there is no
other warrior who is able to slay Bhishma in single combat. It is for
this, O king, that I think Sikhandin is fit to be our generalissimo.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'O sire, the strength and weakness, might and
feebleness, of everything in the universe, and the intentions of every
person here, are well-known to virtuous Kesava. Skilled or unskilled in
weapons, old or young, let him be the leader of my forces, who may be
indicated by Krishna of Dasarha's race. Even he is the root of our
success or defeat. In him are our lives, our kingdom, our prosperity and
adversity, our happiness and misery. Even he is the Ordainer and Creator.
In him is established the fruition of our desires. Let him, therefore, be
the leader of our host, who may be named by Krishna. Let that foremost of
speakers say, for the night approacheth. Having selected our leader,
worshipped our weapons with offerings of flowers and perfumes, we will,
at day-break, under Krishna's orders march to the field of battle!'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of the intelligent king,
Yudhishthira the Just, the lotus-eyed Krishna said, eyeing Dhananjaya,
the white, O king, I fully approve of all those powerful warriors whom ye
have named for becoming the leaders of thy troops. All of them are
competent to withstand thy foes. Indeed, they can frighten Indra himself
in great battle, let alone the covetous and wicked-minded sons of
Dhritarashtra. O thou of mighty arms, for thy good I made great efforts
to prevent the battle by bringing about peace. By that we have been freed
from the debt we owed to virtue. Fault-finding persons will not be able
to reproach us for anything. Foolish Duryodhana, destitute of
understanding, regardeth himself as skilled in weapons, and though really
weak thinketh himself to be possessed of strength. Array thy troops soon,
for slaughter is the only means by which they can be made to yield to our
demands. Indeed, the sons of Dhritarashtra will never be able to keep
their ground when they will behold Dhananjaya with Yuyudhana as his
second, and Abhimanyu, and the five sons of Draupadi, and Virata, and
Drupada, and the other kings of fierce prowess,--all lords of
Akshauhinis. Our army is possessed of great strength, and is invincible
and incapable of being withstood. Without doubt, it will slay the
Dhartarashtra host. As regards our leader, I would name that chastiser of
foes, Dhrishtadyumna.'"
