SECTION CLXVI
"Dhritarashtra said, After Falguni had vowed the slaughter of Bhishma in
battle, what did my wicked sons headed by Duryodhana do? Alas, I already
behold my father, Ganga's son, slain in battle, by that bowman of firm
grasp, viz., Partha, having Vasudeva for his ally! And what also did that
mighty bowman, that foremost of smiters, Bhishma, endued with
immeasurable wisdom, say on hearing the words of Partha. Having accepted
also the command of the Kauravas, what did that foremost of warriors,
Ganga's son, of exceeding intelligence and prowess, do?'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus questioned, Sanjaya told him everything
about what that eldest one of the Kurus, Bhishma of immeasurable energy,
had said.'
"Sanjaya said, 'O monarch, obtaining the command, Bhishma, the son of
Santanu said these words unto Duryodhana, gladdening him greatly,
'Worshipping the leader of celestial forces, viz., Kumara, armed with the
lance, I shall, without doubt, be the commander of thy army today! I am
well-versed in all mighty affairs, as also in various kinds of array. I
know also how to make regular soldiers and volunteers act their parts. In
the matter of marching the troops and arraying them, in encounters and
withdrawing, I am as well-versed, O great king, as Vrihaspati (the
preceptor of the celestials), is! I am acquainted with all the methods of
military array prevalent amongst the celestials, Gandharvas, and human
beings. With these I will confound the Pandavas. Let thy (heart's) fever
be dispelled. I will fight (the foe), duly protecting thy army and
according to the rules of (military) science! O king, let thy heart's
fever be dispelled!'
Hearing these words, Duryodhana said, 'O Ganga's son of mighty arms, I
tell thee truly, I have no fear from even all the gods and Asuras united
together! How much less, therefore, is my fear when thy invincible self
hath become the leader of my forces and when that tiger among men, Drona,
also waiteth willingly for battle! When you two foremost of men, are
addressed for battle on my side, victory, nay, the sovereignty of even
the celestial cannot assuredly be unattainable by me! I desire, however,
O Kaurava, to know who amongst all the warriors of the foe and my own are
to be counted as Rathas and who Atirathas. Thou, O grandsire, art
well-acquainted with the (prowess of the) combatants of the foe, also of
ourselves! I desire to hear this, with all these lords of earth!'
"Bhishma said, 'Listen, O son of Gandhari, O king of kings, to the tale
of Rathas in thy own army! Hear, O king, as to who are Rathas and who
Atirathas! They are in thy army, many thousands, many millions, and many
hundreds of millions of Rathas. Listen, however, to me as I name only the
principal ones. Firstly, with thy country of brothers including Dussasana
and others, thou art of the foremost of Rathas! All of you are skilled in
striking, and proficient in cutting chariots and piercing. All of you are
accomplished drivers of chariots while seated in the driver's box, and
accomplished managers of elephants while seated on the necks of those
animals. All of you are clever smiters with maces and bearded darts and
swords and bucklers. You are accomplished in weapons and competent in
bearing burthens of responsibility. Ye all are disciples of Drona and of
Kripa, the son of Saradwat, in arrows and other arms. Wronged by the sons
of Pandu, these Dhartarashtras, endued with energy, will assuredly slay
in the encounter the Panchalas irresistible in combat. Then, O foremost
of the Bharatas, come I, the leader of all thy troops, who will
exterminate thy foes, vanquishing the Pandavas! It behoveth me not to
speak of my own merits. I am known to thee. The foremost of all wielders
of weapons, Bhoja (chief) Kritavarman is Atiratha. Without doubt, he will
accomplish thy purpose in battle. Incapable of being humiliated by
persons accomplished in arms, shooting or hurling his weapons to a great
distance, and a severe smiter, he will destroy the ranks of the foe, as
the great Indra destroying the Danavas. The ruler of the Madras, the
mighty bowman Salya, is, as I think, an Atiratha. That warrior boasteth
himself as Vasudeva's equal, in every battle (that he fighteth). Having
abandoned his own sister's sons, that best of kings, Salya, hath become
thine. He will encounter in battle the Maharathas of the Pandava party,
flooding the enemy with his arrows resembling the very surges of the sea.
The mighty bowman Bhurisravas, the son of Somadatta, who is accomplished
in arms and is one of thy well-meaning friends, is a leader of leaders of
car-divisions. He will, certainly, make a great havoc among the
combatants of thy enemies. The king of the Sindhus, O monarch, is in my
judgment, equal to two Rathas. That best of car-warriors will fight in
battle, displaying great prowess. Humiliated, O king, by the Pandavas on
the occasion of his, abducting Draupadi, and bearing that humiliation in
mind, that slayer of hostile heroes will fight (for thee). Having
practised after that, O king, the severest austerities, he obtained a
boon, highly difficult of acquisition, for encountering the Pandavas in
battle. That tiger among car-warriors, therefore, remembering his old
hostility, will, O sire, fight with the Pandavas in battle, reckless of
his very life which is so difficult to lay down.'"
