SECTION CLX
"Janamejaya said, 'After the soldiers had been arrayed thus in order of
battle (on the field of Kurukshetra), what, O bull among Brahmanas, did
the Kauravas then do, urged as they were by destiny itself?'
"Vaisampayana said, 'After the soldiers, O bull of the Bharata race, had
been arrayed thus in order of battle, Dhritarashtra, O, king, said these
words to Sanjaya.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'Come, O Sanjaya, tell me with the fullest details
all that hath happened in the encampment of the Kuru and the Pandava
troops. I regard destiny to be superior, and exertion useless, for
although I understand the evil consequences of war that will lead only to
ruin, still I am unable to restrain my son who rejoices in gambling and
considers deceit to be wisdom. Understanding everything, I am not yet
able to secure my own welfare. O Suta, my understanding is capable of
seeing the defects (of measures), but when I approach Duryodhana, that
understanding of mine turneth away (from that right path). When such is
the case, O Sanjaya, that will be which must be. Indeed, the sacrifice of
one's corporeal body in battle is the laudable duty of every Kshatriya.'
"Sanjaya said, 'This question, O great king, that thou hast put, is
indeed, worthy of thee. It behoveth thee not, however, to impute entire
fault to Duryodhana only. Listen to me, O king, as I speak of this
exhaustively. That man who cometh by evil in consequence of his own
misconduct, should never impute the fault to either time or the gods. O
great king, he amongst men who perpetrateth every wicked act, deserveth
to be slain in consequence of his perpetrating those acts. Afflicted with
injuries in consequence of the match at dice, the sons of Pandu, however,
with all their counsellors quietly bore all those injuries, looking up, O
best of men, to thy face alone. Hear from me fully, O king, of the
slaughter that is about to take place in battle, of steeds and elephants
and kings endued with immeasurable energy. Hearing patiently, O thou that
art endued with great wisdom, of the destruction of the world in the
fierce battle that has been brought about, come to this conclusion and no
other, viz., that man is never the agent of his acts right or wrong.
Indeed, like a wooden machine, man is not an agent (in all he does). In
this respect, three opinions are entertained; some say that everything is
ordained by God; some say that our acts are the result of free-will; and
others say that our acts are the result of those of our past lives.
Listen then, therefore, with patience, to the evil that hath come upon
us.'"
