SECTION CLXXIII
"Bhishma said, 'O great king, Rochamana is another Maharatha of the
Pandavas. He will, O Bharata, contend in battle against hostile warriors,
like a second god. That subjugator of foes, the mighty bowman Kuntibhoja
of great strength, the maternal uncle of Bhimasena, is, in my judgment,
an Atiratha. This mighty and heroic bowman is well-versed and highly
skilled in fight. Acquainted with all modes of warfare, this bull among
car-warriors is regarded by me as exceedingly competent. Displaying his
prowess he will fight, like a second Indra against the Danavas. Those
celebrated soldiers that he owns are all accomplished in fight. Stationed
on the side of the Pandavas and devoted to what is agreeable and
beneficial to them, that hero will, for the sake of his sister's sons
achieve extra-ordinary feats. That prince of Rakshasas (Ghatotkacha), O
king, born of Bhima and Hidimva, and endued with ample powers of
illusion, is, in my judgment, a leader of the leaders of car-divisions.
Fond of battle, and endued with powers of illusion, he will, O sire,
fight earnestly in battle. Those heroic Rakshasas who are his counsellors
or dependents will also fight under him.
'These and many other rulers of provinces, headed by Vasudeva, have
assembled for the sake of Pandu's son. These, O king, are principally the
Rathas, Atirathas, and half Rathas of the high-souled Pandava, and these,
O king, will lead in battle the terrible army of Yudhishthira which is
protected, again, by that hero, the diadem-decked (Arjuna), who is even
like the great Indra himself. It is with them (thus) endued with powers
of illusion and fired by the desire of success that I shall contend in
battle, expectant of victory or death. I shall advance against these two
foremost of car-warriors, Vasudeva and Arjuna, bearing (respectively)
Gandiva and the discus, and resembling the sun and the moon as seen
together in the evening. I shall, on the field of battle, encounter also
those other car-warriors of Yudhishthira (whom I have, mentioned) at the
head of their respective troops.
'The Rathas and Atirathas, according to their precedence, have now been
declared by me to thee, and they also that are half Rathas, belonging to
thee or them, O chief of the Kauravas! Arjuna and Vasudeva and other
lords of earth that may be there, all of them, upon whom my eyes may
fall, I will withstand, O Bharata! But, thou of mighty arms, I will not
strike or slay Sikhandin the prince of Panchalas, even if I behold him
rushing against me in battle with weapons upraised. The world knows how
from a desire of doing what was agreeable to my father, that I gave up
the kingdom that had become mine and lived in the observance of the
Brahmacharya vow. I then installed Chitrangada in the sovereignty of the
Kauravas, making at the same time the child Vichitravirya the Yuvaraja.
Having notified my god-like vow among all the kings of the earth, I shall
never slay a woman or one that was formerly a woman. It may be known to
you, O king, that Sikhandin was formerly a woman. Having been born as a
daughter, she afterwards became metamorphosed into the male sex. I shall
not, O Bharata, fight against him. I shall certainly smite all other
kings, O bull of Bharata's race, whom I may encounter in battle. I will
not, however, O king, be able to slay the sons of Kunti!'"
