SECTION CLXVII
"Bhishma said, 'Sudhakshina, the ruler of the Kamvojas, is in my
judgment, equal to a single Ratha. Desiring the success of thy object, he
will certainly fight with the enemy in battle. O best of kings, the
Kauravas will behold the prowess of this lion among car-warriors exerted
for thee, to be equal to that of Indra himself in battle. As regards the
car-army of this king, O monarch, those smiters of fierce impetus, the
Kamvojas, will cover a large area like a flight of locusts! Coming from
(the province of) Mahishmati, Nila, accoutred in blue mail, is one of thy
Rathas. With his car-army he will cause a great havoc among thy foes, O
child, he had hostilities with Sahadeva. O king, he will continually
fight for thee, O thou of Kuru's race. Accomplished in battle, and of
fierce energy and prowess, (the princes) Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti are
both regarded as excellent Rathas. These two heroes among men will
consume the troops of thy foes, with maces and bearded darts, and swords
and long shafts, and javelins hurled from their hands. Like a couple of
(elephant) leaders sporting in the midst of their herds, these two
princes, O monarch, longing for battle, will range the field, each like
Yama himself. The five (royal) brothers of Trigarta are, in my judgment,
all foremost of Rathas. The sons of Pritha provoked hostilities with them
at Virata's city on that (well-known) occasion. Like huge Makaras, O
king, agitating the stream of the Ganges crested with high waves, they
will agitate the ranks of the Parthas in battle. All the five, O king,
are Rathas, having Satyaratha (amongst them) as their first. Remembering
the wrongs inflicted on them of old by that son of Pandu who is Bhima's
younger brother, when the latter, O Bharata, on his car drawn by white
steeds, was engaged, O monarch, in subjugating all the kings of the
earth, they will certainly exert themselves bravely in battle.
Encountering many Maharathas--chief of bowmen--leaders of Kshatriyas--on
the side of the Parthas, they will certainly slay them. Thy son Lakshmana
and the son also of Dussasana--those tigers among men are both
unretreating in battle. In prime of youth, of delicate limbs, endued with
great activity, those two princes, well-versed with battles and capable
of leading all, those tigers among Kurus, those car-warriors, are, I
think, two of our best Rathas. Devoted to the duties of the Kshatriya
order, those two heroes will achieve great feats. Dandadhara, O monarch,
is, O bull among men, equal to a single Ratha. Guarded by his own
soldiers, he will fight in battle for thee. Endued with great impetus and
prowess, king Vrihadvala, the ruler of the Kosalas, is, in my judgment, O
sire, equal to one Ratha. Fierce in arms, this mighty bowman, devoted to
the good of the Dhartarashtras, will exert himself powerfully in battle,
gladdening his own friends. Kripa, the son of Saradwat is, O king, a
leader of leaders of car-ranks. Reckless even of life which is so dear,
he will consume thy foes. Born among a clump of heath as the son of that
great sage, viz., the preceptor Gautama, otherwise called Saradwat, he is
invincible like Kartikeya himself. Consuming untold warriors armed with
various weapons and bows, he will, O sire, roam forth on the field of
battle like a blazing fire.'"
