SECTION CLXXI
"Bhishma said, 'All the five sons of Draupadi, O monarch, are Maharathas.
Virata's son Uttara is, in my judgment, one of the foremost of Rathas.
The mighty-armed Abhimanyu is a leader of leaders of car-divisions.
Indeed, that slayer of foes is equal in battle to Partha himself or
Vasudeva. Endued with great lightness of hand in shooting weapons, and
acquainted with all the modes of warfare, he is possessed of great energy
and is steady in the observance of vows. Remembering the sufferings of
his own father, he will put forth his prowess. The brave Satyaki of
Madhu's race is a leader of leaders of car-divisions. Foremost among the
heroes of the Vrishni race, he is endued with great wrath, and is
perfectly dauntless. Uttamaujas also, O king, is an excellent car-warrior
in my judgment. And Yudhamanyu, too, of great prowess, is, in my
judgment, an excellent car-warrior. All those chiefs own many thousands
of cars and elephants and horses, and they will fight, reckless of their
very lives, from desire of doing what is agreeable to Kunti's sons.
Uniting with the Pandavas, they will, O great king, sweep through thy
ranks like fire or the wind, challenging thy warriors. Invincible in
battle, those bulls among men, old Virata and old Drupada, both endued
with great prowess, are, in my judgment, both Maharathas. Though old in
years yet both of them are devoted to the observance of Kshatriya
virtues. Treading along the path that is trod by heroes, both of them
will exert to the best of their might. In consequence of their
relationship (to the Pandavas) and owing also, O king, to their being
endued with strength and prowess, those great bowmen devoted to pure
vows, have both derived additional strength from the strength of their
affection. According as the cause is, all strong-armed men become, O bull
of Kuru's race, heroes or cowards. Actuated by a singleness of purpose,
both these kings, who are powerful bowmen, will lay down their very lives
in causing a great massacre of thy troops to the best of their might, O
slayer of foes! Fierce in battle, these distinguished heroes, these
mighty bowmen, regardless, O Bharata, of their lives, will, at the head
of their respective Akshauhinis, achieve great feats, justifying their
relationship and the confidence that is reposed on them (by the
Pandavas).'"
