SECTION CLXXXVII
"Bhishma said, 'After the night had passed away, I awoke, O Bharata, and
thinking of my dream I was filled with great joy. Then, O Bharata, the
combat began between him and me--a combat that was fierce and unrivalled
and that made the hairs of all creatures stand on their ends. And
Bhargava poured on me an arrowy shower which I baffled with an arrowy
shower of mine. Then filled with wrath at what he had seen the day before
and what he saw that day, Rama hurled at me a dart, hard as Indra's
thunderbolt and possessed of effulgence, resembling the Yama's mace! It
came towards me like a blazing flame of fire and drinking up, as it were,
all the quarters of that field of battle! Then, O tiger among the Kurus,
it fell, O perpetuator of Kuru's line, upon my shoulder, like the
lightning's flame that ranges the sky. Wounded thus by Rama, O thou of
red eyes, my blood, O mighty-armed one, began to flow copiously like
streams of red earth from a mountain (after a shower)! Filled with great
wrath, I then shot at Jamadagni's son a deadly shaft, fatal as the poison
of a snake. That heroic and best of Brahmanas, struck therewith at the
forehead, O monarch, then appeared as beautiful as a crested hill!
Extremely angry, that hero then, changing his position and drawing the
bow-string with great strength, aimed at me a terrible shaft resembling
all-destructive Death himself, and capable of grinding all foes! That
fierce arrow fell upon my breast, hissing (through the air) like a snake.
Covered with blood, I fell down on the earth, O king, thus struck.
Regaining consciousness, I hurled at Jamadagni's son a frightful dart,
effulgent as the thunderbolt. That dart fell upon the bosom of that
foremost of Brahmanas. Deprived of his senses at this, Rama began to
tremble all over. That great ascetic then, viz., his friend, the
regenerate Akritavrana, embraced him and with diverse words of comfort
soothed him. Reassured thus, Rama of high vows was then filled with wrath
and vindictiveness. He invoked the great Brahma weapon. For baffling it I
also used the same excellent weapon. Clashing against each other, the two
weapons began to blaze forth brightly, showing what happens at the end of
the Yuga! Without being able to reach either myself or Rama, those two
weapons, O best of the Bharatas, met each other in the mid-air. Then the
whole welkin seemed to be ablaze, and all creatures, O monarch, became
highly distressed. Afflicted by the energy of those weapons, the Rishis,
the Gandharvas, and the gods were all greatly pained. Then earth, with
her mountains and seas and trees began to tremble, and all creatures,
heated with the energy of the weapons, were greatly afflicted. The
firmament, O king, became ablaze and the ten points of the horizon became
filled with smoke. Creatures, therefore, that range the welkin were
unable to stay in their element. When, at all this, the whole world with
the gods, the Asuras and the Rakshasas began to utter exclamations of
woe.--This is the time--thought I and became desirous, O Bharata, of
speedily shooting the Praswapa weapon at the command of those utterers of
Brahma (that had appeared to me in my dream)! The Mantras also for
invoking excellent weapon suddenly came to my mind!'"
