SECTION III
"Vyasa said,--'Asses are taking births in kine. Some are having sexual
pleasure with mothers. The trees in the forests are exhibiting
unseasonable flowers and fruits. Women quick with child, and even those
that are not so, are giving birth to monsters. Carnivorous beasts,
mingling with (carnivorous) birds, are feeding together. Ill-omened
beasts, some having three horns, some with four eyes, some with five
legs, some with two sexual organs, some with two heads, some with two
tails, some having fierce teeth, are being born, and with mouths wide
open are uttering unholy cries. Horses with three legs, furnished with
crests, having four teeth, and endued with horns, are also being born. O
king! in thy city is also seen that the wives of many utterers of Brahma
are bringing forth Garudas and peacocks. The mare is bringing forth the
cow-calf and the bitch is bringing forth, O king, jackals and cocks, and
antelopes and parrots are all uttering inauspicious cries.[12] Certain
women are bringing forth four or five daughters (at a time), and these as
soon as they are born, dance and sing and laugh. The members of the
lowest orders are laughing and dancing and singing, and thus indicating
direful consequences. Infants, as if urged by death, are drawing armed
images, and are running against one another, armed with clubs, and
desirous of battle are also breaking down the towns (they erect in
sport). Lotuses of different kinds and lilies are growing on trees.
Strong winds are blowing fiercely and the dust ceaseth not. The earth is
frequently trembling, and Rahu approacheth towards the sun. The white
planet (Ketu) stayeth, having passed beyond the constellation Chitra. All
this particularly bodeth the destruction of the Kurus. A fierce comet
riseth, afflicting the constellation Pusya. This great planet will cause
frightful mischief to both the armies. Mars wheeleth towards Magha and
Vrihaspati (Jupiter) towards Sravana. The Sun's offspring (Sani)
approaching towards the constellation Bhaga, afflicteth it. The planet
Sukra, ascending towards Purva Bhadra, shineth brilliantly, and wheeling
towards the Uttara Bhadra, looketh towards it, having effected a junction
(with a smaller planet). The white planet (Ketu), blazing up like fire
mixed with smoke, stayeth, having attacked the bright constellation
Jeshtha that is sacred to Indra. The constellation Dhruva, blazing
fiercely, wheeleth towards the right. Both the Moon and the Sun are
afflicting Rohini. The fierce planet (Rahu) hath taken up its position
between the constellations Chitra and Swati.[13] The red-bodied (Mars)
possessed of the effulgence of fire, wheeling circuitously, stayeth in a
line with the constellation Sravana over-ridden by Vrihaspati. The earth
that produceth particular crops at particular seasons is now covered with
the crops of every season.[14] Every barley-stalk is graced with five
ears, and every paddy-stalk with a hundred. They that are the best of
creatures in the worlds and upon whom depends the universe, viz., kine,
when milked after the calves have their suck, yield only blood. Radiant
rays of light emanate from bows, and swords blaze forth brilliantly. It
is evident that the weapons behold (before them) the battle, as if it
were already arrived. The hue of weapons and the water, as also of coats
of mail and standards, is like that of fire. A great slaughter will take
place. In this battle,[15] O Bharata, of the Kurus with the Pandavas, the
earth, O monarch, will be a river of blood with the standards (of
warriors) as its rafts. Animals and birds on all sides, with mouths
blazing like fire, uttering fierce cries, and displaying these evil
omens, are foreboding terrible consequences. A (fierce) bird with but one
wing, one eye, and one leg, hovering over the sky in the night, screameth
frightfully in wrath, as if for making the hearers vomit blood? It
seemeth, O great king, that all weapons are now blazing with radiance.
The effulgence of the constellation known by the name of the seven
high-souled Rishis, hath been dimmed. Those two blazing planets, viz.,
Vrihaspati and Sani, having approached the constellation called Visakha,
have become stationary there for a whole year. Three lunations twice
meeting together in course of the same lunar fortnight, the duration of
the latter is shortened by two days.[16] On the thirteenth day therefore,
from the first lunation, according as it is the day of the full moon or
the new moon, the moon and the sun are afflicted by Rahu. Such strange
eclipses, both lunar and solar, forebode a great slaughter.[17] All the
quarters of the earth, being overwhelmed by showers of dust, look
inauspicious. Fierce clouds, portentous of danger, drop bloody showers
during the night. Rahu of fierce deeds is also, O monarch, afflicting the
constellation Kirtika. Rough winds, portending fierce danger, are
constantly blowing. All these beget a war characterised by many sad
incidents.[18] The constellations are divided into three classes. Upon
one or another of each class, a planet of evil omen has shed its
influence, foreboding terrible dangers.[19] A lunar fortnight had
hitherto consisted of fourteen days, or fifteen days (as usual), or
sixteen days. This, however, I never knew that the day of new-moon would
be on the thirteenth day from the first lunation, or the day of full-moon
on the thirteenth day from the same. And yet in course of the same month
both the Moon and the Sun have undergone eclipses on the thirteenth days
from the day of the first lunation.[20] The Sun and the Moon therefore,
by undergoing eclipses on unusual days,[21] will cause a great slaughter
of the creatures of the earth. Indeed, Rakshasas, though drinking blood
by mouthful, will yet not be satiated. The great rivers are flowing in
opposite directions. The waters of rivers have become bloody. The wells,
foaming up, are bellowing like bulls.[22] Meteors, effulgent like Indra's
thunder-bolt, fall with loud hisses.[23] When this night passeth away,
evil consequences will overtake you. People, for meeting together, coming
out of their houses with lighted brands, have still to encounter a thick
gloom all round.[24] Great Rishis have said that in view of such
circumstances the earth drinks the blood of thousands of kings. From the
mountains of Kailasa and Mandara and Himavat thousands of explosions are
heard and thousands of summits are tumbling down. In consequence of the
Earth's trembling, each of the four oceans having swelled greatly, seems
ready to transgress its continents for afflicting the Earth.[25] Fierce
winds charged with pointed pebbles are blowing, crushing mighty trees. In
villages and towns trees, ordinary and sacred, are falling down, crushed
by mighty winds and struck by lightning. The (sacrificial) fire, when
Brahmanas pour libations on it, becomes blue, or red, or yellow. Its
flames bend towards the left, yielding a bad scent, accompanied by loud
reports. Touch, smell, and taste have, O monarch, become what they were
not. The standards (of warriors), repeatedly trembling are emitting
smoke. Drums and cymbals are throwing off showers of coal-dust. And from
the tops of tall trees all around, crows, wheeling in circles from the
left, are uttering fierce cries. All of them again are uttering frightful
cries of pakka, pakka and are perching upon the tops of standards for the
destruction of the kings. Vicious elephants, trembling all over, are
running hither and thither, urinating and ejecting excreta. The horses
are all melancholy, while the elephants are resorting to the water.
Hearing all this, let that be done which is suitable, so that, O Bharata,
the world may not be depopulated.'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of his father,
Dhritarashtra said,--'I think all this hath been ordained of old. A great
slaughter of human beings will take place. If the kings die in battle
observing the duties of the Kshatriya order, they will then, attaining to
the regions reserved for heroes, obtain only happiness. These tigers
among men, casting away their lives in great battle, will win fame in
this and great bliss for ever in the next world.'
Vaisampayana continued,--"O best of kings, thus addressed by his son
Dhritarashtra, that prince of poets, the Muni (Vyasa) concentrated his
mind in supreme Yoga. Having contemplated for only a short space of time,
Vyasa once more said,--'Without doubt, O king of kings, it is Time that
destroyeth the universe. It is Time also that createth the worlds. There
is nothing here that is eternal. Show the path of righteousness to the
Kurus, to thy kinsmen, relatives, and friends. Thou art competent to
restrain them. The slaughter of kinsmen hath been said to be sinful. Do
not do that which is disagreeable to me. O king, Death himself hath been
born in the shape of thy son. Slaughter is never applauded in the Vedas.
It can never be beneficial. The usages of one's race are as one's own
body. Those usages slay him that destroyeth them. For the destruction of
this race and of those kings of the earth it is Time that maketh thee
deviate into the wrong path like one in distress, although thou art
competent (to walk along the path of righteousness). O king, in the shape
of thy kingdom hath calamity come to thee. Thy virtue is sustaining a
very great diminution.[26] Show what righteousness is unto thy sons. O
thou that art invincible, of what value is that kingdom to thee which
bringeth sin to thee? Take care of thy good name, thy virtue, and thy
fame. Thou wilt then win heaven. Let the Pandavas have their kingdom, and
let the Kauravas have peace."
"While that best of Brahmanas was saying these words in a sorrowful tone,
Dhritarashtra, the son of Ambika, accomplished in speech, once more
addressed him, saying.---'My knowledge of life and death is similar to
thine. The truth is known to me as regards these. Man, however, in what
concerns his own interests, is deprived of judgment. O sire, know me to
be one who is an ordinary person. Of immeasurable power thou art. I pray
thee to extend thine towards us. Of soul under complete control, thou art
our refuge and instructor. My sons are not obedient to me, O great Rishi.
My understanding too is not inclined to commit sin.[27] Thou art the
cause of the fame, the achievements, and the inclination for virtue, of
the Bharatas. Thou art the reverend grandsire of both the Kurus and the
Pandavas.'
"Vyasa said,--'O royal son of Vichitravirya, tell me freely what is in
thy mind. I will remove thy doubts."
"Dhritarashtra said,--'O holy one, I desire to hear from thee of all
those indications that happen unto those that become victorious in
battle."
"Vyasa said,--'The (sacred) fire assumes a cheerful radiance. Its light
ascends upwards. Its flame bends towards the right. It blazes up without
being smoky. The libations poured on it yield a fragrant scent. It is
said that these are the indications of future success. The conches and
cymbals yield sounds that are deep and loud. The Sun as well as the Moon
gives pure rays. It is said that these are the indications of future
success. Crows, whether stationary or on their wings, utter cries that
are agreeable. They again that are behind, urge the warriors to advance;
while they that are ahead, forbid all advance.[28] Where vultures, swans,
parrots, cranes, and wood-peckers utter delightful cries, and wheel
towards the right, the Brahmanas say that their victory in battle is
certain. They whose divisions, in consequence of ornaments, coats of
mail, and standards, or the melodious neigh of their steeds, become
resplendent and incapable of being gazed at, always conquer their foes.
They who utter cheerful shouts, those warriors, O Bharata, whose energies
are not damped and whose garlands do not fade, always cross the ocean of
battle. They who utter cheerful shouts having penetrated into the
divisions of the foe, who utter even kind words,[29] to the enemy, and
who, before striking, forewarn the foe, win victory. The objects of
hearing, vision, taste, touch, and smell, without undergoing any change
for the worse, become auspicious. This also is another indication of a
victorious army, viz., there is joy among the combatants at all time.
This also is another indication of success, viz. the winds that blow, the
clouds, and the birds, all become favourable; while the clouds (so
favourable) and the rain-bows drop beneficial showers. These, O king, are
the indications of armies to be crowned with victory, while O monarch,
all these become otherwise in the case of those that are about to be
destroyed. Whether the army be small or large, cheerfulness, as an
attribute of the combatants, is said to be a certain indication of
victory. One soldier, struck with panic, can cause even a large army to
take fright and fly. And when an army, struck with panic, takes to
flight, it causes even heroic warriors to take fright. If a large army is
once broken and put to rout, it cannot like a herd of deer disordered in
fright or a mighty current of water be easily checked. If a large army is
once routed, it is incapable of being rallied; on the other hand,
beholding it broken, even those well-skilled in battle, O Bharata, become
heartless. Beholding soldiers struck with fear and flying, the panic
spreads in other directions, and soon, O king, the whole army is broken
and flies in all directions. And when an army is routed, even brave
leaders, O king, at the head of large divisions consisting of the four
kinds of forces, are incapable of rallying them. An intelligent man,
always exerting himself with activity, should strive (to win success) by
the aid of means. It is said that that success which is won by
negotiation and other means is the very best. That which is achieved by
producing disunion (among the foe) is indifferent. While that success, O
king, which is won by battle, is the worst. In battle are many evils, the
initial one, as it is said, being slaughter. Even fifty brave men who
know one another, who are underpressed, who are free from family ties,
and who are firmly resolved, can crush a large army. Even five, six,
seven men, who are unretreating, win victory. Vinata's son Garuda, O
Bharata, beholding even a large concourse of birds, asketh not the aid of
many followers (to vanquish them). The strength in number, therefore of
an army is not always the cause of victory. Victory is uncertain. It
depends on chance. Even they that become victorious have to sustain
loss.'"
