SECTION I
(Jamvu-khanda Nirmana Parva)
OM! HAVING BOWED down to Narayana, and Nara, the most exalted of male
beings, and also to the goddess Saraswati, must the word 'Jaya' be
uttered.
Janamejaya said,--"How did those heroes, the Kurus, the Pandavas, and the
Somakas, and the high-souled kings assembled together from various
countries, fight?"
Vaisampayana said,--"Listen thou, O lord of the earth, how those
heroes,--the Kurus, the Pandavas, and the Somakas,--fought on the sacred
plain of the Kurukshetra.[1] Entering Kurukshetra, the Pandavas endued
with great might, along with the Somakas, advanced, desirous of victory,
against the Kauravas. Accomplished in the study of the Vedas, all (of
them) took great delight in battle. Expectant of success in battle, with
their troops (they) faced the fight. Approaching the army of
Dhritarashtra's son, those (warriors) invincible in battle[2] stationed
themselves with their troops on the western part (of the plain), their
faces turned towards the east. Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, caused
tents by thousands to be set up according to rule, beyond the region
called Samantapanchaka. The whole earth seemed then to be empty, divested
of horses and men, destitute of cars and elephants, and with only the
children and the old left (at home). From the whole area of Jamvudwipa
over which the sun sheds his rays,[3] was collected that force, O best of
kings. Men of all races,[4] assembled together, occupied an area
extending for many Yojanas over districts, rivers, hills, and woods. That
bull among men, king Yudhishthira, ordered excellent food and other
articles of enjoyment for all of them along with their animals. And
Yudhishthira fixed diverse watch-words for them; so that one saying this
should be known as belonging to the Pandavas. And that descendant of
Kuru's race also settled names and badges for all of them for recognition
during time of battle.
"Beholding the standard-top of Pritha's son, the high-souled son of
Dhritarashtra, with a white umbrella held over his head, in the midst of
a thousand elephants, and surrounded by his century of brothers, began
with all the kings (on his side) to array his troops against the son of
Pandu. Seeing Duryodhana, the Panchalas who took delight in battle, were
filled with joy and blew their loud-sounding conches and cymbals of sweet
sounds. Beholding those troops so delighted, Pandu's son and Vasudeva of
great energy had their hearts filled with joy. And those tigers among
men, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya, seated on one car, having felt great joy,
both blew their celestial conches. And hearing the blare of Gigantea and
the loud blast of Theodotes belonging unto the two, the combatants
ejected urine and excreta. As other animals are filled with fear on
hearing the voice of the roaring lion, even so became that force upon
hearing those blasts. A frightful dust arose and nothing could be seen,
for the sun himself, suddenly enveloped by it, seemed to have set.[5] A
black cloud poured a shower of flesh and blood over the troops all
around. All this seemed extraordinary. A wind rose there, bearing along
the earth myriads of stony nodules, and afflicting therewith the
combatants by hundreds and thousands. (For all that), O monarch, both
armies, filled with joy, stood addrest for battle, on Kurukshetra like
two agitated oceans. Indeed, that encounter of the two armies was highly
wonderful, like that of two oceans when the end of the Yuga is arrived.
The whole earth was empty, having only the children and the old left (at
home), in consequence of that large army mustered by the Kauravas.[6]
Then the Kurus, the Pandavas, and the Somakas made certain covenants, and
settled the rules, O bull of Bharata's race, regarding the different
kinds of combat. Persons equally circumstanced must encounter each other,
fighting fairly. And if having fought fairly the combatants withdraw
(without fear of molestation), even that would be gratifying to us. Those
who engaged in contests of words should be fought against with words.
Those that left the ranks should never be slain.[7] A car-warrior should
have a car-warrior for his antagonist; he on the neck of an elephant
should have a similar combatant for his foe; a horse should be met by a
horse, and a foot-soldier, O Bharata; should be met by a foot-soldier.
Guided by considerations of fitness, willingness, daring and might, one
should strike another, giving notice. No one should strike another that
is unprepared[8] or panic-struck. One engaged with another, one seeking
quarter, one retreating, one whose weapon is rendered unfit, uncased in
mail, should never be struck. Car-drivers, animals (yoked to cars or
carrying weapons) men engaged in the transport of weapons,[9] players on
drums and blowers of conches should never be struck. Having made these
covenants, the Kurus, and the Pandavas, and the Somakas wondered much,
gazing at each other. And having stationed (their forces thus), those
bulls among men, those high-souled ones, with their troops, became glad
at heart, their joy being reflected on their countenances."
