SECTION CXCVIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Next morning, under a cloudless sky, all the kings,
urged by Dhritarashtra's son, Duryodhana,--set out against the Pandavas.
And all of them had purified themselves by baths, were decked in
garlands, and attired in white robes. And having poured libations on
fire, caused Brahmanas to utter benedictions on them, they took up their
weapons and raised their (respective) standards. And all of them were
conversant with the Vedas, and endued with great bravery, and had
practised excellent vows. And all of them were grantors of (other
people's) wishes, and all were skilled in battle. Endued with great
strength, they set out, reposing confidence on one another, and with
singleness of purpose desiring to win in battle the highest regions. And
first Vinda and Anuvinda, both of Avanti, and Kekayas, and the Vahlikas,
all set out with Bharadwaja's son at their head. Then came Aswatthaman,
and Santanu's son (Bhishma), and Jayadratha of the country of the Sindhu,
and the kings of the southern and the western countries and of the hilly
regions, and Sakuni, the ruler of the Gandharas, and all the chiefs of
the eastern and the northern regions, and the Sakas, the Kiratas, and
Yavanas, the Sivis and the Vasatis with their Maharathas at the heads of
their respective divisions. All these great car-warriors marched in the
second division. Then came Kritavarman at the head of his troops, and
that mighty car-warrior, viz., the ruler of the Trigartas, and the king
Duryodhana surrounded by his brothers, and Sala, and Bhurisravas, and
Salya, and Vrihadratha, the ruler of the Kosalas. These all marched in
the rear, with Dhritarashtra's sons at their head. And all these
Dhartarashtras endued with great might, uniting together in proper order,
and all clad in mail, took up their position at the other end of
Kurukshetra, and, O Bharata, Duryodhana caused his encampment to be so
adorned as to make it look like a second Hastinapura. Indeed, O king,
even those that were clever among the citizens of Hastinapura could not
distinguish their city from the encampment. And the Kuru king caused
inaccessible pavilions, similar to his own, to be erected by hundreds and
thousands for the (other) kings (in his army). And those tents, O king,
for the accommodation of the troops were well-planted on an area
measuring full five yojanas of that field of battle. And into those tents
by thousands that were full of provisions, the rulers of the earth
entered, each according to his courage according to the strength he
possessed. And king Duryodhana ordered excellent provisions to be
supplied for all those high-souled kings with their troops consisting of
infantry, elephants, and horses, and with all their followers. And as
regards all those that subsisted upon mechanical arts and all the bards,
singers, and panegyrists devoted to his cause, and vendors and traders,
and prostitutes, and spies, and persons who had come to witness the
battle, the Kuru king made due provision for all of them.'"
