SECTION XI
(Bhumi Parva)
"Dhritarashtra said,--'Thou hast, O Sanjaya, duly described Jamvukhanda
to me. Tell me now its dimensions and extent truly. Tell me also, O
Sanjaya, of the extent of the ocean of Sakadwipa, and Kusadwipa, of
Salmalidwipa and Kraunchadwipa, truly and without leaving anything and
tell me also, O son of Gavalgani, of Rahu and Soma and Surya.'
"Sanjaya said,--'There are, O king, many islands, over which the Earth
extended. I will describe to thee, however, only seven islands, and the
moon, and the sun, and the planet (Rahu), also. The Jamvu mountain, O
king, extends over full eighteen thousand and six hundred Yojanas. The
extent of the salt ocean is said to be twice this. That ocean is covered
with many kingdoms, and is adorned with gems and corals. It is, besides,
decked with many mountains that are variegated with metals of diverse
kinds. Thickly peopled by Siddhas and Charanas, the ocean is circular in
form.
"I will now tell thee truly of Sakadwipa, O Bharata. Listen to me, O son
of Kuru's race, as I describe it to thee duly. That island, O ruler of
men, is of twice the extent of Jamvudwipa. And the ocean also, O great
king, is of twice the extent of that island. Indeed, O best of the
Bharatas, Sakadwipa is surrounded on all sides by the ocean. The kingdoms
there are full of righteousness, and the men there never die. How can
famine take place there? The people are all endued with forgiveness and
great energy. I have now, O bull of Bharata's race, given thee duly a
brief description of Sakadwipa. What else, O king, dost thou wish to
hear?'"[66]
"Dhritarashtra said,--'Thou hast given me, O Sanjaya, a description of
Sakadwipa in brief. O thou that art possessed of great wisdom, tell me
now everything in detail truly.'
"Sanjaya said,--'In that island, O king, there are seven mountains that
are decked with jewels and that are mines of gems, precious stones. There
are many rivers also in that island. Listen to me as I recount their
names. Everything there, O king, is excellent and delightful, The first
of these mountains is called Meru. It is the abode of the gods, Rishis,
and Gandharvas. The next mountain, O king, is called Malaya stretching
towards the east. It is there that the clouds are generated and it is
thence that they disperse on all sides. The next, O thou of Kuru's race,
is the large mountain called Jaladhara.[67] Thence Indra daily taketh
water of the best quality. It is from that water that we get showers in
the season of rains, O ruler of men. Next cometh the high mountain called
Raivataka, over which, in the firmament, hath been permanently placed the
constellation called Revati. This arrangement hath been made by the
Grandsire himself. On the north of this, O great king, is the large
mountain called Syama. It hath the splendour of newly-risen clouds, is
very high, beautiful and of bright body. And since the hue of those
mountains is dark, the people residing there are all dark in complexion,
O king.'
"Dhritarashtra said,--'A great doubt ariseth in my mind, O Sanjaya, from
what thou hast said. Why, O Suta's son, would the people there be of dark
complexion?'
"Sanjaya said,--'O great king, in all islands, O son of Kuru's race, men
may be found that are fair, and those that are dark, and those also that
are produced by a union of the fair and the dark races. But because the
people there are all dark, therefore is that mountain called the Dark
Mountain. After this, O chief of the Kurus, is the large mountain called
Durgasaila. And then cometh the mountain called Kesari. The breezes that
blow from that mountain are all charged with (odoriferous) effluvia. The
measure of each of these mountains is double that of the one mentioned
immediately before. O thou of Kuru's race, it hath been said by the wise
that there are seven Varshas in that island. The Varsha of Meru is called
Mahakasa; that of the water-giving (Malaya) is called Kumudottara. The
Varsha of Jaladhara is called Sukumara: while that of Raivatak is called
Kaumara; and of Syama, Manikanchana. The Varsha of Kesara is called
Mandaki, and that called after the next mountain is called Mahapuman. In
the midst of that island is a large tree called Saka. In height and
breadth the measure of that tree is equal to that of the Jamvu tree in
Jamvudwipa. And the people there always adore that tree. There in that
island are, many delightful provinces where Siva is worshipped, and
thither repair the Siddhas, the Charanas, and the celestials. The people
there, O king, are virtuous, and all the four orders, O Bharata, are
devoted to their respective occupation. No instance of theft can be seen
there. Freed from decrepitude and death and gifted with long life, the
people there, O king, grow like rivers during the season of rains. The
rivers there are full of sacred water, and Ganga herself, distributed as
she hath been into various currents, is there, Sukumari, and Kumari, and
Seta, and Keveraka, and Mahanadi, O Kauravya, and the river Manijala, and
Chakshus, and the river Vardhanika, O thou best of the Bharatas,--these
and many other rivers by thousands and hundreds, all full of sacred
water, are there, O perpetuator of Kuru's race, from which Vasava draweth
water for showering it as rain. It is impossible to recount the names and
lengths of rivers. All of them are foremost of rivers and sin-cleansing.
As heard by all men there, in that island of Saka, are four sacred
provinces. They are the Mrigas, the Masakas, the Manasas, and the
Mandagas. The Mrigas for the most part are Brahmanas devoted to the
occupations of their order. Amongst the Masakas are virtuous Kshatriyas
granting (unto Brahmanas) every wish (entertained by them). The Manasas,
O king, live by following the duties of the Vaisya order. Having every
wish of theirs gratified, they are also brave and firmly devoted to
virtue and profit. The Mandagas are all brave Sudras of virtuous
behaviour. In these provinces, O monarch, there is no king, no
punishment, no person that deserves to be punished. Conversant with the
dictates of duty they are all engaged in the practice of their respective
duties and protect one another. This much is capable of being said of the
island called Saka. This much also should be listened to about that
island endued with great energy."[68]
