SECTION X
"Dhritarashtra said,--'Tell me, O Sanjaya, of the period of life, the
strength, the good and bad things, the future, past and present, of the
residents, O Suta, of this Varsha of Bharata, and of the Himavat-varsha,
as also of Hari-varsha, in detail."
"Sanjaya said,--'O bull of Bharata's race, four Yugas set in Bharata's
Varsha, viz., Krita, Treta, Dwapara, and Kali. The Yuga that sets in
first is Krita. O Lord; after the expiry of Krita comes Treta; after
expiry of Treta comes Dwapara; and after that last of all, sets in Kali.
Four thousand years, O best of the Kurus, are reckoned as the measure of
life, O best of kings, in the Krita epoch. Three thousand years is the
period in Treta, O ruler of men. At present in Dwapara, persons live on
Earth for two thousand years. In Kali, however, O bull of Bharata's race,
there is no fixed limit of life's measure, in so much that men die while
in the womb, as also soon after birth. In the Krita age, O king, men are
born and beget children, by hundreds and thousands, that are of great
strength and great power, endued with the attribute of great wisdom, and
possessed of wealth and handsome features. In that age are born and
begotten Munis endued with wealth of asceticism, capable of great
exertion, possessed of high souls, and virtuous, and truthful in speech.
The Kshatriyas also, born in that age are of agreeable features,
able-bodied, possessed of great energy, accomplished in the use of the
bow, highly skilled in battle and exceedingly brave. In the Treta age, O
king, all the Kshatriya kings were emperors ruling from sea to sea. In
Treta are begotten brave Kshatriyas not subject to any one, endued with
long lives, possessed of heroism, and wielding the bow in battle with
great skill. When Dwapara sets in, O king, all the (four) orders born
become capable of great exertion, endued with great energy, and desirous
of conquering one another. The men born in Kali, O king, are endued with
little energy, highly wrathful, covetous, and untruthful. Jealousy,
pride, anger, deception, malice and covetousness, O Bharata, are the
attributes of creatures in the Kali age. The portion that remains, O
king, of this the Dwapara age, is small, O ruler of men. The Varsha known
as Haimavat is superior to Bharatavarsha, while Harivarsha is superior to
Hainavatvarsha, in respect of all qualities.'
