SECTION VIII
"Dhritarashtra said,--'Tell me truly, O Sanjaya, the names of all the
Varshas, and of all the mountains, and also of all those that dwell on
those mountains.
"Sanjaya said,--'On the south of Sweta and the north of Nishadha, is the
Varsha, called Romanaka. The men that are born there are all of white
complexion, of good parentage, and handsome features. And the men born
there are also all without enemies. And they live, O king, for eleven
thousand and five hundred years, being ever of cheerful hearts. On the
south of Nishadha is the Varsha called Hiranmaya where is the river
called Hiranwati. There, O king, liveth that foremost of birds named
Garuda. And the people there, O monarch, are all followers of the
Yakshas, wealthy, and of handsome features. And, O king, the men there
are endued with great strength and have: cheerful hearts. And they live
for twelve thousand and five hundred years., O king, which is the measure
of their lives. The mountains of Sringavat,[56] O ruler of men, have
three beautiful summits. One of these is made of jewels and gems, another
is very wonderful, being made of all kinds of gems and adorned with
palatial mansions. There the self-luminous lady named Sandili always
liveth. On the north of Sringavat and up to the margin of the sea, O
king, the Varsha called Airavat. And because this jewelled mountain is
there, therefore is this Varsha superior to all. The sun giveth no heat
there and men are not subject to decay. And the moon there, with the
stars, becoming the only source of light, covereth (the firmament).
Possessing the radiance and complexion of the lotus, and endued with eyes
that resemble lotus-petals, the men born there have the fragrance of the
lotus. With winkless eyes, and agreeable scent (emanating from their
bodies), they go without food and have their senses under control. They
are all fallen from the region of the celestials, and are all, O king,
without sin of any kind. And they live, O monarch, for thirteen thousand
years, that being. O best of the Bharatas, the measure of their lives.
And so on the north of the milky ocean, the Lord Hari of unlimited
puissance dwelleth on his car made of gold. That vehicle is endued with
eight wheels, with numerous supernatural creatures stationed on it, and
having the speed of the mind. And its complexion is that of fire, and it
is endued with mighty energy and adorned with Jamvunada gold. He is the
Lord of all creatures, and is possessed, O bull of Bharata's race, of
every kind of prosperity. In him the universe merges (when dissolution
comes), and from him it again emanates (when the creative desire seizes
him). He is the actor, and it is He that makes all others act. He, O
monarch, is earth, water, space, air, and fire. He is Sacrifice's self
unto all creatures, and fire is His mouth."
Vaisampayana continued,--"The high-souled king Dhritarashtra, thus
addressed by Sanjaya, became, O monarch, absorbed in meditation about his
sons. Endued with great energy, he then, having reflected, said these
words: 'Without doubt, O Suta's son, it is Time that destroyeth the
universe. And it is Time that again createth everything. Nothing here is
eternal. It is Nara and Narayana, endued with omniscience, that
destroyeth all creatures.[57] The gods speak of him as Vaikuntha (of
immeasurable puissance), while men call him Vishnu (one that pervadeth
the Universe)!'"
