SECTION XIX
Dhritarashtra said,--"Beholding our ten and one Akshauhinis arrayed in
order of battle, how did Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu, make his
counter-array with his forces smaller in number? How did Kunti's son, O
Sanjaya, form his counter-array against that Bhishma who was acquainted
with all kinds of arrays, viz., human, celestial, Gandharva, and Asura?"
Sanjaya said,--"Seeing the Dhritarashtra divisions arrayed in order of
battle, Pandu's son of virtuous soul, king Yudhishthira the just,
addressed Dhananjaya, saying,--'Men are informed from the words of that
great Rishi Vrihaspati that the few must be made to fight by condensing
them, while the many may be extended according to pleasure. In encounters
of the few with the many, the array to be formed should be the
needle-mouthed one. Our troops compared with the enemy's are few. Keeping
in view this precept of the great Rishi, array our troops, O son of
Pandu.' Hearing this, that son of Pandu answered king Yudhishthira the
just, saying,--That immovable array known by the name of Vajra, which was
designed by the wielder of the thunder-bolt,--that invincible array is
the one that I will make for thee, O best of kings. He who is like the
bursting tempest, he who is incapable of being borne in battle by the
foe, that Bhima the foremost of smiters, will fight at our head. That
foremost of men, conversant with all the appliances of battle, becoming
our leader, will fight in the van, crushing the energy of the foe. That
foremost of smiters, viz., Bhima, beholding whom all the hostile warriors
headed by Duryodhana will retreat in panic like smaller animals beholding
the lion, all of us, our fears dispelled, will seek his shelter as if he
were a wall, like the celestial seeking the shelter of Indra. The man
breathes not in the world who would bear to cast his eyes upon that bull
among men, Vrikodara of fierce deeds, when he is angry.'--Having said
this, Dhananjaya of mighty arms did as he said. And Phalguni, quickly
disposing his troops in battle-array, proceeded (against the foe). And
the mighty army of the Pandavas beholding the Kuru army move, looked like
the full, immovable, and quickly rolling[103] current of Ganga. And
Bhimasena, and Dhrishtadyumna endued with great energy, and Nakula, and
Sahadeva, and king Dhrishtaketu, became the leaders of that force. And
king Virata, surrounded by an Akshawhini of troops and accompanied by his
brothers and sons, marched in their rear, protecting them from behind.
The two sons of Madri, both endued with great effulgence, became the
protectors of Bhima's wheels; while the (five) sons of Draupadi and the
son of Subhadra all endued with great activity, protected (Bhima) from
behind. And that mighty car-warrior, Dhrishtadyumna, the prince of
Panchala, with those bravest of combatants and the foremost of
car-warriors, viz., the Prabhadrakas, protected those princes from
behind. And behind him was Sikhandin who (in his turn) was protected by
Arjuna, and who, O bull of Bharata's race, advanced with concentrated
attention for the destruction of Bhishma. Behind Arjuna was Yuyudhana of
mighty strength; and the two princes of Panchala, viz., Yudhamanyu and
Uttamaujas, became protectors of Arjuna's wheels, along with the Kekaya
brothers, and Dhrishtaketu, and Chekitana of great valour--This
Bhimasena, wielding his mace made of the hardest metal, and moving (on
the field of battle) with fierce speed, can dry up the very ocean. And
there also stay, with their counsellors looking on him. O king, the
children[104] of Dhritarashtra.--Even this, O monarch, was what Vibhatsu
said, pointing out the mighty Bhimasena (to Yudhishthira).[105] And while
Partha was saying so, all the troops, O Bharata, worshipped him on the
field of battle with gratulatory words. King Yudhishthira, the son of
Kunti, took up his position in the centre of his army, surrounded by huge
and furious elephants resembling moving hills. The high-souled Yajnasena,
the king of the Panchalas, endued with great prowess, stationed himself
behind Virata with an Akshauhini of troops for the sake of the Pandavas.
And on the cars of those kings, O monarch, were tall standards bearing
diverse devices, decked with excellent ornaments of gold, and endued with
the effulgence of the Sun and the Moon. Causing those kings to move and
make space for him, that mighty car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna, accompanied
by his brothers and sons protected Yudhishthira from behind. Transcending
the huge standards on all the cars on thy side and that of the enemy, was
the one gigantic ape on Arjuna's car. Foot-soldiers, by many hundreds of
thousands, and armed with swords, spears, and scimitars, proceeded ahead
for protecting Bhimasena. And ten thousand elephants with (temporal)
juice trickling down their cheek and mouth, and resembling (on that
account) showering clouds,[106] endued with great courage, blazing with
golden armour, huge hills, costly, and emitting the fragrance of lotuses,
followed the king behind like moving mountains.[107] And the high-souled
and invincible Bhimasena, whirling his fierce mace that resembled a
parigha[108] seemed to crush the large army (of thy son). Incapable of
being looked at like the Sun himself, and scorching as it were, the
hostile army (like fire), none of the combatants could bear to even look
at him from any neat point. And this array, fearless and having its face
turned towards all sides called Vajra, having bows for its lightning
sign,[109] and extremely fierce, was protected by the wielder of Gandiva.
Disposing their troops in this counter-array against thy army, the
Pandavas waited for battle. And protected by the Pandavas, that array
became invincible in the world of men.
"'And as (both) the armies stood at dawn of day waiting for sunrise, a
wind began to blow with drops of water (falling), and although there were
no clouds, the roll of thunder was heard. And dry winds began to blow all
around, bearing a shower of pointed pebbles along the ground. And as
thick dust arose, covering the world with darkness. And large meteors
began to fall east-wards, O bull of Bharata's race, and striking against
the rising Sun, broke in fragments with loud noise. When the troops stood
arrayed, O bull of Bharata's race, the Sun rose divested of splendour,
and the Earth trembled with a loud sound, and cracked in many places, O
chief of the Bharatas, with loud noise. And the roll of thunder, O king,
was heard frequently on all sides. So thick was the dust that arose that
nothing could be seen. And the tall standards (of the combatants),
furnished with strings of bells, decked with golden ornaments, garlands
of flowers, and rich drapery, graced with banners and resembling the Sun
in splendour, being suddenly shaken by the wind, gave a loud jingling
noise like that of a forest of palmyra trees (when moved by the wind). It
was thus that those tigers among men, the sons of Pandu, ever taking
delight in battle, stood having disposed their troops in counter-array
against the army of thy son, and sucking as it were, the marrow, O bull
of Bharata's race, of our warriors, and casting their eyes on Bhimasena
stationed at their head, mace in hand."
