SECTION XVII
Sanjaya said,--"Just as the holy Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa had said, in
that very manner the kings of the Earth, mustered together, came to the
encounter. On that day on which the battle commenced Soma approached the
region of Pitris.[92] The seven large planets, as they appeared in the
firmament, all looked blazing like fire.[93] The Sun, when he rose,
seemed to be divided in twain. Besides, that luminary, as it appeared in
the firmament, seemed to blaze forth in flames.[94] Carnivorous jackals
and crows, expecting dead bodies to feast upon, began to utter fierce
cries from all directions that seemed to be ablaze. Every day the old
grandsire of the Kurus, and the son of Bharadwaja, rising from bed in the
morning, with concentrated mind, said,--'Victory to the sons of
Pandu'--while those chastisers of foes used (at the same time) yet to
fight for thy sake according to the pledge they had given. Thy father
Devavrata, fully conversant with every duty, summoning all the kings,
said these words (unto them). 'Ye Kshatriyas, this broad door is open to
you for entering heaven. Go ye through it to the region of Sakra and
Brahman. The Rishis of olden times have showed you this eternal path.[95]
Honour ye yourselves by engaging in battle with attentive minds. Nabhaga,
and Yayati, and Mandhatri, and Nahusa, and Nriga, were crowned with
success and obtained the highest region of bliss by feats like these. To
die of disease at home is sin for a Kshatriya. The death he meets with in
battle is his eternal duty.'--Thus addressed, O bull of Bharata's race,
by Bhishma, the kings, looking beautiful in their excellent cars,
proceeded to the heads of their respective divisions. Only Vikartana's
son Karna, with his friends and relatives, O bull of Bharata's race, laid
aside his weapons in battle for the sake of Bhishma. Without Karna then,
thy sons and all the kings on thy side proceeded, making the ten points
of the horizon resound with their leonine roars. And their divisions
shone brightly, O king, with white umbrellas, banners, standards,
elephants, steeds, cars, and foot-soldiers. And the Earth was agitated
with the sounds of drums and tabors and cymbals, and the clatter of
car-wheels. And the mighty car-warriors, decked with their bracelets and
armlets of gold and with their bows (variegated with gold), looked
resplendent like hills of fire. And with his large palmyra-standard
decked with five stars, Bhishma, the generalissimo of the Kuru army,[96]
looked like the resplendent Sun himself. Those mighty bowmen of royal
birth, O bull of Bharata's race, that were on thy side, all took up their
positions, O king, as Santanu's son ordered. (King) Saivya of the country
of the Govasanas, accompanied by all the monarchs, went out on a princely
elephant worthy of royal use and graced with a banner on its back. And
Aswatthaman, of the complexion of the lotus, went out ready for every
emergency, stationing himself at the very head of all the divisions, with
his standard bearing the device of the lion's tail. And Srutayudha and
Chitrasena and Purumitra and Vivinsati, and Salya and Bhurisravas, and
that mighty car-warrior Vikarna,--these seven mighty bowmen on their
carts and cased in excellent mail, followed Drona's son behind but in
advance of Bhishma. The tall standards of these warriors, made of gold,
beautifully set up for adorning their excellent cars, looked highly
resplendent. The standard of Drona, the foremost of preceptors, bore the
device of a golden altar decked with a water-pot and the figure of a bow.
The standard of Duryodhana guiding many hundreds and thousands of
divisions bore the device of an elephant worked in gems. Paurava and the
ruler of the Kalingas, and Salya, these Rathas took up their position in
Duryodhana's van. On a costly car with his standard bearing the device of
a bull, and guiding the very van (of his division), the ruler of the
Magadhas marched against the foe.[97] That large force of the Easterners
looking like the fleecy clouds of autumn[98] was (besides) protected by
the chief of the Angas (Karna's son Vrishaketu) and Kripa endued with
great energy. Stationing himself in the van of his division with his
beautiful standard of silver bearing the device of the boar, the famous
Jayadratha looked highly resplendent. A hundred thousand cars, eight
thousand elephants, and sixty thousand cavalry were under his
command.[99] Commanded by the royal chief of the Sindhus, that large
division occupying the very van (of the army) and abounding with untold
cars, elephants, and steeds, looked magnificent. With sixty thousand cars
and ten thousand elephants, the ruler of the Kalingas, accompanied by
Ketumat, went out. His huge elephants, looking like hills, and adorned
with Yantras,[100] lances, quivers and standards, looked exceedingly
beautiful. And the ruler of the Kalingas, with his tall standard
effulgent as fire, with his white umbrella, and golden curass, and
Chamaras (wherewith he was fanned), shone brilliantly. And Ketumat also,
riding on an elephant with a highly excellent and beautiful hook, was
stationed in battle, O King, like the Sun in the midst of (black) clouds.
And king Bhagadatta, blazing with energy and riding on that elephant of
his, went out like the wielder of the thunder. And the two princes of
Avanti named Vinda and Anuvinda, who were regarded as equal to
Bhagadatta, followed Ketumat, riding on the necks of their elephants.
And, O king, arrayed by Drona and the royal son of Santanu, and Drona's
son, and Valhika, and Kripa, the (Kaurava) Vyuha[101] consisting of many
divisions of cars was such that the elephants formed its body; the kings,
its head; and the steeds, its wings. With face towards all sides, that
fierce Vyuha seemed to smile and ready to spring (upon the foe)."
