SECTION XXIII
Sanjaya said,--"Beholding the Dhartarashtra army approach for fight,
Krishna said these words for Arjuna's benefit."
"The holy one said,--'Cleansing thyself, O mighty-armed one, utter on the
eve of the battle thy hymn to Durga for (compassing) the defeat of the
foe."
Sanjaya continued.--Thus addressed on the eve of battle by Vasudeva
endued with great intelligence, Pritha's son Arjuna, alighting from his
car, said the following hymn with joined hands.
"Arjuna said,--'I bow to thee, O leader of Yogins, O thou that art
identical with Brahman, O thou that dwellest in the forest of Mandara, O
thou that art freed from decrepitude and decay, O Kali, O wife of Kapala,
O thou that art of a black and tawny hue, I bow to thee. O bringer of
benefits to thy devotees, I bow to thee, O Mahakali, O wife of the
universal destroyer, I bow to thee. O proud one, O thou that rescuest
from dangers, O thou that art endued with every auspicious attribute. O
thou that art sprung from the Kata race, O thou that deservest the most
regardful worship, O fierce one, O giver of victory, O victory's self, O
thou that bearest a banner of peacock plumes, O thou that art decked with
every ornament, O thou that bearest an awful spear, O thou that holdest a
sword and shield, O thou that art the younger sister of the chief of
cow-herds, O eldest one, O thou that wert born in the race of the cowherd
Nanda! O thou that art always fond of buffalo's blood, O thou that wert
born in the race of Kusika, O thou that art dressed in yellow robes, O
thou that hadst devoured Asuras assuming the face of a wolf[120], I bow
to thee that art fond of battle! O Uma,[121] Sakambhari, O thou that art
white in hue, O thou that art black in hue, O thou that hast slain the
Asura Kaitabha, O thou that art yellow-eyed, O thou that art
diverse-eyed, O thou of eyes that have the colour of smoke, I bow to
thee. O thou that art the Vedas, the Srutis, and the highest virtue, O
thou that art propitious to Brahmanas engaged in sacrifice, O thou that
hast a knowledge of the past, thou that art ever present in the sacred
abodes erected to thee in cities of Jamvudwipa, I bow to thee. Thou art
the science of Brahma among sciences, and thou that art that sleep of
creatures from which there is no waking. O mother of Skanda, O thou that
possessest the six (highest) attributes, O Durga, O thou that dwellest in
accessible regions, thou art described as Swaha, and Swadha,[122] as
Kala, as Kashta, and as Saraswati, as Savitra the mother of the Vedas,
and as the science of Vedanta. With inner soul cleansed, I praise thee. O
great goddess, let victory always attend me through thy grace on the
field of battle. In inaccessible regions, where there is fear, in places
of difficulty, in the abodes of thy worshippers and in the nether regions
(Patala), thou always dwellest. Thou always defeatest the Danavas. Thou
art the unconsciousness, the sleep, the illusion, the modesty, the beauty
of (all creatures). Thou art the twilight, thou art the day, thou art
Savitri, and thou art the mother. Thou art contentment, thou art growth,
thou art light. It is thou that supportest the Sun and the Moon and that
makes them shine. Thou art the prosperity of those that are prosperous.
The Siddhas and the Charanas behold thee in contemplation.[123]'"
Sanjaya continued,--Understanding (the measure of) Partha's devotion,
Durga who is always graciously inclined towards mankind, appeared in the
firmament and in the presence of Govinda, said these words.
'"The goddess said,--'Within a short time thou shalt conquer thy foes, O
Pandava. O invincible one, thou hast Narayana (again) for aiding thee.
Thou art incapable of being defeated by foes, even by the wielder of the
thunderbolt himself.'
'"Having said this, the boon-giving goddess disappeared soon. The son of
Kunti, however, obtaining that boon, regarded himself as successful, and
the son of Pritha then mounted his own excellent car. And then Krishna
and Arjuna, seated on the same car, blew their celestial conches. The man
that recites this hymn rising at dawn, hath no fear any time from
Yakshas, Rakshasas, and Pisachas. He can have no enemies; he hath no
fear, from snakes and all animals that have fangs and teeth, as also from
kings. He is sure to be victorious in all disputes, and if bound, he is
freed from his bonds. He is sure to get over all difficulties, is freed
from thieves, is ever victorious in battle and winneth the goddess of
prosperity for ever. With health and strength, he liveth for a hundred
years.
"I have known all this through the grace of Vyasa endued with great
wisdom. Thy wicked sons, however, all entangled in the meshes of death,
do not, from ignorance, know them to be Nara and Narayana. Nor do they,
entangled in the meshes of death, know that the hour of this kingdom hath
arrived. Dwaipayana and Narada, and Kanwa, and the sinless Rama, had all
prevented thy son. But he did not accept their words. There where
righteousness is, there are glory and beauty. There where modesty is,
there are prosperity and intelligence. There where righteousness is,
there is Krishna; and there where Krishna is, there is victory."
