SECTION XXXII
 [(Bhagavad Gita Chapter VIII)]
"Arjuna said, 'What is that Brahman, what is Adhyatma, what is action, O
best of male beings? What also has been said to be Adhibhuta, and what is
called Adhidaiva? Who is here Adhiyajna, and how, in this body, O slayer
of Madhu? And how at the time of departure art thou to be known by those
that have restrained their self'?--
"The Holy One said, 'Brahman is the Supreme and indestructible. Adhyatma
is said to be its own manifestation. The offering (to any godhead in a
sacrifice) which causeth the production and development of all--this is
called action.[213] Remembering me alone in (his) last moments, he that,
casting off his body, departeth (hence), cometh into my essence. There is
no doubt in this. Whichever form (of godhead) one remembereth when one
casteth off, at the end, (his) body, unto that one he goeth, O son of
Kunti, having habitually meditated on it always. Therefore, think of me
at all times, and engage in battle. Fixing thy mind and understanding on
me, thou wilt, without doubt, come even to me. Thinking (of the Supreme)
with a mind not running to other objects and endued with abstraction in
the form of uninterrupted application, one goeth, O son of Pritha, unto
the Divine and Supreme male Being. He who at the time of his departure,
with a steady mind, endued with reverence, with power of abstraction, and
directing the life-breath called Prana between the eye-brows, thinketh of
that ancient seer, who is the ruler (of all), who is minuter than the
minutest atom, who is the ordainer of all, who is inconceivable in form,
and who is beyond all darkness, cometh unto that Divine and Supreme Male
Being, I will tell thee in brief about that seat which persons conversant
with the Vedas declare to be indestructible, which is entered by ascetics
freed from all longings, and in expectation of which (people) practise
the vows of Brahmacharins. Casting off (this) body, he who departeth,
stopping up all the doors, confining the mind within the heart, placing
his own life-breath called Prana between the eye-brows, resting on
continued meditation, uttering this one syllable Om which is Brahman, and
thinking of me, attaineth to the highest goal.[214] He who always
thinketh of me with mind ever withdrawn from all other objects, unto that
devotee always engaged on meditation, I am, O Partha, easy of access.
High-souled persons who have achieved the highest perfection, attaining
to me, do not incur re-birth which is the abode of sorrow and which is
transient, All the worlds, O Arjuna, from the abode of Brahman downwards
have to go through a round of births, on attaining to me, however, O son
of Kunti, there is no re-birth.[215] They who know a day of Brahman to
end after a thousand Yugas, and a night (of his) to terminate after a
thousand Yugas are persons that know day and night.[216] On the advent of
(Brahman's) day everything that is manifest springeth from the
unmanifest; and when (his) night cometh, into that same which is called
unmanifest all things disappear. That same assemblage of creatures,
springing forth again and again, dissolveth on the advent of night, and
springeth forth (again), O son of Pritha, when day cometh, constrained
(by the force of action, etc.)[217]. There is, however, another entity,
unmanifest and eternal, which is beyond that unmanifest, and which is not
destroyed when all the entities are destroyed. It is said to be
unmanifest and indestructible. They call it the highest goal, attaining
which no one hath to come back. That is my Supreme seat. That Supreme
Being, O son of Pritha, He within whom are all entities, and by whom all
this is permeated, is to be attained by reverence undirected to any other
object. I will tell thee the times, O bull of Bharata's race, in which
devotees departing (from this life) go, never to return, or to return.
The fire, the Light, the day, the lighted fortnight, the six months of
the northern solstice, departing from here, the persons knowing Brahma go
through this path to Brahma.[218] Smoke, night, also the dark-fortnight
(and) the six months of the southern solstice, (departing) through this
path, devotee, attaining to the lunar light, returneth. The bright and
the dark, these two paths, are regarded to be the eternal (two paths) of
the universe. By the one, (one) goeth never to return; by the other, one
(going) cometh back. Knowing these two paths, O son of Pritha, no devotee
is deluded. Therefore, at all times, be endued with devotion, O Arjuna.
The meritorious fruit that is prescribed for the (study of the) Vedas,
for sacrifices, for ascetic austerities and for gifts, a devotee knowing
all this (that hath been said here), attaineth to it all, and (also)
attaineth the Supreme and Primeval seat.'
