SECTION L
Sanjaya said, "When the troops, O bull of Bharata's race, were withdrawn
on the first day, and when Duryodhana was filled with delight upon
(beholding) Bhishma excited with wrath in battle, king Yudhisthira the
just, speedily repaired unto Janardana, accompanied by all his brothers
and all the kings (on his side). Filled with great grief thinking of his
defeat, and beholding Bhishma's prowess, O king, he addressed that scion
of Vrishni's race, saying, 'Behold, O Krishna, that mighty bowman Bhishma
of terrible prowess. He consumes with his arrow my troops like fire
(consuming) dry grass. How shall we even look at that high-souled
(warrior) who is licking up my troops like fire fed with clarified
butter? Beholding; that tiger among men, that mighty warrior armed with
the bow, my troops fly away, afflicted with arrows. Enraged Yama himself,
or He armed with the thunder, or even Varuna noose in hand, or Kuvera
armed with mace, may be vanquished in battle but the mighty car-warrior
Bhishma, of great energy is incapable of being vanquished. Such being the
case, I am sinking in the fathomless ocean represented by Bhishma,
without a boat (to rescue me).[352] In consequence, O Kesava, of the
weakness of my understanding, having obtained Bhishma (for a foe in
battle), I shall, O Govinda, retire into woods. To live there is
preferable to devoting these lords of earth to Death in the form of
Bhishma. Conversant with mighty weapons, Bhishma, O Krishna, will
annihilate my army. As insects rush into the blazing fire for their own
destruction, the combatants of my army are even so. In putting forth
prowess for the sake of kingdom, O thou of Vrishni's race, I am being led
to destruction. My heroic brothers also are pained and afflicted with
arrows for my sake, having been deprived of both sovereignty and
happiness in consequence of their love for their eldest brother. We
regard life very highly, for, under these circumstances, life is too
precious (to be sacrificed). During the remainder of my days I will
practise the severest of ascetic austerities. I will not, O Kesava, cause
these friends of mine to be slain.[353] The mighty Bhishma incessantly
stays, with his celestial weapon, many thousands of my car-warriors who
are foremost of smiters. Tell me, O Madhava, without delay, what should
be done that might do me good. As regards Arjuna, I see that he is an
indifferent spectator in this battle. Endued with great might, this Bhima
alone, remembering Kshatriya duties, fighteth putting forth the prowess
of his arms and to the utmost of his power. With his hero-slaying mace,
this high-souled (warrior), to the full measure of his powers, achieveth
the most difficult feats upon foot-soldiers and steeds and cars and
elephants. This hero, however, is incapable, O sire, of destroying in
fair fight the hostile host in even a century. This thy friend (Arjuna)
alone (amongst) is conversant with (mighty) weapons. He, however,
beholding us consumed by Bhishma and the high-souled Drona, looketh
indifferently on us. The celestial weapons of Bhishma and the high-souled
Drona, incessantly applied, are consuming all the Kshatriyas. O Krishna,
such is his prowess, that Bhishma, with wrath excited, aided by the kings
(on his side), will, without doubt annihilate us. O Lord of Yoga, look
for that great bowman, that mighty car-warrior, who will give Bhishma his
quietus like rain-charged clouds quenching a forest conflagration. (Then)
through thy grace, O Govinda, the son of Pandu, their foes being slain,
will, after recovery of their kingdom, be happy with their kinsmen.
"Having said this, the high-souled son of Pritha, with heart afflicted by
grief and mind turned within, remained silent for a long while in a
reflected mood. Beholding the son of Pandu stricken with grief and
deprived of his senses by sorrow, Govinda then gladdening all the
Pandavas said, 'Do not grieve, O chief of the Bharatas. It behoveth thee
not to grieve, when thy brothers are all heroes and renowned bowmen in
the world. I also am employed in doing thee good, as also that mighty
car-warrior Satyaki and Virata and Drupada, both reverend in years, and
Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata's line. And so also, O best of kings, all
these monarchs with their (respective) troops are expectant of thy favour
and devoted to thee, O king. This mighty car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna of
Prishata's race placed in command of thy army is always desirous of thy
welfare and engaged in doing that which is agreeable to thee, as also
this Sikhandin, O thou of mighty arms, who is certainly the slayer of
Bhishma. Hearing these words, the king (Yudhishthira), said, unto that
mighty car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna, in that very assembly and in the
hearing of Vasudeva, these words, O Dhrishtadyumna, mark these words that
I say unto thee, O thou of Prishata's line. The words uttered by me
should not be transgressed. Approved by Vasudeva, thou hast been the
commander of our forces. As Kartikeya, in days of old, was ever the
commander of the celestial host, so also art thou, O bull among men, the
commander of the Pandava host. Putting forth thy prowess, O tiger among
men, slay the Kauravas. I will follow thee, and Bhima, and Krishna also,
O sire, and the sons of Madri united together, and the sons of Draupadi
accoutred in mail, and all the other foremost of kings, O bull among men.
Then gladdening (the listeners) Dhrishtadyumna said, 'Ordained of old by
Sambhu himself, I am, O son of Pritha, the slayer of Drona. I shall now
fight in battle against Bhishma, and Drona and Kripa and Salya and
Jayadratha and all the proud monarchs (on the Kuru side)'. When that
foremost of princes, that slayer of foes, the son of Prishata, said this
defiantly, the Pandava warriors, endued with great energy and incapable
of being defeated in battle, all set up a loud shout. And then Pritha's
son Yudhishthira said unto the commander of his army, the son of
Prishata, (these words), 'An array known by the name of Krauncharuma,
that is destructive of all foes, and that was spoken of by Vrihaspati
unto Indra in days of old when the gods and the Asuras fought,--that
array destructive of hostile divisions, do thou form. Unseen before, the
kings behold it, along with the Kurus.' Thus addressed by that god among
men, like Vishnu addressed by the wielder of the thunderbolt,[354] he
(Dhrishtadyumna), when morning dawned, placed Dhananjaya in the van of
the whole army. And Dhananjaya's standard, created at Indra's command by
the celestial artificer, while moving through the skies, seemed
wonderfully beautiful. Decked with banners bearing hues resembling those
of Indra's bow,[355] coursing through the air like a ranger of the skies,
and looking like the fleeting edifice of vapour in the welkin, it seemed,
O sire to glide dancingly along the track of the car (to which it was
attached). And the bearer of Gandiva with that (standard) graced with
gems, and that standard itself with the bearer of Gandiva, looked highly
adorned, like the Self-create with the Sun (and the Sun with the
Self-create).[356] And king Drupada, surrounded by a large number of
troops, became the head (of that array). And the two kings Kuntibhoja and
Saivya became its two eyes. And the ruler of the Dasarnas, and the
Prayagas, with the Daserakas, and the Anupakas, and the Kiratas were
placed in its neck, O bull of Bharata's race. And Yudhishthira, O king,
with the Patachcharas, the Hunas, the Pauravakas and the Nishadas, became
its two wings, so also the Pisachas, with the Kundavishas, and the
Mandakas, the Ladakas, the Tanganas, and the Uddras, O Bharata, and the
Saravas, the Tumbhumas, the Vatsas, and the Nakulas. And Nakula and
Sahadeva placed themselves on the left wing. And on the joints of the
wings were placed ten thousand cars and on the head a hundred thousand,
and on the back a hundred millions and twenty thousand and on the neck a
hundred and seventy thousand. And on the joints of the wings, the wings
and the extremities of the wings proceeded elephants in large bodies,
looking, O king, like blazing mountains. And the rear was protected by
Virata aided by the Kekayas, and the ruler of Kasi and the king of the
Chedis, with thirty thousand cars.[357] Forming, O Bharata, their mighty
array thus, the Pandavas, expectant of sunrise, waited for battle, all
cased in armour. And their white umbrellas, clean and costly, and
brilliant as the sun, shone resplendent on their elephants and cars."[358]
