SECTION LXXVIII
Sanjaya said, "Then king Duryodhana, regaining his senses, once more
began to resist Bhima with showers of arrows. And once more those mighty
car-warriors viz., thy sons, united together, began to fight valiantly
with Bhimasena. And Bhimasena also of mighty arms during that battle,
having got his car, ascended it and proceeded to the spot where thy sons
were. And taking up a strong and very tough bow adorned with gold and
capable of taking the lives of foes he pierced thy sons in that conflict,
with his shafts. Then king Duryodhana struck the mighty Bhimasena at the
very vitals with a long shaft of exceeding sharpness. Then that mighty
bowman, pierced thus deeply by thy son, bow in hand, forcibly drawing his
own with eyes red in wrath, struck Duryodhana in his two arms and the
breast with three shafts. But struck thus, O king, he moved not, like a
prince of mountains. Beholding then those two heroes excited with rage
and smiting each other, the younger brothers of Duryodhana, all of whom
were heroes prepared to lay down their lives, remembering their
previously formed scheme of afflicting Vrikodara of terrible deeds, set
about firmly resolved, for smiting him down. And as they fell upon him in
battle, Bhimasena of great strength rushed against them, O king, like an
elephant rushing against an attacking compeer. Excited with fury and
endued with great energy, that celebrated hero then, O king, afflicted
thy son Chitrasena with a long arrow. And as regards thy other sons, that
descendant of Bharata smote them all in that battle, with diverse kinds
of shafts furnished with wings of gold and endued with great impetus.
Then king Yudhishthira the just, disposing all his own divisions properly
despatched twelve mighty car-warriors including Abhimanyu and others to
follow Bhimasena behind. Those, O king, all proceeded against those
mighty car-warriors, viz., thy sons. Beholding those heroes on their
cars, resembling the Sun himself or the fire in splendour-those great
bowmen of blazing effulgence and superb beauty, looking resplendent in
that dreadful conflict with ornaments of gold,--thy mighty sons abandoned
Bhima (with whom they had been fighting). The sons of Kunti, however,
could not bear the sight of their abandoning the conflict alive."
