SECTION LXXXIX
Sanjaya said, "The Pandavas were incapable of even looking at Bhishma
excited with rage in battle and scorching every side like the Sun himself
shedding scorching heat. Then all the (Pandava) troops, at the command of
Dharma's son, rushed at the son of Ganga who was grinding (everything)
with his whetted arrows, Bhishma, however, who delighted in battle felled
the mightiest of bowmen amongst the Srinjayas and the Panchalas, with his
shafts. Though thus slaughtered by Bhishma, the Panchalas along with the
Somakas still rushed impetuously at him, forsaking the fear of death. The
heroic Bhishma, the son of Santanu, however, in that battle, cut off, O
king, the arms and heads of their car-warriors. Thy sire, Devavrata
deprived their car-warriors of cars. And the heads of cavalry soldiers on
their chargers fell fast. And we beheld, O king, huge elephants looking
like hills, deprived of their riders, and paralysed with Bhishma's
weapons, lying all around. Amongst the Pandavas, O king, there was no
other man save that foremost of car-warriors, the mighty Bhimasena, (who
could resist Bhishma). Indeed, Bhima alone, approaching Bhishma,
encountered him in battle. Then in that encounter between Bhima and
Bhishma, a fierce and terrible uproar arose among all the troops (of the
Kauravas). The Pandavas then, filled with joy, uttered leonine shouts.
During that destructive carnage, king Duryodhana, surrounded by his
uterine brothers, protected Bhishma in that battle. Then that foremost of
car-warriors, viz., Bhima, slew Bhishma's charioteer. Thereupon the
steeds no longer controlled, ran away from the field with car. Then that
slayer of foes, viz., Bhima with a sharp arrow having a horse-shoe head,
cut off the head of Sunabha. (Thus) slain, the latter fell down on the
earth. When that son of thine, that mighty car-warrior and great bowman
was slain, seven of his heroic brothers, O sire, could not (quietly) bear
(that act). These, viz., Adityaketu and Vahvasin, and Kundadhara and
Mahodara, and Aparajita, and Panditaka and the invincible Visalaksha,
clad in variegated armour and with their beautiful coats of mail and
weapons,--these grinders of foes desirous of battle,--rushed against the
son of Pandu. And Mahodara, in that battle, pierced Bhimasena with nine
winged arrows, each resembling the thunder-bolt in force, like the slayer
of Vritra striking (the great Asura) Namuchi. And Adityaketu struck him
with seventy shafts, and Vishnu with five. And Kundadhara struck him with
ninety shafts, and Visalaksha with seven. And that conqueror of foes, the
mighty car-warrior Aparajita, O king, struck Bhimasena of great strength
with many arrows. And Panditaka also, in battle, pierced him with three
arrows. Bhima, however, did not (quietly) bear these attacks of his foes
in battle. Forcibly grasping the bow with his left hand, that grinder of
foes cut off, in that battle, the head, with a straight shaft, of thy son
Aparajita, graced with a fine nose. Thus vanquished by Bhima, his head
then dropped on the ground. Then, in the very sight of all the troops,
Bhima despatched, with another broad-headed arrow, the mighty car-warrior
Kundadhara to the domain of Death. Then that hero of immeasurable soul,
once more aiming an arrow, sped it, O Bharata, at Panditaka in that
battle. And the arrow killing Panditaka, entered the earth, like a snake
impelled by Death quickly entering the earth after despatching the person
(whose hour had come). Of undepressed soul, that hero then, O king,
recollecting his former woes, felled Visalaksha's head, cutting it off
with three arrows. Then Bhima, in that battle, struck the mighty bowman
Mahodara in the centre of the chest with a long shaft. Slain (therewith),
O king, the latter fell down on the earth. Then, O Bharata, cutting off
with an arrow the umbrella of Adityaketu in that battle, he severed his
head with another broad-headed shaft of exceeding sharpness. Then, O
monarch, excited with rage, Bhima, with another straight shaft,
despatched Vahvasin towards the abode of Yama. Then thy other sons, O
king, all fled away regarding the words to be true which Bhima had
uttered in the (midst of the Kaurava) assembly.[430] Then king Duryodhana
afflicted with sorrow on account of his brothers, addressed all his
troops, saying, 'There is Bhima. Let him be slain.' Thus, O king, thy
sons, those mighty bowmen, beholding their brothers slain, recollected
those words beneficial and peaceful, that Vidura of great wisdom had
spoken. Indeed, those words of the truthful Vidura are now being
realised,--those beneficial words, O king, which, influenced by
covetousness and folly as also by affection for thy sons, thou couldst
not then understand. From the way in which that mighty armed hero is
slaying the Kauravas, it seemeth that that mighty son of Pandu hath
assuredly taken his birth for the destruction of thy sons. Meanwhile,
king Duryodhana, O sire, overwhelmed with great grief, went to Bhishma,
and there, overcome with sorrow, he began to lament, saying, 'My heroic
brothers have been slain in battle by Bhimasena. Although, again, all our
troops are fighting bravely, yet they also are failing. Thou seemest to
disregard us, behaving (as thou dost) like an indifferent spectator,
Alas, what course have I taken. Behold my evil destiny.'"
Sanjaya continued. "Hearing these cruel words of Duryodhana, thy sire
Devavrata with eyes filled with tears, said this unto him.[431] 'Even
this was said by me before, as also by Drona, and Vidura, and the
renowned Gandhari. O son, thou didst not then comprehend it. O grinder of
foes, it hath also been before settled by me that neither myself, nor
Drona, will ever escape with life from this battle. I tell thee truly
that those upon whom Bhima will cast his eyes in battle, he will surely
slay. Therefore, O king, summoning all thy patience, and firmly resolved
on battle, fight with the sons of Pritha, making heaven thy goal. As
regards the Pandavas, they are incapable of being vanquished by the very
gods with Vasava (at their head). Therefore, setting thy heart firmly on
battle, fight, O Bharata.--'"
