Veliyathunad is a village spread over Aluva Taluk and Paravur Taluk of Eranakulam district in the Indian state of Kerala. Veliyathunad is situated near Aluva town. Veliyathunad is one of rarest greenery sights in Eranakulam District: even though Veliyathunad people have all the benefits of a rural area they face few of the problems of other rural areas.
Veliyathunad is a part of Karumalloor panchayat and is situated 7 kilometers from Aluva Railway Station, 10 kilometers from North Paravur Bus Stand and 12 kilometers from Cochin International Airport. The village is bounded by distributaries of the Periyar river. It consists of large tracts of paddy fields and is mainly a rice-based agrarian economy. However, due to losses in paddy farming many farmers have recently changed to banana farms.


== Institutions ==
Govt M.I.U.P School Veliyathunad
The Alwaye Settlement H.S. School
Jyothi Nivas Public School
Muhammed Abdul Rahman Sahib Library
Veliyathunad Post Office
Govt. Ayurveda Dispensary
Veliyathunad Co-operative Bank
Janaseva Sisubhavan
Welfare Association Trust
Thanthra Vidya Peedham
Carmelgiri St.Joseph Pontifical Seminary
Kolbe Asramam
Similia Homeo Lab
Ice Station
Govt Homoeo Dispensary
Thomas Clinic Malikempeedika


== Localities ==
Parana, Thandirikkal, Aduvathuruth, Thadikkakadav, Millupadi, Cheriyath, Kadooppadam, Millupady, Vayalodam, Kanypady, Pallypadi, Madrassapady, Paruvakkad, Aattilpuzhakkav
Mariyappady, Vayalakkad, Parelipallam, Laksham Veedu, 4Cent, Socityppady, Mambra, Valliyappanpady


== Places of Worship ==
Churches

St. Thomas Orthodox Syrian ChurchMasjids

Hidayathul Anam Madrassa & Masjid Madrassapady, Veliyathunad
W. Veliyathunadu Jum'a Masjid
E. Veliyathunadu Jum'a Masjid
Kadoopadam Jum'a Masjid
Thadikkakadav Jum'a Masjid
Badriya Masjid, Aduvathuruth
Salafi Masjid, Parana
Arafa Masjid, parana
Millupady Masjid
Minarul Huda Masjid.
Masjid Abdullah Khayath
MasjidulRahma VayalakadTemples

Aattippuzhakkav Bhagavathi Temple https://goo.gl/maps/CZaa8QbuoEtYGgT9A
Cheriyath Narasimha Swamy Temple
Vellam Bhagavathi Temple
Mullakkal Temple
Alungal Bhagavathi Temple
Chirangara Temple


== References ==