


Town in West Bengal, India.mw-parser-output .infobox-subbox{padding:0;border:none;margin:-3px;width:auto;min-width:100%;font-size:100%;clear:none;float:none;background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .infobox-3cols-child{margin:auto}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-header,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-subheader,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-above,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-title,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-image,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-full-data,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-below{text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement{width:23em;border-collapse:collapse;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement td,.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement th{border-top:1px solid #a2a9b1;padding:0.4em 0.6em 0.4em 0.6em}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .mergedtoprow .infobox-full-data,.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .mergedtoprow .infobox-header,.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .mergedtoprow .infobox-data,.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .mergedtoprow .infobox-label,.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .mergedtoprow .infobox-below{border-top:1px solid #a2a9b1;padding:0.4em 0.6em 0.2em 0.6em}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .mergedrow .infobox-full-data,.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .mergedrow .infobox-data,.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .mergedrow .infobox-label{border:0;padding:0 0.6em 0.2em 0.6em}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .mergedbottomrow .infobox-full-data,.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .mergedbottomrow .infobox-data,.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .mergedbottomrow .infobox-label{border-top:0;border-bottom:1px solid #a2a9b1;padding:0 0.6em 0.4em 0.6em}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .maptable{border:0;padding:0}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .infobox-header,.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .infobox-below{text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .infobox-above{font-size:125%;line-height:1.3em}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement .infobox-subheader{background-color:#cddeff;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement-native{font-weight:normal;padding-top:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement-other-name{font-size:78%}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement-official{font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement-caption{padding:0.3em 0 0 0}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement-caption-link{padding:0.2em 0}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement-nickname{display:inline}.mw-parser-output .ib-settlement-fn{font-weight:normal;display:inline}KurseongTownPanorama of KurseongNickname(s): The School Town[1].mw-parser-output .locmap .od{position:absolute}.mw-parser-output .locmap .id{position:absolute;line-height:0}.mw-parser-output .locmap .l0{font-size:0;position:absolute}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pv{line-height:110%;position:absolute;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pl{line-height:110%;position:absolute;top:-0.75em;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pr{line-height:110%;position:absolute;top:-0.75em;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pv>div{display:inline;padding:1px}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pl>div{display:inline;padding:1px;float:right}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pr>div{display:inline;padding:1px;float:left}KurseongLocation in West Bengal, IndiaKurseongKurseong (India)Show map of West BengalShow map of IndiaShow allCoordinates: .mw-parser-output .geo-default,.mw-parser-output .geo-dms,.mw-parser-output .geo-dec{display:inline}.mw-parser-output .geo-nondefault,.mw-parser-output .geo-multi-punct{display:none}.mw-parser-output .longitude,.mw-parser-output .latitude{white-space:nowrap}26°52′40″N 88°16′38″E﻿ / ﻿26.87778°N 88.27722°E﻿ / 26.87778; 88.27722Coordinates: 26°52′40″N 88°16′38″E﻿ / ﻿26.87778°N 88.27722°E﻿ / 26.87778; 88.27722Country IndiaStateWest BengalDistrictDarjeelingGovernment • TypeMunicipality • BodyKurseong MunicipalityArea[3] • Total7.50 km2 (2.90 sq mi)Elevation1,500 m (4,900 ft)Population (2011) • Total42,446 [2]Languages • OfficialNepali[4]Time zoneUTC+5:30 (IST)PIN734 203Telephone code0354Vehicle registrationWB-02, 73, 74, 76, 77Lok Sabha constituencyDarjeelingVidhan Sabha constituencyKurseongWebsitewww.kurseongmunicipality.org
Kurseong is a town and a municipality in Darjeeling district in the Indian state of West Bengal. It is the headquarters of the Kurseong subdivision.
Located at an altitude of 1,482.55 metres (4,864.0 ft),[5] Kurseong is 32 kilometres (20 mi) from Darjeeling[6] and has a pleasant climate throughout the year.
Kurseong is 34 kilometres (21 mi) from Siliguri and is connected to the city by road and the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway. The nearest airport is at Bagdogra and the nearest major railway station is New Jalpaiguri, which is about 45 kilometres (28 mi) from the town. The economy is based primarily on education and tourism.

Contents

1 Etymology
2 History
3 Geography

3.1 Location
3.2 Area overview
3.3 Sights
3.4 Religious sites
3.5 Natural sites
3.6 Museums
3.7 Other sites


4 Civic administration

4.1 Gorkha Public Library


5 Education

5.1 University Colleges
5.2 Schools of Kurseong
5.3 Higher Secondary Vocational


6 Transport
7 Demographics
8 Media and communications
9 Notable residents
10 References

10.1 Bibliography


11 External links



Etymology[edit]
The origin of the name is unclear; stories suggest it comes from the Lepcha language word for "small orchid", kurson-rip because of the little white orchids (Coelogyne cristata) dotting the valleys, or perhaps the term for a stick made out of a local cane.(O'Malley 1999, p. 216)

History[edit]
The original inhabitants were the Lepcha people, who named their home "Kurseong", because every spring it was alive and bright with Kurson-Rip orchids. In the remote past, Kurseong was a part of the Kingdom of Sikkim, even before the British came to India. However, in around 1780 the  Kingdom of Nepal conquered and annexed Kurseong and its surrounding areas. Then came the Gurkha War, which the Nepalese lost. The 1817 Treaty of Titalia restored Kurseong to Sikkim.[7]
With its mountains providing a cool and dry environment in the summer, Kurseong was a favourite of the British. Nevertheless, they found travelling there from the plains of Bengal difficult, even on warm sunny days because of the mountains. Although a road was built from Kurseong to Darjeeling from Titalia in the 1770s and 1780s, its irregular maintenance soon made the new route, the Military Road, almost useless. The next route, Hill Cart Road (now Tenzing Norgay Road), opened in 1861 and fared better.
Nevertheless, in 1835 the British decided that Darjeeling would make an excellent sanitorium and summer residence for their military and civilian officers along with their families. Negotiations with the Chogyal of Sikkim, Tshudpud Namgyal, provided them a strip of hill territory in Kurseong for an annual fee. As one of the hill stations on the road to Darjeeling, Kurseong began to develop.
Kurseong is home to one of the oldest municipalities in the state of West Bengal. Established as an independent Municipality in 1879, it did not become a Sub-Division until 1890, when the District of Darjeeling was formed. Kurseong and the District were added to the Rajshahi Division (now West Central Bangladesh) by the British Raj for the Bengal Presidency. In 1908, they were transferred to the Bhagalpur Division in the same Presidency.
Before Independence from the British, there were 12 ward commissioners. Four of them were appointed by the British Raj and it also appointed its own man, the Sub-Divisional Officer (S.D.O.), as their chairman. In 1939, when Bengal became a province of British India, Kurseong was allowed to elect its own member to be the chairman, but the Raj continued to send ward commissioners until India gained independence. Nevertheless, between 1939 and 1942, Kurseong grew rapidly. As of today Kurseong has 20 commissioners.[when?]

Geography[edit]


@media all and (max-width:720px){body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output div.mw-graph{min-width:100%!important;max-width:100%;overflow-x:auto;overflow-y:visible}}.mw-parser-output .mw-graph-img{width:inherit;height:inherit}
[Interactive fullscreen map]
Places and tea estates in the north-eastern portion of  Darjeeling Sadar  subdivision (including Rangli Rangliot CD block) and Kurseong subdivision in Darjeeling districtCT: census town,  R: rural/ urban centre, N: neighbourhood, H: hill centre, NP: national park/ wildlife sanctuary, TE: tea estate, TA: tourist attractionAbbreviations used in names – TG for Tea Garden (town/village), TE for Tea EstateOwing to space constraints in the small map, the actual locations in a larger map may vary slightly

Location[edit]
Kurseong is located at 26°52′40″N 88°16′38″E﻿ / ﻿26.87778°N 88.27722°E﻿ / 26.87778; 88.27722.

Area overview[edit]
The map alongside shows the eastern portion of the Darjeeling Himalayan hill region and a small portion of the terai region in its eastern and southern fringes, all of it in the Darjeeling district. In the Darjeeling Sadar subdivision 61.00% of the total population lives in the rural areas and 39.00% of the population lives in the urban areas. In the Kurseong subdivision 58.41% of the total population lives in the rural areas and 41.59% lives in the urban areas.[8][9] There are 78 tea gardens/ estates (the figure varies slightly according to different sources), in the district, producing and largely exporting Darjeeling tea. It engages a large proportion of the population directly/ indirectly.[10] Some tea gardens were identified in the 2011 census as census towns or villages.[11] Such places are marked in the map as CT (census town) or R (rural/ urban centre). Specific tea estate pages are marked TE.
Note: The map alongside presents some of the notable locations in the subdivision. All places marked in the map are linked in the larger full screen map.

Sights[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (September 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
  Coelogyne cristata, the white orchid from Kurseong
  Kurseong Railway Station
Kurseong is surrounded by a myriad of tea gardens. These include Castleton, Makaibarie, Ambootia and Goomtee, all of which can be visited.
The tracks of the 'Darjeeling Toy Train' run the length of the town, and the station is the nucleus of the town.

Religious sites[edit]
The Ambootia Shiva Temple.
Giddha Pahar Sita Ram Mandir
Giddah Pahar Durga Mata Mandir.
Jagdish Mandir - The Jagdish temple has very old idols (almost 300 years old) of Lord Jagannath (Lord Krishna).  The specialty of this temple is that there are two idols of The Lord and both are of Lord Jagannath (Krishna).  In other temples of Lord Jagannath there are three idols - Lord Krishna, Lord Balram and Devi Subhadra (Sister of Lord Krishna and Lord Balram).  But in Jagdish Mandir - Kurseong both the idols are of The Lord.
St. Pauls Church on Hill Cart Road, near St. Joseph's School.
Buddhist Gompa (monastery) in Monteviot.
Kunsang Choiling Monastery at Upper Naya Busty.
Juma Mosque in Hat Bazaar.
Grotto and Catholic church in St. Mary's Hill.
Sath Kaniya Devi Mandir at Uzari Busty Ward No 19 P B Road
Natural sites[edit]
Eagle's Craig.  It is situated in the centre of the town and is a viewpoint from which there are views of the tea estates, surrounding mountains, hills, hamlets, and slopes. The place gains its own importance with the construction of Sahid Smarak made in comm-oration of the Martyrs who sacrificed their lives in the course of the Gorkhaland movement.[citation needed] Every year their sacrifice is remembered on the 27th of July which is marked as Sahid Diwas. It also has a water reservoir that supplies water to the adjacent areas, an observatory or watchtower, a small flower garden with a variety of flowers, and a cafeteria serving local organic hand-picked tea.
Rock garden.  the tip of the valley.
Deer Park - now known as Dowhill Park, on the Dowhill Road.
The Kholas (Water Falls - Springs) like Whistle Khola (named by the British, as there is a bend and the toy train whistles when passing through it). It is also known as Hussel Khola (means river in the local language). Although relatively dry during the dry months of winter, it comes alive during the monsoon season.[citation needed] There is a story called the "gadiman" (bullock cart driver) by a local writer and is a staple story in the local school syllabus.
The Kettle Valley
Museums[edit]
Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose Museum and NSC Bose Institute of Asiatic Studies, hosted in the house of his elder brother, Sarat Chandra Bose, are situated in the Giddhapahar area (5 to 10 minutes drive from the Railway station). Netaji was interned in this house by the British government in the late thirties. The house now displays priceless artifacts depicting the life of the freedom fighter. These include photocopies of the exchange of letters between Netaji and his would-be wife, Ms. Emilie, many rare photographs of his Indian National Army (INA), other memorabilia of the Indian Freedom Movement and a few personal belongings of Netaji and the Bose Family.[citation needed]
Other sites[edit]
Chimney: A walk or ride through the forest of Cryptomaria Japonica on the road, now called Aranya Sarani, leads to open meadows at Chimney. The curious name of the place is reminiscent of the days when there was a bungalow here on the only road (Old Military Road) leading to Darjeeling. A long, dilapidated chimney, standing all alone, is the only remnant of the bungalow now.[citation needed]
Naya Busty Park: Located just above the Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose Museum.
Civic administration[edit]
  A busy road in Kurseong
Kurseong Municipality, which is over 125 years old (one of the oldest in the country), is the main civic administration body for the town of Kurseong. It is located at 13 Dowhill Road.  The Municipality is divided into 20 wards [originally 12 wards] and each of the wards has its own ward commissioner.  The current Chairman of the Municipal Committee is Mr. Birga Gurung @Brigen Gurung, presiding office since 10th June 2021.
The previous chairman, until 2008, was Mr. P. C. Agarwal.  But in early March 2008 his political party, the Gorkha National Liberation Front (GNLF), lost the control of the Committee in a no-confidence vote to the other Gorkha political party, the Gorkha Janmukti Morcha (GJMM). Since 2007, the GJMM has been campaigning for the creation of a separate state for the Indian Gorkhas, the original goal of the GNLF. Because of the no-confidence vote, Mr. Agarwal was forced to resign and the Municipal Committee was suspended.[12]
Kurseong has its own Munsif Magistrate Court and has the Police Station and Town Out Post in P B Road.  The S.D.O. (Sub Divisional Officer) is the head of the administration for the Town.
Hospital and Health Care in Kurseong : Kurseong has a Sub Divisional Hospital and no private nursing homes or clinics unlike Kalimpong and Darjeeling.

Gorkha Public Library[edit]
Gorkha Public Library or Gorkha jana pustakalay was established in the year 1913,[13] as an initiative of the Indian Gorkhas to develop their culture, language and literature in the small town of Kurseong. It was probably the first Nepali public library project.[13] This small initiative played a vital role in the development of Indian Gorkha culture, language and literature. The library still exists today, and among other things is used as a polling station in local elections.[14]
Bloomfield Library: A well stocked library opposite of the post office. The timings are fairly convenient and there is a minimal fee.

Education[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (June 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
  Goethals Memorial School
Housing a number of schools, Kurseong is popularly nicknamed as "the school town" due to the emergence of many new schools in the town. The schools can be classified into two distinct groups. The English Medium and the Nepali Medium. The English medium schools are mostly affiliated to the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education, Delhi while the Nepali Medium Schools are affiliated to the State Education Board i.e. West Bengal Board of Secondary Education, Calcutta. Only one school Godwin Modern School is affiliated to the Central Board of Secondary Education, Delhi in Kurseong Town.

University Colleges[edit]
Kurseong has one college Kurseong College which is affiliated to the University of North Bengal. It provides undergraduate studies - Bachelor of Arts (General and Honours), Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Commerce (General).
Darjeeling Polytechnic College offers courses in Civil, Computer and Electrical.
From 1889-1971 there was even a theological college on St. Mary's hill (2 kilometres (1.2 mi) north on the way to Darjeeling) training the Jesuit seminarians to the Catholic priesthood until it was shifted to Delhi under the new name of Vidyajyoti College of Theology.
The old Theologate's building now hosts the Eastern Forest Rangers College, which provides training courses to the would-be Forest Rangers of India. There is a West Bengal Forest School near Deer Park and Victoria Boys School, Dowhill which also provides training for foresters as well.
About 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) north on the way to Darjeeling at Tung, there is an Industrial Training Institute (ITI) which offers various vocational course in plumbing, motor mechanics, and book binding.

Schools of Kurseong[edit]
ICSE & ISC STREAM

St Anthony's School (Separate Schools for Boys and Girls)
Dowhill school (co-ed till 3rd standard, All girls after that)
Cambridge English School
Little Flower School (Co-Ed)
Himali Boarding School (Co-Ed)
Goethals Memorial School (Boys)
St. Helen's Secondary School (Girls)
Jnaneshwar Memorial Academy
Victoria Boys School
Daises School
Sunshine School
Modern English School
Glenhill Public School
Bellvue School
Carmel High School
Bethany school
CBSE Stream

Godwin Modern School
 WBBSE Stream 

Ramakrishna Girls High School
Pushparani Roy Memorial School
St. Alphonsus School
St. Joseph's Girls High School
Scott's Mission School
Higher Secondary Vocational[edit]
Holy Cross Institute (Class 11 & 12)
Transport[edit]
  Kurseong Railway Station
Kurseong is considered as midpoint between Siliguri and Darjeeling. The nearest airport is the Bagdogra Airport and nearest major railway hub is New Jalpaiguri railway station. Kurseong is well connected to Siliguri, Darjeeling and Mirik. Several prepaid vehicles run from Kurseong to Darjeeling, Siliguri and Mirik. But Kurseong does not have a strong transport connection to Kalimpong and Gangtok. Only two vehicles to Gangtok and one vehicle to Kalimpong run from Kurseong every day. Taxis also run to Pankhabari, Ambootia, Mahanadi, Tindharia, Latpanchor. North Bengal state buses also run from Darjeeling to Siliguri and NJP Station via Kurseong.
Kurseong also has a railway station where Toy Train runs to New Jalpaiguri and Darjeeling. Kurseong Station is a part of Darjeeling Himalayan Railway and comes under Katihar Division of Northeast Frontier Railway.
There are three roads between Kurseong and Siliguri: National Highway, Pankhabari Road and Rohini Road.

Demographics[edit]
In 2011, the population of Kurseong Municipality was 42,446. The rural area in Kurseong Block had a population of 94,347.[2]

Media and communications[edit]
All India Radio has a local station in Kurseong which broadcasts various programs of mass interest. It was established in the year 1962.

Notable residents[edit]
Ferdinand Perier (1875–1968), 3rd Archbishop of Calcutta (now Kolkata), (stayed during three years of his retirement (1962–1965))
Jack Farj Rafael Jacob (1921-2016), Lieutenant General, Chief of Staff of the Indian Army's Eastern Command
Jung Bahadur Rana (1816–1877), the Prime Minister of Nepal and the founder of the Rana dynasty of Nepal
M. Fazlul Haque (b. 1938), High Court Justice of Bangladesh
Peter Sarstedt (1941–2017), musician and singer, attended Victoria Boys' School
Sister Nivedita (1867–1911), Scots-Irish social worker, author, teacher and a disciple of Swami Vivekananda
References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}"Kurseong Municipality Official Page". Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 16 September 2015.

^ Jump up to: a b "District Census Handbook, Darjiling" (PDF). Directorate of Census Operations, West Bengal. 2011. Retrieved 29 September 2015.

^ "Kurseong City". Retrieved 26 November 2020.

^ "Report of the Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities in India: 50th report (delivered to the Lokh Sabha in 2014)" (PDF). National Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities, Ministry of Minority Affairs, Government of India. p. 95. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2016. Retrieved 16 September 2015. The Official Language of the State is Bengali. Nepali has also been declared as Official Languages in Darjeeling and Kurseong

^ Vijay Kumar Gupta (1 March 1987). Tourism in India. Gyan Publishing House. pp. 213 ff. ISBN 978-81-212-0124-7. Retrieved 1 November 2012.

^ M.S. Kohli (1 April 2004). Mountains of India: Tourism, Adventure, Pilgrimage. Indus Publishing. pp. 172 ff. ISBN 978-81-7387-135-1. Retrieved 1 November 2012.

^ Kurseong Municipality, "History" [of Kurseong].  Retrieved 2 February 2013

^ "Darjeeling". District Profile - General Information. District administration. Retrieved 21 March 2020.

^ "District Statistical Handbook 2013 Darjeeling". Tables 2.2, 2.4b. Department of Planning and Statistics, Government of West Bengal. Retrieved 21 March 2020.

^ "Darjeeling Tea". District administration. Retrieved 21 March 2020.

^ "2011 Census – Primary Census Abstract Data Tables". West Bengal – District-wise. Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India. Retrieved 21 March 2020.

^ "GNLF loses control over Kursong civic board", OutlookIndia.com, 18 March 2008. Retrieved 2 February 2013

^ Jump up to: a b Chalmers, Rhoderick (2009). "Education, institutions and elites building and bounding Nepali public life in early Twentieth Century India".  In Tanka Bahadur Subba (ed.). Indian Nepalis: Issues and Perspectives. Concept Publishing Company. p. 127. ISBN 9788180694462.

^ Information Booklet. Gorkhaland Territorial Administration Sabha Election - 2012


Bibliography[edit]
O'Malley, Lewis Sydney Steward (1 January 1999). Bengal District Gazetteer : Darjeeling. Concept Publishing Company. ISBN 81-7268-018-X.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kurseong.

 Kurseong travel guide from Wikivoyage
Official Website of the Kurseong Municipality
Information on Kurseong at West Bengal Government Website
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vteCities, towns and locations in Darjeeling DistrictCities, municipal and census townsDarjeeling Sadar subdivision
Badamtam Tea Garden
Chongtong Tea Garden
Darjeeling
Ging Tea Garden
Mangarjung Tea Garden (Nagri)
Rongmook Ceder Tea Garden
Singtam Tea Garden
Sonada
Sukhiapokhri
Kurseong subdivision
Cart Road
Kurseong
Mirik subdivision
Mirik
Siliguri subdivision
Bara Mohansingh
Bairatisal
Bhimram
Dakshin Bagdogra
Dumriguri
Geni
Jitu
Kalkut
Kharibari
Lalman
Mathapari
Shyamdhan
Siliguri
Tari
Uttar Bagdogra
Locationsother than cities and townsDarjeeling Sadar subdivision
Bijanbari
Chamong Tea Garden
Dhajea Tea Garden
Ghum
Jorebungalow
Lebong & Mineral Spring Tea Garden
Lodhoma
Manebhanjyang
Mariabong Tea Garden
Nagri Farm Tea Garden
Orange Valley Tea Garden
Peshok Tea Garden
Pokhriabong
Poobong Tea Garden
Pattabong Tea Garden
Rangli Rangliot
Rimbick
Rishihat Tea Garden
Sandakphu
Singla Tea Garden
Soom Tea Garden
Sungma Tea Garden
Takdah
Teesta Valley Tea Garden
Tonglu
Tumsong Tea Garden
Tukvar Tea Garden
Kurseong subdivision
Ambootia
Giddapahar
Gayabari
Longview Tea Garden
Mangpu
Monteviot Tea Garden
Rohini Tea Garden
Simulbari Tea Garden
Sittong
Sukna
Tindharia
Mirik subdivision
Panighatta
Singbulli Tea Garden
Soureni
Siliguri subdivision
Bagdogra
Batasi
Bengdubi
Matigarahat
Mohorgon Tea Garden
Naxalbari
Panitanki
Phansidewa
Specific Tea Estates
Arya Tea Estate
Avongrove Tea Estate
Badamtam Tea Estate
Balasun Tea Estate
Castleton Tea Estate
Glenburn Tea Estate
Gopaldhara Tea Estate
Goomtee Tea Estate
Happy Valley Tea Estate
Jungpana Tea Estate
Lopchu Tea Estate
Makaibari Tea Estate
Margaret's Hope Tea Estate
North Tukvar Tea Estate
Okayti Tea Estate
Phoobsering Tea Estate
Phuguri Tea Estate
Pussimbing Tea Estate
Puttabong Tea Estate
Thurbo Tea Estate
See also
 Darjeeling related topics
Bagdogra Airport
 People from Darjeeling district
 Villages in Darjeeling district
 India portal
vteMunicipalities and CD blocks of West BengalMunicipalcorporations
 Asansol
 Bidhannagar
 Chandannagar
 Durgapur
 Howrah
 Kolkata
 Siliguri
Municipalities
Alipurduar
Arambagh
Ashoknagar Kalyangarh
Baduria
Baidyabati
Balurghat
Bangaon
Bankura
Bansberia
Baranagar
Barasat
Bardhaman
Barrackpore
Baruipur
Basirhat
Beldanga
Berhampore
Bhadreswar
Bhatpara
Birnagar
Bishnupur
Bolpur
Budge Budge
Buniadpur
Chakdaha
Champdani
Chandrakona
Contai
Cooch Behar
Dainhat
Dalkhola
Darjeeling
Dhuliyan
Dhupguri
Diamond Harbour
Dinhata
Dubrajpur
Dum Dum
Egra
English Bazar
Gangarampur
Garulia
Gayespur
Ghatal
Gobardanga
Guskara
Habra
Haldia
Haldibari
Halisahar
Haringhata
Hugli-Chuchura
Islampur
Jalpaiguri
Jangipur
Jaynagar Majilpur
Jhalda
Jhargram
Jiaganj Azimganj
Kaliaganj
Kalimpong
Kalna
Kalyani
Kamarhati
Kanchrapara
Kandi
Katwa
Kharagpur
Kharar
Khardaha
Khirpai
Konnagar
Krishnanagar
Kurseong
Madhyamgram
Maheshtala
Mainaguri
Malbazar
Mathabhanga
Mekhliganj
Memari
Murshidabad
Nabadwip
Naihati
Nalhati
New Barrackpore
North Barrackpur
North Dum Dum
Old Malda
Panihati
Panskura
Pujali
Purulia
Raghunathpur
Raiganj
Rajarhat
Rajpur Sonarpur
Ramjibanpur
Rampurhat
Ranaghat
Rishra
Sainthia
Shantipur
Sonamukhi
South Dum Dum
Suri
Taki
Tamluk
Tarakeswar
Titagarh
Tufanganj
Uluberia
Uttarpara
Community developmentblocks1
A
Alipurduar I
Alipurduar II
Amdanga
Amta I
Amta II
Andal
Arambagh
Arsha
Ausgram I
Ausgram II
B
Baduria
Bagdah
Baghmundi
Bagnan I
Bagnan II
Balagarh
Balarampur
Balurghat
Bally Jagachha
Bamangola
Bandwan
Bangaon
Bankura I
Bankura II
Barjora
Bansihari
Barabani
Barabazar
Barrackpore I
Barrackpore II
Barasat I
Barasat II
Baruipur
Basanti
Basirhat I
Basirhat II
Beldanga I
Beldanga II
Berhampore
Bhagawangola I
Bhagawangola II
Bhagabanpur I
Bhagabanpur II
Bhangar I
Bhangar II
Bharatpur I
Bharatpur II
Bhatar
Binpur I
Binpur II
Bishnupur, Bankura
Bishnupur I, South 24 Parganas
Bishnupur II, South 24 Parganas
Bolpur Sriniketan
Budge Budge I
Budge Budge II
Burdwan I
Burdwan II
Burwan
C
Canning I
Canning II
Chakdaha
Chanchal I
Chanchal II
Chandipur
Chanditala I
Chanditala II
Chapra
Chandrakona I
Chandrakona II
Chhatna
Chinsurah Mogra
Chopra
Contai I
Contai II
Contai III
Cooch Behar I
Cooch Behar II
D
Darjeeling Pulbazar
Dantan I
Dantan II
Daspur I
Daspur II
Debra
Deganga
Diamond Harbour I
Diamond Harbour II
Deshapran
Dhaniakhali
Dhupguri
Dinhata I
Dinhata II
Domjur
Domkal
Dubrajpur
E
Egra I
Egra II
English Bazar
F
Falakata
Falta
Farakka
Faridpur Durgapur
G
Gaighata
Galsi I
Galsi II
Gangajalghati
Gangarampur
Garhbeta I
Garhbeta II
Garhbeta III
Gazole
Ghatal
Goalpokhar I
Goalpokhar II
Goghat I
Goghat II
Gopiballavpur I
Gopiballavpur II
Gorubathan
Gosaba
H
Habibpur
Habra I
Habra II
Haldia
Haldibari
Hanskhali
Hariharpara
Haringhata
Haripal
Harirampur
Harishchandrapur I
Harishchandrapur II
Haroa
Hasnabad
Hemtabad
Hili
Hingalganj
Hirbandh
Hura
I
Ilambazar
Indas
Indpur
Islampur
Itahar
J
Jagatballavpur
Jalangi
Jalpaiguri
Jamalpur
Jamboni
Jamuria
Jangipara
Jaynagar I
Jaynagar II
Jhalda I
Jhalda II
Jhargram
Jorebunglow Sukhiapokhri
Joypur, Bankura
Joypur, Purulia
K
Kakdwip
Kalchini
Kaliachak I
Kaliachak II
Kaliachak III
Kaliaganj
Kaliganj
Kalimpong I
Kalimpong II
Kalna I
Kalna II
Kandi
Kanksa
Karandighi
Karimpur I
Karimpur II
Kashipur
Katwa I
Katwa II
Keshiari
Keshpur
Ketugram I
Ketugram II
Khanakul I
Khanakul II
Khandaghosh
Kharagpur I
Kharagpur II
Khargram
Kharibari
Khatra
Khejuri I
Khejuri II
Khoyrasole
Kolaghat
Kotulpur
Krishnaganj
Krishnanagar I
Krishnanagar II
Kulpi
Kultali
Kumarganj
Kumargram
Kurseong
Kushmandi
L
Labpur
Lalgola
M
Madarihat-Birpara
Magrahat I
Magrahat II
Mahisadal
Mal
Manbazar I
Manbazar II
Mandirbazar
Manikchak
Manteswar
Mathabhanga I
Mathabhanga II
Mathurapur I
Mathurapur II
Matiali
Matigara
Maynaguri
Mayureswar I
Mayureswar II
Mejia
Mekhliganj
Memari I
Memari II
Midnapore Sadar
Minakhan
Mirik
Mohammad Bazar
Mohanpur
Mongalkote
Moyna
Murarai I
Murarai II
Murshidabad-Jiaganj
N
Nabadwip
Nabagram
Nagrakata
Nakashipara
Nalhati I
Nalhati II
Namkhana
Nandakumar
Nandigram I
Nandigram II
Nanoor
Naoda
Narayangarh
Naxalbari
Nayagram
Neturia
O
Old Malda
Onda
P
Panchla
Pandabeswar
Pandua
Panskura
Para
Patashpur I
Patashpur II
Patharpratima
Patrasayer
Phansidewa
Pingla
Polba Dadpur
Puncha
Purbasthali I
Purbasthali II
Pursurah
Purulia I
Purulia II
R
Raghunathganj I
Raghunathganj II
Raghunathpur I
Raghunathpur II
Raiganj
Raina I
Raina II
Raipur
Rajarhat
Rajganj
Rajnagar
Ramnagar I
Ramnagar II
Rampurhat I
Rampurhat II
Ranaghat I
Ranaghat II
Rangli Rangliot
Ranibandh
Raniganj
Raninagar I
Raninagar II
Ratua I
Ratua II
S
Sabang
Sagar
Sagardighi
Sahid Matangini
Sainthia
Salanpur
Salboni
Saltora
Samserganj
Sandeshkhali I
Sandeshkhali II
Sankrail, Howrah
Sankrail, Jhargram
Santipur
Santuri
Sarenga
Shyampur I
Shyampur II
Simlapal
Singur
Sitai
Sitalkuchi
Sonamukhi
Sonarpur
Sreerampur Uttarpara
Suri I
Suri II
Sutahata
Suti I
Suti II
Swarupnagar
T
Taldangra
Tamluk
Tapan
Tarakeswar
Tehatta I
Tehatta II
Thakurpukur Maheshtala
Tufanganj I
Tufanganj II
U
Udaynarayanpur
Uluberia I
Uluberia II
See also
List of cities in West Bengal by population

Similar to tehsils in many states of India

Authority control General
VIAF
1
WorldCat
National libraries
United States

vte State of West BengalCapital: KolkataState symbols
Emblem: Emblem of West Bengal
Animal: Fishing cat
Bird: White-throated kingfisher
Flower: Night-flowering jasmine (Shiuli)
Tree: Devil's tree (Saptaparni)
Fish: Ilish
History
Gauda Kingdom
Shashanka
Pala Empire
Sena dynasty
Mallabhum
Cooch Behar State
Sher Shah Suri
Mughal Empire
Nawabs of Bengal and Murshidabad
East India Company
Battle of Plassey
Bengal Presidency
Great Bengal famine of 1770
Indian Rebellion of 1857
Bengali Renaissance
Bardhaman Raj
Nadia Raj
Jhargram Raj
Sovabazar Raj
Panchkot Raj
Partition of Bengal (1905)
Revolutionary movement for Indian independence
Anushilan Samiti
Jugantar
Bengal famine of 1943
Direct Action Day
Noakhali riots
Partition of Bengal (1947)
Bangladesh Liberation War
Naxalite movement
Geography
Darjeeling Himalayan hill region
Terai
North Bengal plains
Dooars
Rarh region
Sundarbans
Western plateau and high lands
Ganges Delta
Climate
Sandakphu (Highest point)
Protected areas
Rivers
Khoai
Tiger Hill, Darjeeling
Siliguri Corridor
Governance
Chief Ministers
Governor
Legislative Assembly
Human Rights Commission
Political parties (All India Trinamool Congress
Communist Party (Marxist)
Indian National Congress
Bharatiya Janata Party)
Parliamentary constituencies
Assembly constituencies
CID West Bengal
Kolkata Police
Rights groups
Matua Mahasangha
Bangla Pokkho
Division and DistrictsBurdwan division
Birbhum
Hooghly
Paschim Bardhaman
Purba Bardhaman
Jalpaiguri division
Alipurduar
Cooch Behar
Darjeeling
Jalpaiguri
Kalimpong
Malda division
Dakshin Dinajpur
Malda
Murshidabad
Uttar Dinajpur
Medinipur division
Bankura
Jhargram
Paschim Medinipur
Purba Medinipur
Purulia
Presidency division
Howrah
Kolkata
Nadia
North 24 Parganas
South 24 Parganas
Cities and towns
Alipore
Asansol
Berhampore
Balurghat
Bankura
Barasat
Bardhaman
Bishnupur
Hugli-Chuchura
Cooch Behar
Darjeeling
Durgapur
Haldia
Howrah
Jalpaiguri
Jaynagar Majilpur
Kalimpong
Kharagpur
Kolkata
Krishnanagar
Kurseong
Malda
Midnapore
Murshidabad
Purulia
Raiganj
Siliguri
Siuri
Tamluk
List of cities in West Bengal by population
Cities and towns by district
Culture
Bengali Renaissance
Bengali calendars
Patachitra
Chalchitra
Arts of West Bengal
Baul
Bhadu
Gombhira
Chhau dance
Cuisine
Rabindra Sangeet
Rabindra Nritya Natya
Holi
Prostitution in Kolkata
Pahela Baishakh
Durga Puja
Architecture
Bengal temple
Language
Literature
Cinema
Jatra
Ghosts in Bengali culture
GI product
Baluchari sari
Banglar Rosogolla
Bankura horse
Bengal Patachitra
Chhau mask
Darjeeling tea
Dhaniakhali Sari
Dhokra
Fazli (mango)
Gobindobhog
Himsagar
Jaynagarer Moa
Madurkathi
Manasa chali
Mihidana
Nakshi kantha
Sonagachi
Santiniketan Leather Goods
Sitabhog
Tulaipanji
Demographics
Bengali people
Bihari people
Economy of West Bengal
Gurkha
Adivasi
Anglo-Indian
Ethnic communities in Kolkata
List of West Bengal districts ranked by literacy rate
People
Rabindranath Tagore
Satyajit Ray
Kazi Nazrul Islam
Anil Kumar Gain
Ritwik Ghatak
Subhas Chandra Bose
Jamini Roy
Nandalal Bose
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Meghnad Saha
Bankim Chandra Chatterjee
Image gallery at Wikimedia Commons




