.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-unesco{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b1/WorldHeritageBlanc.svg")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-star{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e7/Cscr-featured.svg")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-ftt{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b0/Writing_Circle.svg/25px-Writing_Circle.svg.png")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-dotm{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/50/Yes_Check_Circle.svg/25px-Yes_Check_Circle.svg.png")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-otbp{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6e/Right_turn_icon_blue.svg/25px-Right_turn_icon_blue.svg.png")}

  Vidhana Soudha
Bangalore, now known officially as Bengaluru (Kannada: ಬೆಂಗಳೂರು), is the capital of the Indian state of Karnataka. Nowadays it is a large, cosmopolitan city with a large working population. Bangalore is the major centre of India's information technology (IT) industry, and known worldwide as the "Silicon Valley of India".


Understand[edit]
Once called the "Garden City of India" and the "Pensioner's Paradise", these epithets don't apply to the modern Bangalore.

History[edit]
The earliest records of a place named "Bengaluru" are found in a ninth-century temple in an area now known as "Old Bangalore".
Legend has it that when the feudal lord Kempe Gowda was once hunting rabbits in the area, a rabbit appeared and attacked his dog. This made a great impression on Gowda and he named the place gandu bhoomi (the place of heroes). In 1537, with the assistance of the local king, he constructed three districts protected by a walled fort on the site.
During the next three centuries, Bangalore existed very much in the shadow of the neighbouring city, Mysore, and control of the town changed hands many times. The year 1831 marked a major turning point for the city. Claiming misrule by the king Krishna Raja Wodeyar III, the British took control of the Mysore Kingdom and, possibly influenced by the city's salubrious climate, moved the administrative capital to Bangalore. New telecommunication systems were laid, rail connections built, fine government buildings constructed, and the city's famous parks and gardens established. After independence, Bangalore maintained its position as the state capital of Karnataka and continues to grow.
For many years, Bangalore was regarded in India as the most green, liberal and forward-thinking city. These attributes have propelled Bangalore to the forefront of India's high-tech industry boom, and it ranks as one of the most developed cities in India and one of the world's fastest growing urban areas.
A popular myth explaining the native name Bengaluru is that it originated from Benda Kaalu Uru (Town of Boiled Beans). The story is told that the name was given to the city by King Vira Ballala who, while lost in the area, was offered boiled beans by an old woman.

Climate[edit]
Unlike the major metropolises of India which are extremely hot in the summer months, Bangalore enjoys a relatively mild climate all year round.

Summer – February to May (peak temperature is during April and May)
Monsoon – June to October (the heaviest rains are typically between June and August)
Winter – November to January (with January being the coldest month)
Summer temperatures can reach 36°C (97°F), and early morning temperatures in the winter hover around 12°C (54°F).
However, Bangalore has an unpredictable weather not much unlike certain western cities. It is quite common to have a warm sunny day followed by evening showers ending with cool nights. So, be prepared for rain for the better part of the year (esp. May to November).

Talk[edit]
Being the capital of Karnataka, the widely spoken and official language in Bangalore is Kannada. Most people can speak and understand English and Hindi. Other Indian languages such as Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Bengali and Urdu are spoken by the respective migrant and minority communities. As Bangalore is a commercial and cultural hub, it has a smattering of Konkani, Marathi and Tulu speakers.
Most auto rickshaw drivers, bus conductors and shop assistants can have a conversation in at least basic English. Some of them will be able to understand Hindi, Tamil and Telugu. Signs are generally written in both Kannada and English. However, a basic knowledge of Kannada comes very handy when interacting with locals.

Get in[edit]
By plane[edit]
  Taxi cabs outside the airport
13.200477.7091Kempegowda International Airport (BLR IATA) (In Devanahalli, 40 km (25 mi) from the central business district of Bangalore (Mahatma Gandhi ("MG") Road) and 30 km (19 mi) from the Bengaluru City Railway Station.), ☏ +91 80 6678-2255, +91 80 6678-2251, toll-free: +1 800 425 4425, feedback@bialairport.com. The airport is occasionally subject to operational restrictions due to fog from 15 November to 15 February between 3AM-8:30AM (IST). Flight delays and diversions may occur on some mornings due to the morning fog. The airport is among India's busiest and most modern. The airport is host to 10 domestic airlines and 21 international airlines connecting the city to about 50 destinations.The airport has an international and a domestic terminal. They share the same building, but are on different sides - the domestic gates are on the west side while the larger international gates are to the east. There are ATMs, bureaux de change, two units of Cafe Coffee Day and other cafés, duty-free shops, restaurants, and day hotels at the airport. When departing from the airport, make sure to check restrictions on times for baggage check-in, and make sure to bring a printout of your boarding pass with you to the airport. For flights leaving in the early hours of the morning (such as 3AM), you may need to check in your bags as much as 2½ hours in advance.   
Airlines[edit]
The airport serves as a hub city for almost all domestic airlines such as GoAir, IndiGo, SpiceJet and Vistara.
International airlines include Air India, Air France, AirAsia, Malaysian Airlines, Air Mauritius, British Airways, Dragonair, Emirates, Etihad Airways, Lufthansa, Singapore Airlines, SilkAir, Scoot Tigerair, SriLankan Airlines, Qatar Airways and Thai Airways.

Airport to central business district[edit]
  A bus run by the Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation
Buses Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC) operates buses from various points of the city every 15 minutes to the Kempegowda International Airport. 156 buses ply to and from the airport. Of these, 40 are air-conditioned Volvo buses, called Vayu Vajra. The cost for each trip in these buses ranges between ₹50 and ₹250 depending on the distance. This is the cheapest and an extremely convenient way to get to the airport. Moreover, this service is available everyday, day and night. While taking this mode of transport, be aware that to get from the bus stop to your final destination, you will need to take an auto rickshaw ride or to get a lift from someone.
Taxis
Airport-approved taxis There is a dedicated taxi holding area for travellers arriving at the airport. Taxis at this holding area use meters at the rate of ₹19.5 per kilometer. You will also have to pay the toll charge of ₹120 when you enter the highway. It costs approximately ₹600 to get to Bangalore's central business district, and about ₹700 to Koramangala. These taxis are operated by either EasyCabs, Meru Cabs or KSTDC. However, readers have reported that Meru Cabs is unreliable as some cab drivers have been known to cancel reservations at the last moment if they find a better deal from a street pick-up while on the way to an airport pick-up. Journeys to anywhere in Bangalore should not cost more than ₹800–1000. More information can be found on the airport site.
Unofficial taxis You may be able to find a ride into Bangalore City at a much cheaper rate by taking a taxi not approved by the airport, but only if you are willing to take a risk. Taxi drivers driving such taxis will attempt to negotiate with you a much lower fare than that charged by EasyCabs and Meru Cabs, sometimes as little as ₹200–300 for a ride to the central business district. These taxis can be found just beyond the terminal plaza at the covered walkway that leads to the car park. Once you leave the walkway, some taxi drivers may become fairly aggressive, and may try to take your luggage without your permission. The best thing to do is to keep track of, and be in control of, your belongings. Even the most aggressive taxi driver or tout will leave you alone if you stand firm and make it clear that you do not want his help. You should only use such taxis if you have an idea of what the appropriate taxi rates are, and are willing to bargain very hard to avoid being swindled. It is recommended that you agree on a price before you enter the cab; no tip is necessary once you arrive at your destination.
App-based taxis Smartphone app-based taxi services operate in Bangalore and many provide services to the airport. These operate from a pickup point a little further outside the terminal building. You can follow the signs for app-based taxi pickup. You will need to download an app to your smartphone and have an Internet connection to be able to use these services. If you don't have and Indian SIM card or cheap roaming data, you may be better to use one of the other taxi services, as the Airport WiFi can be overloaded at peak times.
Uber has a flat rate service from the airport to anywhere in the city for ₹549, including the toll charges.
Ola also operates taxis via their app from the airport.
Limousines and self-drive cars Hertz and Akbar Travels provide pre-paid limousine and car rental facilities through counters at the airport terminal building. These cost above ₹1,200 for travel to the central business district. There are generally a few ranges of self-drive cars: the compact range (Suzuki Swift), the intermediate range (Ford Fiesta), the standard range (Toyota Corolla), multi-utility vehicles (Toyota Innova) and sports utility vehicles (Ford Endeavour). Cars are given to renters with a full tank of fuel, and have to be returned with the fuel tank full. A flexible pick up and drop off facility in town and at the airport are offered. Renters can pick up their cars at the airport and drop them off anywhere in the city or in Chennai or Hyderabad. Similarly, cars can be picked up at any of these cities and dropped off at the airport. Conditions apply – for example, renters must be over 21 years of age and possess driving licences valid in India. It may be necessary to complete a lot of paper work and, depending on the company and type of car to be rented, a large deposit may be required. Please check well in advance before making plans.
Hotel pick-up You can arrange with your hotel to have a driver pick you up at the airport. Some hotels, especially the higher-end ones, provide this service for free if you are staying with them, although some may charge you anything around ₹2,500 (far higher than just taking a taxi). This may be a good option if it is your first time travelling to Bangalore. The driver will be waiting in the arrival area of the airport with a sign bearing your name.
Helicopter If you are in a hurry and have a lot of money, helicopter services are offered by Birdie and Deccan Aviation. There are eight helipads across Bangalore. A ride from the international airport sets you back by about ₹5,000.
By train[edit]
See also Rail travel in India.
There are many railway stations in Bangalore, each serving certain trains:

12.978277.56931 Krantivira Sangolli Rayanna Bengaluru (IR station code: SBC, formerly known as Bengaluru City Station), Railway Station Rd, Kempegowda, Sevashrama (Opposite the Majestic Bus stand, Metro Green/Purple: Nadaprabhu Kempegowda Station:Majestic). Most local and long-distance trains arrive and depart from here. Platforms: #1 to 7 connect to Chennai (360 km (220 mi), 5-6h, ₹125-1,105) and Salem (via Hosur), #8 to 10 to Hubli via Yeshwantpur, Tumkur, Birur, #5 to 10 towards Mysore. There also trains depart to Hyderabad via Guntakal.   (updated Feb 2018)
13.0239177.550822 Yeswantpur Junction (IR station code: YPR, also Yesvantpur Junction), NH-4 (Tumkur Road) (Metro (Green Line): Yeswantpur Station, BMTC Bus serving the station on its Yeshwantapur old market side (nearer to Platform 1) are 90E from Majestic, 91C and 52E from Krishna Rajendra market also known as City market, 94E from Shivajinagar, K1 from St. Johns Hospital). The other main railway terminal of Bangalore. A few (mostly long-distance) trains arrive and depart from here. All trains towards Hubli stop here. Services: retiring rooms and dormitories, AC VIP Lounge, Essential stalls and ATM.   
12.9985977.621733 Bengaluru East (IR station code: BNCE), Pottery Rd. (About 5 km (3.1 mi) northeast from the center). A smaller one.   
12.9938477.598074 Bengaluru Cantonment (IR station code: BNC), Cantonment Railway Station Rd, Kaverappa Layout, Vasanth Nagar. A smaller one. Services: Passenger Reservation Centre, AC VIP lounge, inquiry counters, essential stalls, Food plaza, ATM. PF-1A (Dead end side of Platform 1) is used for terminating trains like 12509/10 Guwahati Tri-weekly Express, 12503/04 Agartala Humsafar Weekly Express, 18635/36 Hatia Weekly Express, 56503/04 Vijayawada Passenger and 2 DMU services operating from Kolar via Bangarpet. The main platforms are used for halting by all the trains passing through this station except 12007/08 Chennai Mysore shatabdi Express   
13.000677.674555 Krishnarajapuram Railway station (KJM), Outer Ring Road, Jyothi Puram, Krishnarajapura (All buses between 303 and 320 except 314 series to/from Majestic/Shivajinagar/Market & Ulsoor). An important stop owing to proximity of IT companies and the ring road just passing close to the station and well connected by buses to major parts. It also forms the 1st stop for majority of trains leaving Yeshvantapur towards Jolarpettai. 
12.9175377.483916 Kengeri (KGI), Kengeri Satellite Town, Kengeri (5 mins walk from Kengeri TTMC on Mysore Road). An important stop owing to proximity of residential areas in the proximity. Its a major stop for all train coming from Mysore side. Kengeri Bus stand on Mysore road is 5 mins walk from Railway station, having access to major Ring Road services of 401K (Yelahanka via Vijayanagar ), 401M (Yeshvantapur via Ring Road ), 502F (Peenya), 375 (Banashankari via Uttarahalli), 378 (Electronic City via Uttarahalli) and 222A/226N towards Majestic and Market. Global Tech Park is about 3 km (1.9 mi) from here and B.G.S Global Hospital about 5 km (3.1 mi).   
Bookings can be done at either the railway stations or at the Indian Railways booking counters in major commercial and residential areas. Booking can also be done online. If you are booking at Bengaluru City and are traveling to Mysore, there is a separate counter for travellers to Mysore. This is to cater for the large number of travellers between Bangalore and Mysore. If travelling to Mysore on a Sunday afternoon, arrive early as there is usually a long line for buying tickets.
As with all Indian railway travel, have some patience for delays. Trains are usually on time (within 20 min of scheduled time), but can sometimes be late. A digital departure board in the station will tell you what platform your train is on and what time it leaves.
For train arrival/departure and PNR status inquiries at various railway stations at Bengaluru, call 139.
Travelling from Mumbai to Bangalore by train takes a long time (24 hr or so). Buses are comparatively faster and take 18-20 hr, provided there are no traffic jams in Mumbai and Pune en route. Effective travel time by train or bus is long. Air travel is recommended for traveling between Mumbai and Bangalore, the duration of which is about 90 min. Low-cost airlines charge the same fare as A/C train or Volvo bus. However, sleeper class (non air-con) train travel from Mumbai to Bangalore is economical and you can have a view of some lush evergreen forests and river valleys across Western India.
Traveling to Delhi can take 39 hours (or more) and the flight ticket just double than the amount of the slow train.
For the Foreign Tourist Quota, go to the big building on the left, before entering the train station through the main access. This is the "Unreserved Tickets" building (even if on the side door it says "Reservation Center"). On the first floor, there is the Chief Reservation Supervisor. The official will book the ticket for you (after showing a foreigner passport). They might refer you to the first counter on the main building. But there you must stand in the queue, while here you can sit at the office and wait they book the ticket for you.

By bus[edit]
  Kempegowda Bus Station or Majestic, the main bus station
If you have difficulty in arranging a plane or railway ticket to/from your next destination, or you prefer a little more adventure, you can go by bus. Government and private buses run services to/from major cities like Mumbai, Goa, Chennai, Mangalore, Coimbatore, Madurai, Tirupati, Hyderabad, etc. Buses can be a regular service with only seats and no A/C, normal luxury bus, a Volvo A/C bus or a sleeper bus for night travel. Buses are also good for coming from many towns in Karnataka without a good number of trains due to the increased service - most towns in Karnataka are essentially guaranteed to have service to the state capital.

12.9778877.572337 Kempegowda Bus Station (Majestic Bus Station, Kannada: ಕೆಂಪೇಗೌಡ ಬಸ್ ನಿಲ್ದಾಣ), Gandhi Nagar, City Bus Rd (The main bus stand is next to the Kempegowda Bus Station and Metro Green/Purple Kempegowda/Majestic). One of the largest bus stands in the city, this bus stand caters to major buses on Karnataka (Except Mysore Road side buses), Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Maharashtra & Goa routes. it is also the largest intersecting point for Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC), which maintains bus services within Bangalore. The bus stand is opposite City Railway station.   
12.9537177.5436618 MCTC (Mysore Road Satellite Bus stand), Bapuji Nagar, Mysore Road (Majestic: KSRTC Shuttles, BMTC 220 to 235 ; Market: 220 to 235 series ; Shivajinagar: 222E,226N,121B ; Jayanagar: 60A to L ; Yeshvantapur: K-2 ; Jalahalli Cross: 248). One of the important bus stands of Bangalore, aimed at decongesting Majestic bus stand, this bus stand caters to all ordinary and Luxury services towards Mysore, as well as Interstate ordinary and Luxury services to Kerala, via Mysore, operated by Karnataka and Kerala state governments. Ordinary and Deluxe uses bound to Ooty, Coimbatore via Mysore/Kollegal also start from this place. All ordinary services operated by Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation to Vellore, Tiruvannamalai, Salem, Vriddachalam, Kanchipuram, Coimbatore and Trichy use this Bus stand for terminating their bus services 
12.9547577.591989 Shantinagar (Double Road Bus stand), K.H.Road (From Majestic: 171, all buses from 340 to 372; From Shivajinagar: 13, 13A to 13K, 27,27E,29,210F,G,GA,Q,K6). One of the important bus stands of Bangalore, aimed at decongesting Majestic bus stand, this bus stand caters to all Luxury services towards Tamilnadu operated by KSRTC as well as SETC of Tamilnadu State. Some Kerala State Transport Corporation buses running via Salem to Kerala go through this terminal. 
There are also many unofficial stops that buses will go to on request (even on deluxe buses with reserved seats, you can ask the conductor to stop at such a stop as long as it is in Bangalore/the same city as the stop on your ticket) or even let passengers book tickets from. These places do not have any station infrastructure, but are usually located near landmarks, on major streets/circles/squares, and of course can be spotted by the numerous buses crowded around. One particularly useful stop is Yeswanthpur Junction, which is next to the long distance train station of the same name as well as the Yeswanthpur metro station.
The display boards for long distance buses bus show the destination in the local language Kannada. If you don't speak Kannada, you will likely need to get some help to get on the right bus. However, the newer Volvo buses are all equipped with electronic displays that show the destination in Kannada and English one after the other. Non-Volvo buses are being gradually retrofitted with these electronic displays; this should make bus travel much simpler if you are unfamiliar with the local language. However, there are still many of the older Ashok Leyland and even some very old Tata buses plying the roads, so it is best to go by timings or ask the conductor where the bus is heading (usually by asking the destination name like its a question, such as "Mysore?", and hearing if the conductor responds with the same name or another one).

Bus companies[edit]
Durgamba Motors
Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC)- Operated by Govt. of Karnataka. Counters are present all over the city for reservations, list on the website.
KPN Travels - From the direction of Tamil Nadu
VRL Travels - From most places north of Bangalore
City Travels- From the direction of Tamil Nadu
By car[edit]
Driving in India can be very stressful. Lane discipline is practically non-existent, excessive honking, high vehicle density, lack of regard for traffic law, combined with razor thin passing margins are common. One ride in a taxi will most likely convince you that driving yourself is not worth the risk, so if you do want to arrive by car, you will probably want to hire a car and a driver. Cost varies, but most car and driver combinations cost ₹1,400-1,700/day. The fares for hired private taxis are usually in the multiples of 4hr/40 km (25 mi), fares for which start at around ₹450 for a non-air conditioned small car. Depending on where you are coming from, you may be able to negotiate a lower fare if the trip isn't far, and it may be a higher fare if you are travelling far and your driver has to travel back on his own time. Having an approximate idea of the fare or distance beforehand and persistent bargaining skills can lead to significant savings. Although it costs more, consider requesting an air conditioned car if you aren't used to the heat, especially in summer. An air conditioned car will also help filter out the air pollution, which is considerable, especially on congested roadways. If you want something even more special, such as a fancy car or SUV, be prepared to pay extra.

Get around[edit]
By metro[edit]
  Namma Metro
The Bangalore Metro (Namma Metro) is an efficient cross-city rail service. As of March 2020, there are two lines intersecting at Kempegowda Bus Station Majestic Terminal (called Nadaprabhu Kempegowda Station Majestic), with a total of 41 stops. Tickets can be bought at any station. Fares depend on the number of stations to commute. Minimum fare is ₹10 and maximum is ₹60. Card costing ₹50 will save you from the queues and can be recharged online(recommended to recharge in the counters). The cards offer a 5% discount on ordinary fare. There is no other concession for seniors, women, etc. Tickets are to be purchased for children above 3 feet in height.
If you get a smart token (the single journey ticket), remember that it has to be returned at the station you get off at, so take a picture of it before you leave if you want. All trains are 6-coach trains. This reduces rush in the trains.
The existing routes are:

East-West Line/Purple Line: Baiyappanhalli (Old Madras Road)-->Swami Vivekananda Road-->Indiranagar-->Halasuru-->Trinity Circle-->M.G.Road-->Cubbon Park-->Vidhana Soudha-->Sir M Vishweshwaraya Station Central College-->Kempegowda Bus Station (interchange station)-->City Railway Station-->Magadi Road-->Hosahalli-->Vijayanagar-->Attiguppe-->Deepanjalinagar-->Nayandahalli (Mysore Road)- extended till Kengeri.
North-South Line/Green Line: Nagasandra (Tumkur Road)-->Dasarahalli-->Jalahalli-->Peenya Industry-->Peenya-->Goraguntepalya-->Yeshvantapur Railway Station (PF-6 entrance)-->Sandal Soap Factory-->Mahalakshmi-->Rajajinagar-->Kuvempu Road-->Srirampura-->Mantri Square Sampige Road-->Kempegowda Bus Station (interchange station)-->Chikpet-->K.R.Market-->National College-->Lalbagh-->South End Circle-->Jayanagar-->R.V.Road-->Banashankari-->J.P.Nagar-->Yelechanahalli (now extended till Silk Institute from 2021).
By bus[edit]
Buses are cheap and usually frequent (though expensive compared to other states). But travelling on them can be very difficult if you don't know the system well. Now, most buses have digital signage alternating between the local language Kannada and English but some buses still display the old printed signs with only the route number in English, with the destination and route information written in Kannada. Of course, even with the digital signage the buses can take a long time to change the displayed language, meaning that it can be easy to miss your bus. This means you will have to know what route number you need before you get on, which you can find from the BMTC website, BMTCRoutes.in website, Desiroutes, entering your starting point and end point on Google maps, or by asking locals.
Not all bus stops are clearly marked, so it can be a little tricky on your first trip. Groups of people standing around can be a good indicator that the bus will stop there. Also its a good idea to ask the driver or conductor if they stop at the stop you want to go to (a 500 and a 500Q will not go to all the same stops). Just ask the name in a question tone and you will get a response. Conductors (there is one on every bus and they collect fares and issue tickets- they are always in uniform) are also helpful in telling you where/when your stop is if you ask, as are fellow passengers if they frequent the route. Posted route maps of the bus system are rare, although maps are sold at the main bus terminals (Kempegowda Bus Stand and Shivajinagar). BMTC (toll free) ☏ +1-800-425-1663.
Watch out: some bus drivers put their route sign on the bottom right side of the windshield instead of its place on the sign holder on the top of the windshield.
Buses with black display boards run within the city. Red board buses covers long distance and go to adjoining suburbs. The ordinary city buses are white & blue or green in colour. The newer city buses tend to be blue in colour, and have LED display boards. There are blue Volvo buses, called Vajra, that operate mainly on IT sector routes like Electronic City , ITPL and Outer Ring Road routes, and to tourist places like Bannerghatta National Park and weekend Services to Wonderla. They offer a comfortable air-conditioned ride at higher prices ( 1 1/2 to 2 times the regular bus fare) than the regular buses (which are not air-conditioned). Unlike most other buses, the Vajras have illuminated LED display boards on the front and sides which display the destination and route information in English as well as Kannada.
BMTC also operates  Vayu Vajra  services to Bangalore International Airport from various destinations across the City. KIAS-9 is the most frequent of the routes, connecting the Airport to Majestic Bus stand.
City buses are crowded during rush hours, which are at least 7-10AM and 5-9PM (M-Sa) but one can travel with little difficulty during the daytime. Bus services usually start by 5 or 6AM and are less frequent 9:30AM-10PM and rare after 10:30PM. Also note that traffic in Bangalore is notorious. A trip across the city can take up to 4 hr, especially in rush hour times. There are no bus lanes, so busses, cabs and cars face the same traffic jams!
Major buses in the city have the seats reserved for ladies in the front, between the front and middle doors. The first seat near the front door is reserved for ladies senior citizens, while the first seat behind the middle door is for the physically challenged, and the seat facing the door is for senior citizens. Generally you can board and exit the bus from either door.
It is always better to buy a daily pass if you plan to travel the whole day on the bus. The daily pass costs ₹70 as of January 2018 and it comes in handy if you need to travel on several buses in a single day. Daily passes are issued by the on-duty bus conductor or at the bus stand. Using this pass you can travel in any bus (other than the Vajra) for the entire day, any number of times. Senior citizens are given 25% concession in all buses on production of valid ID card (e.g., passport). Children aged 4-12 are given 50% concession. No charge for children up to 4 years of age.
There are three major bus stands:

12.9779877.5721410 Kempegowda bus stand (Majestic Bus Stand) (Near Gandhi Nagar, directly opposite the Bengaluru City railway station). Quite neatly organised and is easily navigable. There is an inquiry office near platform number 1 on ‘Majestic’ where you can ask the bus number and platform for your desired destination. You can find a large map on display, which you can use to find the bus number you need to take if you know the area you are going to. You can of course always ask the conductor or other passengers. Route maps are also sold on the platforms. Has stations for both lines of the metro. (updated Feb 2018)
12.964277.5777311 City Market. Around 2.5 km (1.6 mi) away from Majestic. Could daunt newcomers, since it is very disorganised. It is a large dirt parking lot under an overhead highway, and there is not much order to where buses park. 
12.9834377.6030812 Shivajinagar. In the north. It is neatly organised, and there is an inquiry window to find about buses. If you are changing buses, you may have to get down on the street and walk into the bus stand to catch your next bus. You can find a large map on display here too, which you can use to find the bus number you need to take if you know the area you are going to. Route maps are also sold on the platforms. 
Buses are available to all major localities of the city from these three bus stands. There have been lot of developments due to the ongoing metro project as well as efforts to decongest the city. BMTC is adding more bus stations all the time. Better to check on their website for latest situation.

By auto-rickshaw[edit]






Note: Autorickshaws and taxis in Bangalore have a metered fare system. Tipping is neither expected nor required when one avails oneself of autorickshaw or taxi services.


  Autorickshaw in Bangalore awaiting customers
Auto-rickshaws (also called "auto") are everywhere at any time of day. They are green-and-yellow or black-and-yellow three wheeled contraptions. They are a fast (but unsafe) way to get around the city - in thick traffic, they are quicker than a taxi or bus.
Auto-rickshaws are supposed to charge fares as per the meter reading, which equals to ₹13 per distance kilometer, a minimum charge of ₹25 for the first 1.8 km (1.1 mi) or less, and a 50% surcharge after 10PM (called "one and a half"). Heavy luggage costs an additional fee of around ₹10-20. They generally tend to charge on an ad-hoc basis depending on the distance of the destination, the chances of getting another customer from the mentioned locality, and their mood. You should simply refuse to board an auto where the meter is faulty or the driver refuses to use it. Saying "meter please" will usually do the trick.
Tourists should be cautious when approaching auto-rickshaws at night, or during heavy rains. Chances are they will charge exorbitant rates (some drivers may demand 100% surcharge after 10PM or 11PM), but you must refuse to board in such a case. Help could be taken from the local traffic police to avail auto-rickshaws during such circumstances. If you are a visitor and do not know the route to the destination, it is a good idea to bargain and fix the fare before boarding to avoid long, convoluted routes being used by the driver - or check the route by recording a GPS track on your mobile.
Auto drivers commonly charge 1.5 rates for timings from 9PM to 6AM. For instance, if the meter reads ₹100, you are to pay ₹150. Catching autos on a normal fare at these times are tough.
Another thing to keep in mind is to be firm but not loud in an argument while travelling in the auto. Some of the less reputable drivers may team up with their friends midway to cause problems. Remember that although Bangaloreans are known for their polite and mild mannered behaviour, auto drivers are normally an exception. Some will think nothing of trying to rip you off. If in doubt, consult a local or your hotel travel desk.
If a rickshaw driver offers to show/drive you to some great places to shop, firmly refuse. A common tactic is to drive you to local shops where you will be pressured to buy Indian crafts that you probably don't want. Know your destination and insist upon it.
Rickshaw drivers are required by law to display their identification on the dashboard or the back of their seats. Refuse to get into a rickshaw that does not display one.
If an auto driver is problematic, their identification number and report to the BBMP Control room which is empowered to withdraw their auto license. This is a very effective technique to deal with them. The BBMP control room number as of December 2009 is ☏ +91 80 22975803.
If you arrive in Bangalore via train, at the main train station there is an office near the taxis/auto-rickshaws which will print-out a pre-paid receipt for your ride. The service costs ₹1, but will save you a potentially large amount of money by giving you an accurate value for your ride. This also allows you to avoid haggling with the driver, and acts as an official price agreement in the event that the driver wants to dispute the price of the ride.

By taxi[edit]
Taxis are very convenient and comfortable. Most of the vehicles are Toyota Etios, Tata Indica cars or Mahindra Logan cars, which are much safer than auto-rickshaws, and the drivers are polite. If you are alone or going to an unknown destination, you are strongly advised to choose this option, even though the rates will be double that of an auto-rickshaw. Most taxi companies will charge a flat rate of ₹150 from anywhere to anywhere within city limits. Waiting or return trips will be charged extra, as will a lot of heavy luggage.
Unlike many other countries, taxis are not marked with 'TAXI' signs on the top. Instead, the cars are marked with the logo of the fleet operator or taxi company on the sides of the car. Only some companies like "Meru Taxi" are marked with the sign 'Taxi' on them. Some companies have a yellow sign with an identification number (usually a letter followed by two digits) on the top. Keep in mind that these taxis cannot be hailed from the street, but have to be called by telephone. When you call, you must give the operator your location, destination, and phone number. The operator will in turn tell you the charge (or will inform you that you must go by the meter) as well as the taxi number. The taxi will come pick you up, and call you when they are close. When you go out on the street, look at the license plate for the number they gave you—it will be the last four digits of the license plate. Alternatively, look for the yellow board atop the car with the taxi's identification number.
The license plate number is usually in the format "KA" followed by 01 to 05, followed by two letters, followed by a four digit number. Taxis generally have yellow license plates with black letters.
On weekdays, especially during rush hours, be prepared to book a taxi a couple of hours in advance. Otherwise, the rush-hour traffic jams and high demand for taxis will make it difficult for a taxi to reach you in time. Private taxis are generally more reliable during this time – in many cases, radio cabs will be overbooked, and you might be unfortunate be informed that your booking has been cancelled.
Although it can be hard for non-Indians to grasp at first, the system is actually very effective. If in doubt, ask a member of your hotel staff to help you, and when your taxi comes be sure to tip them ₹35–40 for the assistance.
Some radio taxi services are:
Map Cabs (☏ +91 8880 510 520), GetMeCab (☏ +91 92666 01520, hours=8AM–9PM), Cabbazar (☏ +91 77778-80880), Ola Cabs (☏ +91 80 3355 3355), SPOT City Taxi (☏ +91 80 2551 0000), 7mcar (☏ +91 80 87138713), BSR Travels (☏ +91 85508-55111), Bestway Cabs (☏ +91 98150-46464).
Travel agents and hotels can arrange private chauffeur driven cars, and you may also hire cars to drive yourself. While expensive compared to taxis, these are the most trusted, secure, and comfortable ways to travel around the city. Driving in Bangalore can be difficult, because of poor driver discipline, but chauffeur driven services are very reasonable. These can be arranged by travel companies or online from the countries of origin.

By private car[edit]
Most taxi and auto-rickshaw drivers will be more than happy to offer you either a daily rate or an hourly rate, and take you around wherever you need to go. Alternately, your hotel or a travel company can arrange a private car.
If you find a good taxi or auto driver, this can be a great way to go for a foreigner. You'll certainly pay a lot more than if you bought individual rides, but you'll always have a driver waiting for you, and he can help with recommending local tourist sites, finding a good restaurant to eat at, and otherwise coping with day-to-day life. This can take a lot of the stress out of traveling.
Rates are generally something like ₹50–100 per hour for an auto-rickshaw, and ₹150–250 per hour for a taxi. Rates for a private car booked via the hotel will probably be more. Like everything else in India, rates are very fluid.

By bicycle[edit]
The weather in Bangalore is extremely pleasant, but the traffic is equally hectic. So if your plan is not to go towards crowded city, you can go around cycling.
Most of the sightseeing locations are within a range of 15 km (9.3 mi), so you can consider covering them on bicycle. Bicycle dealers charge ₹100-300 for entire day and you have to submit identity proof to hire bicycle.

By rental scooter[edit]
Travelling by rental scooter is increasingly common. Companies like Bounce, VOGO and YULU offer rental scooters and electric cycles (solar powered models are available), to be unlocked using an app on your smartphone. VOGO and YULU have certain hubs where the vehicle has to be parked, whereas Bounce scooters can be parked anywhere. The rates charged are comparable with those of auto rickshaws, or may be slightly higher at times. You should carry your own helmet since most of these vehicles don't come equipped. The flip side to these services is that the price charged in the end is final and cannot be bargained and sometimes these apps have poor customer services.

By commuter rail[edit]
There are MEMU trains connecting the city centre to various suburbs, especially those with a high concentration of tech companies such as Whitefield. However, speeds are low and station infrastructure can be poor.

See[edit]
12°58′36″N 77°36′0″EMap of Bangalore


There are city tours that can show you the city efficiently if you are short on time. Typically, tours do not include entry fees into the attractions. Bangalore, like the rest of India, has a habit of charging foreigners a lot more than locals for attractions. For example, Tipu Sultan's Palace, which is on the half-day tour, charges ₹15 for Indians/Saarc and ₹200 for non-Indians.

Landmarks[edit]
  The Bangalore Palace
12.998677.5921 Bengaluru Palace, Palace Road, Vasanth Nagar. Built by the Maharajahs of Mysore. For many years the building was neglected as a tourist attraction, but is now open to the public. This is a run down building with paint peeling on the interior, and generally a tourist trap to be avoided. ₹100/450 for Indians/foreigners and ₹675 for a still camera. This includes an audio guide that points out rooms, photos and other things.   
12.9593477.573592 Tipu Sultan's Palace, Allbert Victor Road, Chamrajpet (Just south of Metro: Krishna Rajendra Market (Green)), ☏ +91 80 2670 6836. Daily 9:30AM–5:30PM. Dating to about 1790, it was the summer retreat for Tipu Sultan. The two story structure is made mostly out of wood with finely embellished balconies, pillars and arches. It contains a small museum with information on Tipu Sultan. Tickets are ₹15 for Indians/Saarc/Bimstec citizens and ₹200 for foreigners (March 2018), not very worth it for damaged walls and few information about the Sultans life.   
12.96292777.5759773 Bangalore Fort (Tippu's Fort) (Just north of Metro: Krishna Rajendra Market (Green)). Built in 1537. A small part with massive granite walls, big gates, a dungeon, and a small Ganesha temple is still intact. Free of charge. 
12.974677.59074 Seshadari Iyer Memorial, Kasturba Rd (Metro: Vidhana Soudha (Purple)). A distinctive red sandstone building. It houses the State Central Library (right south of Cubbon Park) and the Bengaluru High Court of Karnataka, (Ambedkar Veedhi, Sampangi Rama Nagar, north of Ribbon Park), while the grounds include a children's recreation area with a toy train, fairground and theater. 
12.9796177.590495 Vidhana Soudha (Karnataka state Assembly), Dr Ambedkar Rd, Sampangi Ramnaga (Metro: Vidhana Soudha (Purple)). The legislative House of the State of Karnataka, this granite building was built by Sri K. Hanumanthaiya, Chief Minister of the then Mysore state between 1951-1956. A marvel of neo-Dravidian architecture, and one of the most imposing buildings in India. One of the interesting feature of this building in grand stairs in its front. The grand stairs has a flight of forty-five steps, 62 m (203 ft) wide and 21 m (69 ft) deep, giving a direct access to the foyer of first floor leading to an Assembly Chamber. The architecture of the building is based on Dravidian style, comprising richly carved bases and capitals for pillars, deep friezes, kapotha cornices, chaithya arches, heavy pediments domical finials. At the same time, the construction was on modern designs, making use of the present-day materials like steel, reinforced concrete, glass, and plastic. General public and tourists are not allowed to enter the ground or the building. It can only be viewed from the road and footpath outside the boundary walls.   (updated Mar 2019)
12.978477.589266 Vikasa Soudha (Metro: Vidhana Soudha (Purple)). Located next to Vidhana Soudha, built in the same classic style. It was inaugurated in 2005. General public and tourists are not allowed to enter the premises. It can only be viewed from outside the boundary walls. (updated Feb 2018)
12.9552277.680777 HAL Aerospace Museum. India's first aerospace museum. Run by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), a large aerospace company.   (updated Jan 2018)
12.8917777.583728 Indian Music Experience, Brigade Millenium Avenue, JP Nagar, 7th Phase (opp. Wood Rose Club), ☏ +91 96866 02366, info@indianmusicexperience.org. A hi-tech and interactive music museum with exhibits on traditional and contemporary Indian music. Adults and children over 12 - ₹250. (updated Dec 2018)
Temples[edit]
  Art of Living world HQ, Bangalore
Art of Living Temple, Near Cricket Coaching ground, Double Road, ☏ +91 9448386061, prameelaudhay@yahoo.com. The Bangalore Ashram is the international headquarters of the Art of Living foundation. The ashram is spread of 65 acres and was established in 1986. They conduct frequent yoga and Ayurveda programs. (updated Jun 2015)
13.013677.65219 Banaswadi Hanuman Temple (Between Sri Uma Maheshwari Temple and Bethal Church, northeast 5 km (3.1 mi) from center). Constructed in the Dravidian style, attracts a large number of devotees especially on week-ends. It has smaller temples dedicated to Lord Rama, Shiva and Ganapathi within the walled compound. 
  Bull Temple, Bangalore
12.941877.56810 Bull Temple, Bull Temple Road, NR Colony, Basavanagudi (Majestic :43 A to E 45 A to E, Shivajinagar: 34 A to F, 37 A to F, Jayanagar/Vijayanagar60 A to K (Ramakrishna Ashrama)). A typical Dravidian style temple, famous for its mammoth bull statue that was carved from a single boulder. Legend has it that the temple was built to appease a marauding bull that stole local crops, and that the offering was effective with the bull subsequently leaving the area. Since then, local farmers have held an annual festival to express their gratitude. 
DakshinaMukhy Nandeeshwara Temple (in the heart of Bangalore). A very ancient temple. This is on Sampige Road in the Malleshwaram area. The speciality of the temple is that, the natural (mineral) water flows from the mouth of Nandi (naturally) which is above a ShivaLingam, and pours all over the year as Abhishekam by nature itself. This water, after Abhishekam is taken by devotees as medicinal water, believed to cure many diseases. People from all over the world take this water in small containers with a lot of trust and devotion. 
12.9657477.5828511 Dharmaraya Swamy Draupadi Devi Temple (in the heart of Bangalore). One of the oldest temples of Bangalore and also the smallest, the Temple is in exsitence since the day of finding the city by Shri Kempegowda. It is on S.P. Road close to Corporation circle, behind the LIC building. This temple is famous for the Annual Karaga Festival held every summer. The Presiding Deity is Dharmaraya (Yudishtra) & Consort Draupadi making it a unique one of its kind. 
12.9428977.5682312 Dodda Ganapathi. One of the oldest temples in Bangalore, it is adjacent to the Bull Temple. The temple is famous for the huge monolith structure of Lord Ganesha, who was worshipped by the villagers to save them from the Bull that was damaging their crops in the area. The Bull Temple is a few metres away from this temple. 
12.9482977.5632213 Gavi Gangadeshwara Cave Temple, Gavipuram, Kempegowda Nagar (Right north of Hanumantha Nagar Park, north of Ramanjaneya Temple, in Gavipuram, adjacent to Basavanagudi). 7AM-12:30PM and 5PM-8:30PM. Built by Kempe Gowda, this temple with four remarkable monolithic pillars is dedicated to Lord Shiva. The temple also has a rare idol of Agni god of fire. The annual festival is on Makara Shankranti and thousands of devotees flock to see the suns rays fall on the Shivlinga. 
13.0099577.5511114 ISKCON Hare Krishna Temple (ISKCON Bangalore), Hare Krishna Hill, Chord Rd (Between Metro Green: Mahalakshmi and Sandal Soap Stations), ☏ +91 99860 77269. 3:45AM-8PM. Temple built on a hillock in Rajajinagar atop scenic surroundings, is a perfect blend of modern technology and spiritual harmony. The huge cultural complex was built to promote vedic culture and spiritual learning, and abounds with shops selling devotional items and souvenirs. The annual Krishna and Balarama Rath Yatra is attended by thousands. (updated Nov 2020)
12.9781777.5806915 Maha Bodhi Society Temple, No. 14, Kalidas Road, Gandhi Nagar (Northwest rim of Freedom Park). A relatively new structure, with the main shrine built as a replica of the historic stupa at Bodh Gaya. The temple grounds are very peaceful, and visitors are welcome to stroll around. In addition, the temple houses an excellent library of books on Buddhism, many of which are in English. 
Maruthi Mandir, Mahakalshmi Layout. A Hanuman Temple is opposite - 5 min drive from ISKCON temple, in the gate of Mahalakshmi Layout. This is a rock hill with huge idols of Hanuman and Mahalakshmi temples. The annual festival of Hanumad Jayanthi during December is very attractive. 
12.8749577.5943516 Meenakshi Sundareshwarar Temple, Bannerghatta Rd (after Indian Institute of Management, south of Bangalore). Beautiful, spacious temple devoted to Sri Meenakshi Amma. Built in ancient style with stone structures, this place is very cool and mind refreshing place to see. You will feel that you are in a temple at Tamilnadu, when in this temple. 
12.9146577.4229917 Mukti Naga Temple. Contains the world's largest monolithic statue of Lord Naaga, about 16 feet tall and weighing 36 tons. The Mukti Naga Temple, which is run by Shri Subrahmanya Seva Trust, is in a serene ambience of Ramohalli, a village on the outskirts of the city. 
12.9148277.593318 Ragi Gudda, Jayanagar 9th block (South of Bangalore). This is a famous Hanuman temple abode. The temple is on a mammoth rocky hill, and has very attractive chain of temples like Spathika Shiva, Ganesha and scenery within the premises. This is a very crowd attracting place during the period of Hanumad Jayanthi in December. You get mahaprasadam meals on Saturday noon-1PM. 
Someshwara Temple, Halasuru (Close to Halasuru Police station; Metro Purple Line). Temple dedicated to Lord Shiva, is one of the oldest temples of the City. The Inner Sanctum Santorium is said to have been built in the 8th Century by the Cholas who ruled this place,the outer Praharam during the Hoysalas of the 11th Century while the front hall construction and the Gopuram during the Vijayanagar Empire of the 15th Century. The structure resembles the various changes the Temple has gone through during the period with major additions and renovations done for preserving the temple. Free. 
12.958177.6566419 Shiva Temple (Shiv Mandir), Old Airport Rd (Close to Vishweshwara College and Total Mall?), ☏ +91 80 2522 8444. This temple has a massive monolith of Lord Shiva in the middle of an artificial pool. There is a cave-like walkthrough behind the statue. It is extremely crowded on the festival of Maha Shivaratri. One can't see or feel any kind of Bhakti in this temple, because at each move inside the temple there will be a person collecting money which creates such a disturbance for the concentration on Bhakti. On each step the devotees will be concentrating on the money boxes (Hundi in Kannada), and people standing to ask money as offerings. Free entrance, camera ₹25. 
Shree Guruvayurappan Temple (at Nettigere, Bangalore South). A Kerala style temple located in Kanakapura Road. A small and nice temple which gives a great vibration of peace and tranquility. Only traditional attire is allowed to enter the sanctum (dhotis for men and sarees for women). 
Sri Raja Rajeshwari Temple (in RajaRajeshwari Nagar, just before Kengeri on Mysore Road). A famous temple dedicated to Goddess Parvathi (RajaRajeshwari). It was built by a renowned spiritual guru, Sri Sri Sri Tiruchi Mahaswaigal. Built in the ancient style with stones, the temple is very spacious. One can feel the peace and satisfaction when visited. Week ends are very crowded. (updated May 2020)
  Ramakrishna Ashram, Halasuru
Sri Ramakrishna Ashram. There are many Ramakrishna Ashrams in Bangalore, but the special and central one is in Gandhi Bazaar, an area with many temples. This mutt contains a vast meditating hall, a beautiful park, a Vedic school and many more facilities. Sri Sharada Devi had meditated on a location in the park in this boundary. This location is preserved as a monument. A stone on which Swami Vivekananda sat when he visited Bangalore is also kept as a monument. This is a calm and peaceful place to meditate. 
12.8954177.5518320 Vasantha Vallabharaya Temple ( Majestic 210E, 210R Shivajinagar 210G , Market: 210, 210D, 210E, Electronic City/Kengeri : 378 ) In South Bangalore, close to Sai Baba Temple, Eashwara Temple, Anjaneya Temple, off Vasantapura Road). A small hillock with an ancient temple dedicated to Sri Vasantha Vallabharaya Swamy. 
VenkataramanaSwamy Temple, Visveswarapuram district (M: National College half km west,). A fine example of Dravidian architecture. This ancient temple was built by Maharaja Chikka Devaraya Wodeyar and is next to the summer palace of Tipu Sultan. 
12.8135777.5765721 Champakadhama Temple, Bannerghatta, close to Bannerghatta circle (Bannerghatta/Jigani/Anekal buses via Bannerghatta Road). A old temple dedicated to Lord Champakeshwara, an incarnation of Lord Vishnu. Name stands because of the presence of the "Champaka" flowers in the area that was used for worship. A small temple, dedicated to Lord Narasimha is on the hillock. A small Kalyani is present behind the Temple, close to the borders of the Bannerghatta forest in about 700 m walk from top of the Hillock. Visit to the Tank is prohibited in Wintry evening and late evenings owing to presence of elephant movement (updated Feb 2018)
Churches[edit]
  The entrance to the Holy Trinity Church
12.9720777.6205322 Holy Trinity Church (at Trinity circle at the east end of the MG Rd). This church is a major landmark in Bangalore. It was built in 1851, for the British Regiment stationed in Bangalore. Built in the English Renaissance style, the church can accommodate 700 people and is regarded as the largest "military" church in southern India. It has a congregation of over 450 families. 
12.98419477.60388623 St. Mary's Basilica. The oldest church in Bangalore, and the only church in the state which has been elevated to the status of a minor basilica. It is famous for the festivities held during the St. Mary's Feast in the month of September each year, an event that attracts devotees from in and around Bangalore. The basilica is been built in Gothic style with arches, ornamental motifs and stained glass windows. Multiple columns and tall spires of the basilica can be seen from quite a distance. The stained glass windows were removed during World War II and were subsequently restored in 1947. 
Shelter House Church, Bannerghatta Rd, Arekeres. The service is conducted in English and starts from 9:30AM in the morning. 
St Mark's Cathedral. On the west end of MG Road, near Anil Kumble circle. (updated Feb 2021)
Do[edit]
Indoor activities[edit]
12.9848677.589541 Jawaharlal Nehru Planetarium, Bangalore Association for Science Education, Sri T. Choudaiah Road, High Grounds (Opposite Indira Gandhi Musical Fountain, Near Raj Bhavan), ☏ +91 80-22379725, info@taralaya.org. 12:30PM-4:30PM. A very good planetarium for adults and children alike. Shows are offered in Kannada and English. Each show is about 30 minutes long. There are about 200 seats available for each show. A ticket can be used only for the show mentioned on the ticket, and is non-refundable if you miss that show. Ticket prices are ₹35 for adults and ₹20 for school students and children (up to 16 years), children below 3 years are not allowed inside the Sky-Theatre. Mondays and second Tuesday are holidays. 
  Vishveshvaraya Industrial and Technological Museum
12.9750577.596332 Visvesvaraya Industrial & Technological Museum (VITM) (Metro: Cubbon Park (Purple)), ☏ +91 80-22866200, vitmuseum@gmail.com. 10AM-5:30PM. Contains many fun learning activities and exhibitions that can be enjoyed by adults and children. Most exhibits are based on simple science, but some have industrial applications. For general visitors entry fee is ₹40. Some groups receive discounts (organised school groups, BPL Category when showing valid BPL card, etc). Entry is free for military and police personnel in uniform, the physically challenged, and children below 5 years of age. There is also a 3D show costing an extra ₹25 (for general public). Open on all days of the year except Ganesha Chathurthi and Deepavali. 
Outdoor activities and sports[edit]
Adventure clubs: Bangalore is bestowed with rock climbers, aqua sportsmen and aero sportsmen. There are several clubs including Nature Admire, Care, Spark, KMA, Capture, Mars, Angel, Wildcraft and Adventure Works.
Camping, Savandurga, Gunjoor Lake, Bhimeshwari, Rangaswamy betta.
Cave exploration, Savandurga, Anthargange, Siddarabetta.
Cycling. Art of Bicycle Trips organizes bicycle tours in and around Bangalore. The tours combine cycling with Indian art, culture and heritage. 
Hiking, Nandi hills; Rangaswamy betta, Bhimeshwari - Muttati.
Hill Climbing, Savandurga, Makalidurga, Kavaledurga (Skandagiri), Kabalidurga, Siddarabetta, Nijakal betta, Shivgange.
Sports clubs. The Koramangala Club in Koramangala, and the Swimming club at the National Games Village (NGV), have facilities such as swimming pools and tennis courts. (updated Feb 2017)
12.97106277.6433813 Trash Trail, Daily Dump, ☏ +91 80 41157311, dailydumpcompost@gmail.com. On this journey through the story of waste, you will meet people who silently clean up and transform all the stuff we throw away. In the process, you will visit places you haven't imagined existed! 
Ultimate Frisbee. Although in a nascent stage, Ultimate Frisbee games are held on Tu Th Sa mornings starting 6:30AM. The teams comprise of players of all skill levels. 
12.9788477.599584 Watch a cricket match, M. Chinnaswamy Stadium (near Cubbon Park). Chinnaswamy Stadium is the home ground of the Indian Premier League (IPL) team Royal Challengers Bengaluru which is reputed for having a large, loyal, and loud fan following. IPL season typically is between March and May every year, matches are played in the evenings and last around 3 hours. Scour the daily newspapers for ticket information - tickets typically get sold out a week before. 
Sujaya Holidays, Mumbai & Thane, ☏ +91 9820447112, sujayatoursandtravels@gmail.com. Sujaya holidays provides all adventure tours around Bangalore at the cheapest rates. Prices start from ₹500 per person. 
Swayourway Travel & Tourism Agency, No 7, R.H. Mishra Estate, Swami Vivekanand Rd, Dahisar East, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400068, ☏ +91 9819941810. 10AM to 8PM. Swayourway India's no.1 Travel & Tourism Company. Explore the Trip of memories like Trekking, Camping, Sightseeing, Adventuring rides and sports. (updated Jul 2019)
Nature and parks[edit]
  Lal Bagh Garden, Bangalore
  Lumbini Garden, Hebbal, Bangalore
Hebbal Lake. It is located in the north of Bangalore at the mouth of National Highway 7, along the junction of Bellary Road and the Outer Ring Road. It was one of the three lakes created in 1537 by Kempe Gowda.
Lumbini Gardens. A public park on the banks of the Nagawara Lake in Bangalore, Karnataka. It contains an eco-friendly boating park and a 12,500 square foot artificial beach and children's pool.
12.9577.595 Lalbagh (Lalbagh botanical Garden) (Metro: Lalbagh (Green)). Garden and lake inside-the lake offers a pleasant view and is home to some water birds   
13.0347577.550576 J. P. Park (Jayaprakash Narayan Biodiversity Park), Mathikere, Near Yashwanthpur Railway Station (11 km (6.8 mi)). The third largest park in Bangalore, covering 85 acres. There are many statues of animals and provision for children's' games. The park includes four lakes, 25 acres of lawns, over 250 varieties of trees and shrubs (including select exotic and aquatic species, and a nursery), a nature centre, an exhibition plaza, and an amphitheatre. (updated May 2015)
13.045677.556417 HMT Area, BEL Junction (18 km (11 mi)). This area is dotted with parks and green layouts. Examples are General Ayyappa Park and Kittur Rani Chennamma Park. The J.P.Park is nearby. Lodges are available at Mathikere and Jalahalli. (updated May 2015)
12.982577.61958 Ulsoor Lake (Halasuru lake). A pleasant lake (updated Jul 2017)
13.0099177.574799 Sankey Tank. A pleasant lake (updated Jul 2017)
12.9094477.3955210 Dodda Alada Mara (Big Banyan Tree). A giant 400-year-old Banyan tree about 28 km (17 mi) from central Bangalore. This single plant covers 3 acres and is one of the largest of its kind. (updated Feb 2017)
12.976977.598911 Cubbon Park (Cubbon Park Queen's Statue & Aquarium) (Metro Purple Line; Opposite to Chinnaswamy Cricket Stadium). A Nice forested area in the heart of the City. The entrance from Queen's Statue forms the tourist attraction owing to the presence of the Government Aquarium and Bal Bhavan, a play area for kids. Puttaani Express a small toy train for kids, runs inside the Bal Bhavan attracts kids from far and near. Vidhana Soudha and Karnataka High Court border the other side of Cubbon Park (updated Feb 2018)
Fairs & exhibitions[edit]
13.1312777.6154812 Aero India. Held in the second week of February every alternate year (the next one is in 2021), this is Asia's premier air show. Spanning 5 days but open to the public only on the last 3 days (F-Su), the show at Yelahanka Air Force Base in the northern part of Bangalore comprises a defence exhibition and air show. Fighter jets from around the world are on flying and on static display. Normally, there are two air shows every day - one in the morning and the other in the afternoon. Tickets can be purchased online or at select outlets - scan the newspapers for more information. (Purchasing a ticket at outlets requires you to show a photo identification and tickets are non-transferable. For the 2011 edition, Pakistani nationals were not permitted to register via the website.) 
12.9905377.5823413 Chitra Santhe (Paintings market). An annual exhibition, held on the first Sunday of every year in January, the Chitra Santhe on Kumara Krupa Road (near Golf Course) brings together artists from all across Karnataka. Paintings, pottery, and sculpture are all on an exhibition-cum-sale. The road is closed for traffic on that day, making it possible to have a leisurely stroll, admiring and buying the items. Prices range from ₹100-20,000. Bargaining is recommended, but not too hard. Pay a fair price. (Credit cards and foreign currency are rarely accepted, so carry sufficient cash in Indian currency). 
12.94577.5678614 Kadlekai Parishe (Peanut fair). Every year, sometime during the months of Nov-Dec, the area around Bull Temple Road in South Bangalore hosts a peanut fair. Centuries ago, the villages in and around this area used to cultivate peanuts and the custom was to dedicate the first crop to Nandi (the Bull at the temple). Although the villages of yore are today residential areas, the tradition continues as peanut farmers congregate to sell their crop. The 2 day traditional fair has many stalls that sell peanuts, trinkets, bangles, pottery, dolls etc. There are also a number of food stalls. 
Flower Show (Biannual). 9AM to 5PM. A bi-annual affair at Lalbagh Botanical Gardens Bangalore, during the Independence Day (August 15th) & Republic Day (January 26th). Various companies display their floral exhibits in this period, normally held from a week before the above mentioned days. Main epicentre would be a Rose arrangement representing a theme, or a heritage structure, which attracts major crowd from around Bangalore. Rs.50/- entry fees. 
Mango Mela. 9AM to 5PM. An annual affair, during the beginning of the summer season, the season for the king of fruits. Normally, Mangoes (raw & ripe), cultivated in the Bangalore rural districts as well as neighbouring Kolar and Chikballapur districts are brought and kept for show as well as sale during this period, at Lalbagh Botanical Gardens. A must visit for mango fans. Rs.30/- entry fees. 
Arts and theatre[edit]
Concerts at Bengaluru Palace Grounds. Check the local listings to see if any concerts are happening. Most international acts happen at Bengaluru Palace Grounds and the venue has hosted Metallica, The Rolling Stones, Bryan Adams, Iron Maiden, Deep Purple, Joe Satriani, Mark Knopfler, Aerosmith, Sting, Uriah Heep, Lamb of God, Megadeth, Machinehead, Scorpions among others. 
Rangashankara, 36/2, 8th Cross, J.P. Nagar, 2nd Phase, ☏ +91 80 26592777, +91 80 26494656. Evening shows start at 7:30PM. Many local groups perform here, although more often shows are presented by traveling groups touring India. Quality of the performances varies, but most plays are worth seeing, especially the ones by Indian playwrights or directors, as they can show you an Indian (or non-western) perspective. Shows are in various languages, so it is a good idea to double-check whether the play is in English before buying or reserving (blocking) tickets. Tickets cost ₹45–100. 
Movies[edit]
Take in a movie at one of the innumerable theaters around the city. Some multiplexes:

Cinemax (Bangalore Central, Bellandur). 
Cinepolis, Royal Meenakshi Mall, Bannerghatta Rd; ETA Mall, Binny Pete; Forum Shantiniketan, Whitefield. 
Gopalan Cinemas, Arch Mall, Mysore Rd,. Gopalan Mall, Mysore Road; Gopalan Mall, Near Jayadeva Hospital, Bannerghatta Road ; Gopalan Mal;, Old Madras Road, Near Baiyappanhalli Metro Station 
Inox theatre, Bangalore Central, JP Nagar, Fame Cinemas, MG Road, Forum Value Mall, Whitefield, Garuda Mall, Magrath Road, Lido Mall, Ulsoor, Mantri Square, Malleshwaram, Garuda Swagath Mall, Jayanagar. 
PVR Cinemas, Forum Mall, Koramangala, Orion Mall, Malleshwaram, The Phoenix Market City Mall, Whitefield; Vega Mall, JD Mara signal. 
Other:

The Alliance Francaise. 
Bangalore Film Society. A club membership (around ₹500/year) is typically required for entrance. Foreign film series and cultural events. 
Goethe Institute (Max Mueller Bhavan), 716, CMH Road Indiranagar 1st Stage (From M.G. Road: Go down Old Madras Road. Turn right before the Epidemic Diseases Hospital onto 100 Foot Road. At the next traffic light take a left onto CMH Road.), ☏ +91 80 25205305. The Goethe-Institut/Max Mueller Bhavan Bangalore (founded in 1960) offers language courses, organises cultural events and has a Library. 
Urvashi Theatre (Urvashi), Lalbagh Road, Bangalore (Near Lalbagh Main gate & MTR). A cool remodified theatre that allows a 1st hand experience in watching movies. One of the oldest theatres and important landmark of the City (updated Feb 2018)
Sampige Theatre (Sampige), Sampige Road, Malleshwaram; Next to Mantri Mall. One of the oldest theatres of Malleshwaram, and an important landmark. (updated Feb 2018)
Spa & massage[edit]



Massage or Prostitution
Beware that many of the "Massage" classifieds in local newspapers may be fronts for prostitution. Prostitution is illegal and if caught in a raid, you may end up spending a night in the cooler before being eligible for bail. Most legitimate spas and massage parlors have detailed websites and are run professionally.


Massages & spas are very much a part of Bangalore's east-meets-west culture, new ones spring up across the city all the time.

The 5th Element, Inner Ring Rd (near Dell office). Spa. All practitioners are from Thailand and offer authentic Thai massage, scrubs, and wraps. 
Aroma Home Spa, Brookefields, ITPL Main Rd (Near Whitefield). Natural eco-friendly products in use. Hydro therapy massage in addition to therapies suited to individual needs. 
Ayur Sukha (Malleswaram.). Very nice, clean and professional spa in a nice neighborhood. 1 hr basic Ayurvedic treatment (massage and steam) is about ₹1,000. 
SPA.ce, Cunningham Rd. Run by an expat Brit offers a variety of massages, scrubs, and facials. 
Sundaythespa, No.627/628, 5th Cross Road, 15th Main, 80 Feet Road, 4th Block, Koramangala Layout, ☏ +91 80-25520757, toll-free: +91 80-25520758, info@sundaythespa.com. Incorporates Ayurvedic, Indian and East Asian practices, offers professional services by well-trained staff. (updated Dec 2016)
Buy[edit]
  Inside a mall in Koramangala, Bangalore
Shopping districts[edit]
Bangalore provides a wide range of options for shoppers. One can buy many things ranging from clothing to electronic goods and vehicles. Being an IT city, Bangalore provides all kind of services but one might find things to be costlier.
Many visitors come to Bangalore searching only for sandalwood carvings and silk saris and so miss out on the true Bangalore shopping experience. Here is a low down on shopping - Bangalore style:

The UB City and Vittal Mallya Road are Page-3 shopping areas. You'll find brands like Versace, Louis Vuitton, Kimaya in the UB City. Vittal Mallya Road has stores like The Collective which is a shop only for men. Armani, Versace, Boss, you name it they have it. There's even Canary Blue and Esprit on the same road.
12.9111277.60011 Bannerghatta Road. Grasshopper is a space that exhibits clothing designs from the most experimental designers in India and also showcases other ideas - lighting design, products, theatre, music - an open space for expression! If that's too boring, you can keep driving and you have a thousand ways that you can take to enjoy the wildlife and the myriad reservoirs strewn across the area - you can still find your very own private haven. (updated Feb 2017)
12.975277.608172 Brigade Road/M.G. Road (M.G. Road station (Metro east-west line) is right next to the intersection of M.G. and Brigade Roads.). The most popular place for tourists. These two roads are filled with shops of every kind, whether it be traditional handicrafts or the latest western wear (this is especially true for Brigade Road). Brigade Road, where British soldiers used to buy their necessities, is now the centre of yuppie Bangalore; you'll see hordes of college students on the road any time of day or night. Stores on Brigade Road include: Planet M (a huge music store with everything), Tommy Hilfiger, Louis Phillipe, Pepe Jeans, Levis, Lee, SanFrisco Jeans, Nike, and Titan (great Indian made watches). There are also many eateries on Brigade road and on the side roads that lead off it. Fast food outlets include KFC (right at the entrance), Pizza Hut (at the other end of the road), and many cafes including the Indian coffee chain Cafe Coffee Day. Also includes a tattoo studio. M.G. Road is short for Mahatma Gandhi road. (updated Feb 2017)
12.9821977.608243 Commercial Street. A legacy of the British is another shopping mecca that sells international brands (similar to Brigade road) alongside locally produced items. Commercial Street has more of a bazaar feel than Brigade Road. In addition, it is famous for its body piercing centers. The price of goods here is very competitive and it is a great place to pick a bargain. (updated Feb 2017)
Sampige Road. The heart of Malleswaram district, connecting Sheshadripuram to IISc. Sampige Road is around 2 km (1.2 mi) long, has a wide range of shops that sells books, electronic items, silk sarees, handicrafts, cloth materials, Hindu pooja materials, sweets and all the trivial things you can buy on earth. Also try Malleswaram 8th cross on Sampige road (aptly named Brigade Road of Malleswram) for a vibrant shopping experience. Sampige Road is also home to best flower market and fruits market in Bangalore. If you are tired of going to individual shops you can go to department stores such as Fabmall, Foodworld and Nilgiris. 
Shopping malls[edit]
Malls typically have higher-end stores retailing apparel, footwear, and consumer electronics. Many malls also have food courts (with international cuisine) and movie theatres. Finding a parking spot for your car may not be easy though, especially on weekends.
The heart of the new mall shopping district is on Victoria Road, with malls like Garuda Mall, Bengaluru Central and Globus, all within easy walking distance.
Some of the more popular malls in Bangalore are:

12.9734577.611254 Bengaluru Central (Bangalore Central), Residency Road. Bengaluru Central is more of a large department store than a mall with separate retailers. 
12.9345977.611265 Forum Mall (on Hosur road, Koramangala suburb). One of the well-known malls in Bangalore in an upscale suburb. Stores range from high international brands to traditional Indian Khadi clothing at the Khadder. The top floor of the mall contains an 11-screen cinema. For eating there is fast food and world cuisines including: Chinese, Vietnamese, Mexican and Italian and Indian. The PVR Cinema hall is here too. (updated Dec 2019)
12.9700477.609686 Garuda Mall. On the corner of McGrath and Commissariat Roads. 
12.9459477.570587 Gandhi Bazaar (in the heart of Basavangudi). One of the oldest shopping areas in Bangalore, Gandhi Bazaar stretches for a short kilometer or so, bordered on both sides by shops selling everything from saris and clothes to plastics and kitchen utensils, fronted by vegetable and fruit stalls. 
12.929577.584518 Jayanagar Shopping Complex. From antique jewelry stores, the authentic gold jewelry stores, saree stores, sweet meat stores, classic Iyengar bakeries, dress stores, and food stores that sell fresh vegetables, fruits, meat, and butter. Most of the products are comparatively cheap and are often value for money. (updated Jul 2020)
12.9668377.611729 Lifestyle (Sony World Junction, Koramangala). A two-story store on Victoria Road in the heart of the new mall shopping district. This was one of the most coveted stores until the malls came along. It's an easy place to go shopping when you don't want too many options to confuse you or when you're tired and don't want to visit too many shops - you can get everything under one roof here. Good for clothes, cosmetics, watches, jewelry, shoes etc. You also get stylish furniture and other home and living items for a decent price. 
12.9916177.5706210 Mantri Square (Metro Green: Sampige Rd). In Malleswaram 
Marathahalli Main Road and Factory Outlets. Some distance from central Bangalore (although not difficult to reach) is Marathahalli (a village in a previous life). The main road of this suburb is now a haven for factory outlets for all major brands. You can expect prices here to be cheaper than in the malls, at least 20-30% price difference but can be up to 50% cheaper when it comes to some of the major denim brands. As if India wasn't cheap enough. Although this is the best place to go to for factory outlet shopping, there are smaller factory outlets scattered across the city. Also look out for sales held by the major brands to get rid of end of season stock (again end of summer or end of monsoon), these are usually advertised in newspapers or look for signs posted on major roads. 
Metro shopping mall (near Yeshwanthpur railway station and ISKCON temple). 
12.9797777.6069611 Safina Plaza. The sale capital of Bangalore, on Infantry Road. Every week there is sale going on of any type. One week it might be home furnishings and the next men's wear. Good place to find some bargains. Many exhibitions are also held here, although there are retailers here too. So for quiet shopping come here (much less crowded than the other malls). Its best to visit during end of season sales (summer, monsoon) or during festivals (New Year, Christmas, Ganesh Chaturthi). 
12.99692377.69686212 Phoenix Marketcity. It is the largest mall in Bangalore by area. There is something for everyone in this mall. This mall has many upscale restaurants, electronic shops, bookstores, toy stores and a large selection of clothes, cosmetics, shoes, etc. (updated Dec 2019)
Markets[edit]
The traditional markets have mom-and-pop stores that sell everything from fruits, vegetables, groceries to electronics, music, and mobile phones.

12.9656377.5763613 KR Market (City Market, Krishna Rajendra Market). The city's largest vegetable and fruit market is in the heart of the city (updated Feb 2017)
Smaller but more lively traditional markets can be found in residential areas such as Gandhi Bazaar, N R Colony, Banashankari, Malleswaram, Jayanagar, JP Nagar & Shivajinagar.
For other food options, you can do your grocery at Nature's Basket or Spar, More, FoodWorld, options are huge, all on the 80 ft (24 m) Road. At the 1st block you can find grocery shops more suited for the local residents, if you want it the traditional way!

Ulsoor Fish Market (Metro Purple: Halasuru). (updated Jan 2018)
Individual stores[edit]
Jewellery[edit]
C. Krishniah Chetty & Sons (Diamond Flagship Store), 2-1 Main Cross Rd (next to Safina Plaza), ☏ +91 80 4000 1869. 14,000 square feet (1,300 m2) dedicated to the finest gold and diamond jewellery, spread over two floors. 
C. Krishniah Chetty & Sons-The Heritage Store, 35 & 36 Commercial St, ☏ +91 80 4000 1869. Dedicated to gold and silver. 
Giantti Luxury Ensemble (at Shop No. C9, Level 2, The Leela Palace), ☏ +91 80 4115 9766. Diamond & gold jewellery along with silver articles and idols. 
Bluestone Site No.89/2, Lava Kusha Arcade, Munnekolal Village, Marathahalli Outer Ring Rd.
Handicrafts[edit]
The Cauvery Arts & Crafts Emporium, 45 MG Rd, ☏ +91 80 2558 1118. A large store, offering a wide selection of some of Karnataka's best hand made products. The carvings made of Mysore sandalwood are an especially good buy. 
Central Cottage Industries Emporium (CCIE), MG Rd. A government run store promoting traditional Indian hand crafts. The CCIE has major outlets in New Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore and Chennai. 
Miras Carpet Industries, No.7, Ground Floor, Suryodai Complex, Old Airport Rd, Kodihalli (Opp. Hotel Leela Palace), ☏ +91 80 4157 1894, +91 80 2521 0786, enquiry@mirascrafts.com. Daily 9AM-9:30PM. Manufacturers and exporters of carpets, rugs, kilims, Indian handicrafts, jewellery, pashmina shawls, cashmere scarfs, silk sarees, etc. Claims to be the biggest dealer of Oriental carpets and rugs in Bangalore, selling high quality and "locally priced" wares. Valet car parking available. (updated Mar 2016)
Chandi - The Divine Gallery, MG Rd (Shop No. 12, First Floor, Public Utility Building), ☏ +91 80 4112 3590, +91 80 4112 3610. Specialising in Indian divine figures in all mediums. Claims to have the biggest collection of Ganeshas in town. High-quality and locally-priced wares, supposedly no pushy salesmanship. 
Kala Madhyam Store', 2nd floor, Flat No 2, Benson Town #77/8, Nandidurg Rd (Benson Cross Rd corner), mail@kalamadhyam.org. Folk and tribal art paintings, handicrafts from across India, clothing for women. Specialises in wall murals of folk and tribal art as well as terracotta. 
Karnataka State Handicrafts Development Corporation, 45 K.S.H.D.C Complex, MG Rd, ☏ +91 80 2558 1118. Specialises in Karnataka handicraft. 
Royal Arts & Crafts, ☏ +91 80 2248 4797. 21 K.H. Rd. Has a particularly wide selection of silk carpets and paper mache products. 
Bookstores[edit]
Gangarams Book Bureau, #3, Church Street, 3rd Floor, ☏ +91 080 2512 7888, gangaramsinternational@gmail.com. M-Sa 10AM-8PM. Since 1977, a destination for booklovers with books in a diverse range from academic, professional and technical to fiction and non-fiction. (updated Sep 2019)
Blossoms, Church St (parallel to MG Rd and nearby Coconut Grove Restaurant), ☏ +91 80 255 9733. There are 3 full floors of those rare, hard to find old books. All 2nd hand, good condition and at low rates. 
The Bookworm (Church Street, opposite Starbucks). This is a small used book store. Good bargains on used and new books are available here. 
Crossword, Residency Rd (ACR Towers, opposite Gateway Hotel), ☏ +91 80 2558 2411-16. A hot spot for books of various genres combined with seating areas, spacious racks, music and movie section, children's section and a coffee shop. A wonderful hangout to read, browse and shop. 
Elloor Library, Blue Cross Chambers, Infantry Rd (close to Commercial St). A circulating library that has a wide range of fiction and non-fiction books, including new titles. Requires membership which includes a deposit. 
Gangarams Indiranagar, 330/9 Axis Road Domlur Inner Ring Rd. Domlur Layout. Near Indira Nagar Flyover, ☏ +91 80 4038 3838, info@gangarams.in. Daily 10AM-8PM. A wide selection of fiction and non-fiction books, including textbooks and professional works, stationery, multimedia, movies, toys, art material and gifts. 
Gangarams Mg road, Triumph Tower, 2nd Floor, 48 Church St (opposite High Gates Hotel and Mainland China; Church Street is parallel to Mahatma Gandhi ("MG") Road), ☏ +91 80 2512 7888, gangarams@vsnl.com. M-Sa. A wide selection of fiction and non-fiction books, including textbooks and professional works. 
Goobes Book Republic, 46-1-1 Church St, Karnataka (in the basement of Church Street Inn, Budget Hotel, near MG Rd), ☏ +91 80 4112 4956, goobesbookrepublic@gmail.com. Secondhand and new books on a wide variety of subjects and a very cost effective library option and buy back used books. 
Higginbothams, 68 MG Rd, ☏ +91 80 2558 7359, +91 80 2558 6574. This bookstore has a good selection of maps, postcards, guides and novels. 
Oxford Book Store (at the Leela Galleria, next to Hotel Leela Palace). Has some of the latest collection of books and magazines but, doesn't offer any discounts. It has a Chai Bar attached offering 69 blends of tea. 
Premier Book Shop, 46/1 Church St (off MG Rd), ☏ +91 80 2558 8570. A venerable institution that has books on every conceivable subject literally stacked from floor to ceiling. Although the store may appear to be utterly chaotic, the owner knows where every piece of his stock lies - just be careful with those elbows, a slight nudge and the whole place will come tumbling down. This store however, will shut down shortly. 
Sapna Book House, 3rd Main Rd, near Kamat Yatri Nivas, Gandhi Nagar (Walking distance from Majestic Bus stand). This is a large bookstore, they also have branches in three other locations Sadashivnagar, Jayanagar, and Indiranagar. Sapna Book House also provides online book delivery. 
Select Bookshop, Brigade Rd (off Brigade Rd Behind Curzon Court Hotel). Used to be the only old bookstore. Mr Murthy, who runs the bookstore, is one of the most knowledgeable people. His grandfather started the bookstore. He also has a collection of lithographs, stained glass paintings and collectors copies of antique books. 
The Strand book stall, Dickenson Rd (1st Floor, Manipal Centre), ☏ +91 80 2558 0000. Best known for the latest releases in art, design, architecture and all at good prices. 
Streelekha, 33/1-9, Thyagaraja Layout, Jaibharath Nagar, ☏ +91 80 2549 2783. This is a great bookstore to explore the feminist literature and activism that is being produced in India, as well as other texts on the research and work of Indian NGOs. The atmosphere is relaxing and inviting. 
Tata Book House. At the Indian Institute of Science, Malleswaram. Has a large collection of technical books, on which it offers a flat 20 percent discount. Lots of books in a small place. Also worth visiting just because it is in IISc. 
Boutiques[edit]
Apart from the numerous malls that have taken Bangalore by storm, the essential element and soul of the city comes through in its myriad small and unique boutiques that are all over the city, usually tucked away though. Have tried to list the must check out stores.

Arnav, ☏ +91 80 2656 8416. The quaint little jewellery store at Ashoka Pillar, Jayanagar makes for very interesting jewellery buys, a range of antique, restored, contemporary and fusion jewellery are on display. They could help you design a piece of jewellery to suit your needs, an in-house jewellery consultant could help you choose your jewellery. 
Aura Creations, Shop No.3, Plot No. 2 Nandagokula Layout, Shampura Main Rd, ☏ +91 85 5363 7531. Designer boutique with exclusive dress materials. 
Chilli Billi, ☏ +91 92 4179 9105. Great for women's westernwear', especially the dresses, good collection of bags, shoes and jewellery. They also offer home decor solutions. 
Levitate-InDiA in A RooM, 100 Ft. Rd, ☏ +91 80 6452 8190, +91 98 4531 7776, levitateindia@gmail.com. Silver & costume handcrafted Jewellery, Bohemian apparel, Indian kitsch, lifestyle accessories. 
Mahendra Textiles, ☏ +91 80 4124 9900. Sarees and dress materials from Surat, Mumbai, Kolkata, Rajasthan, Varanasi, Kerala and Sri Lanka. 
Marmalade, Magrath Rd (adj to Spratt Salon; left before Coffee Day, on Brigade Rd Extn), ☏ +91 80 4122 1814. Loads of affordable young designer wear. 
Native Place (behind Museum Rd Post Office, Museum Road). Loads of interesting merchandise, crafts made by NGOs, c/o The Only Place Restaurant. 
One G, ☏ +91 80 4123 1231. (Jewellery) Hatworks Boulevard, Cunningham Rd. 
President's Groom Concepts, B.v.k.iyengar Rd and Kamraj Rd, ☏ +91 80 4147 0910. Two menswear fashion stores. Fine fabrics for made-to-order and a large ready-to-wear collection. Bespoke suits and made to order clothing including tuxedos, business wear to traditional Indian kurtas and sherwanis. 
Sakhi by Chandras, 6th main, HAL 2nd stage, Indiranagar, ☏ +91 80 4115 5551. Combines traditional fabrics and craftsmanship with contemporary themes. Sakhi’s sarees, salwars and kurtis combine kanchivaram, tussar, chiffon, georgette, crêpe, organza and cotton with traditional techniques such as cut work, block print, kalamkari, badla, mirror work, chamki (sequins) and embroidery in a mélange of colours. 
Stritva near ITPL, 294, 8th main, BEML Layout, ITPL Main Rd, ☏ +91 963 222 1615. Sells readymade salwar suit, kameez, kurtas, dress material, sarees and nightwear. The store has a good collection at good prices. 
Music and movies[edit]
Habitat, Church Street, Off Brigade Road. Tiny compared to other retail music/movie stores, it's a delight for lovers of good music especially Jazz. Has an excellent and varied selection of DVDs for rent as well, though membership is closed. 
Electronics[edit]
The Croma electronics showroom is opposite Lifestyle Mall. eZone, Reliance Digital, Pai, Sony, Panasonic electronics showrooms are all within the kilometre from here. So this is the ideal location if you want to do a survey before making your next expensive LCD/LED TV purchase.

Learn[edit]
Hinduism[edit]
 The Art of Living, Art of Living International Center, Ved Vignan Maha Vidya Peeth,21st Km, Kanakapura Road, Udayapura, ☏ +91 80 67262626, +91 80 6726262627, +91 80 6726262628, info@vvmvp.org. The campus is also the focal point of many service projects such as rural development and education, organic farming initiatives, scientific research into the benefits of ‘Sudarshan Kriya’ While at the ashram, one cannot miss the Satsangs that are held every evening. Satsangs are gatherings where scattered minds unite through music, meditation, and wisdom to experience a higher state of consciousness. People from all over the world who know different languages participate in the singing of bhajans, or the repetitive chanting of a word or a verse. 
 ISKCON, ISKCON Sri Radha Krishna-Chandra Temple,Hare Krishna Hill, Chord Rd, ☏ +91 80-23471956, +91 80-23578346, fax: +91 80-23578625. The International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON) temple in Bangalore city is huge cultural complex that was inaugurated in 1997 to carry out the vision of A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the Founder-Acarya of ISKCON, to promote Vedic culture and spiritual learning. ISKCON Sri Radha Krishna-chandra Mandir attracts visitors from different parts of the world and it is more than a place of rituals. However, due to the huge flow of foreign visitors, it has mostly become a heavily commercialized place and less of a religious center. 
Buddhism[edit]
 Choe Khor Sum Ling, Ashwini, No. 24, 1st Floor, Domlur Layout, ☏ +91 80 41486497, info@cksl.in. This Tibetan Buddhist meditation and study centre is in Domlur Layout near Shanti Sagar Restaurant on Airport Road. CKSL is a center for the study and practice of Mahayana Buddhism following the lineage and example of Lord Buddha. The Centre, whose name means 'The Three Turnings of the Wheel of Dharma' was founded in 2003 by Lama Zopa Rinpoche under the guidance of HH the XIVth Dalai Lama. The Centre offers courses in various Buddhist meditation techniques and teachings on different aspects of Buddhism. Teachings are offered free to the public and are conducted in English or in Tibetan (with translation in English). In addition to regular teachings, every few weeks the Centre invites senior Lamas to give talks on important aspects of the Buddhist path. Such talks are also accompanied by instructions and initiations by the Lama into different meditation practices. 
 Maha Bodhi Society, 14 Kalidasa Road, Gandhinagar, ☏ +91 80 2250684, mahabodhi@vsnl.com. This temple has a very active schedule. There are teachings on the Dharma in English on the first two and last Sundays of every month from 9:30-11:30AM, while on the 3rd Sunday there is a meditation retreat. Anyone is welcome to attend. The temple also has a good library and a beautiful garden - a great place to retreat from the hustle and bustle of the metropolis outside. 
 Thubten Lekshey Ling (Dharma Subhashita), ☏ +91 98 80296930, info@lekshey.org. Nyingma Tibetan Buddhist meditation centre founded by the late His Holiness Pema Norbu (Penor) Rinpoche. The centre is close to MG Road on Ulsoor road, on the side of Manipal Centre. The centre conducts meditation classes, spiritual discourses and advanced study programs. Weekend teachings in meditation and philosophy are offered by lamas from Namdroling Monastery, Bylakupee. 
Work[edit]
Indians[edit]
The best way to find employment in Bangalore is through job fairs, job portals, applying directly to companies of interest, and through headhunters.




Non-Indian Citizen Employment Regulation
Indian regulations may require that any foreign national who is employed in India earn at least US$25,000/year. This is exempted for (a) Ethnic chefs, (b) Language teachers (other than English language teachers) / translators and (c) Staff working for Embassy/High Commissions. Check your compensation offer so that you meet this requirement and are eligible for an employment visa.  Some foreign nationals are employed at salaries less than this, though, typically in the NGO sector.


Being referred as Silicon Valley of India, the city provides plethora of employment opportunities to youngsters from different corners of India.

Non-Indians[edit]
With a little hard work and persistence finding a job is quite possible in Bangalore. Most of the available positions are in the IT field but not necessarily IT based. Several expats do marketing, quality assurance, accent training and translation among other things. All jobs in India require an employment visa which must be obtained abroad and sponsored by the hiring company in India. In general, the salary for expats is very high compared to the local Indian wage. The best resource for jobs is through the expat community. Ask around but a good place to meet expats is the Sunday brunches at the 5-star hotels or at the numerous coffee shops in and around the MG Road area.

Eat[edit]
Bangalore has a wide variety of food options. Foreigners will want to look for cleanliness in choosing a place to eat. Also don't expect the exterior to be too fancy, observe the cleanliness of the inside and the servers when choosing a place to eat! Eating options include high end restaurants to chains to temples to mom and pop shops and of course street vendors! Restaurants usually label if they serve only vegetarian(veg or pure veg) or both veg and non-veg cuisine. If you haven't been in India long, it is safer to take bottled water. But juices and other drinks are usually ok.
There are numerous established south Indian joints that serve authentic dosais and idlis such as MTR, CTR, Vidyarthi Bhavan and so on! Make sure to try out the classic Benne Masala Dose and a cup of filter coffee at one of these places.
There are also hundreds of young coconut and sugar cane juice stands! A nice refresher as you go around town! Both are good for keeping cool and energized. A coconut goes for ₹25- 30 (some stands may have smaller coconuts for ₹10-15). Sugar cane juice runs ₹10-15 per cup.
Bangalore is far from the sea, and as such the quality of seafood can vary. Some of the higher end and popular seafood places
manage this well, but foreign travellers may want to tread a bit carefully.
Foreigners might want to only drink bottled water and eat only chutneys that are made with bottled or filtered water. Also, beef is forbidden to be on the menu in Karnataka restaurants.
The 80 ft (24 m) Road is the Eat Street of Koramangala. Pizza Hut, Domino's, KFC, Taco Bell, Au Bon Pain are all found here. There are also many non-chains serving local Indian cuisine. Chandni Chowk is a great option if you want the rural Punjabi dhaba experience.
Wisdom Cafe, near the AlienWare showroom is a really cosy place to have some snacks or lunch. So is the Hole in the Wall cafe, on the back street behind Maharaja Hotel. Serves great coffee and English breakfast. So does Cafe Terra, near Wipro park crossing. Adjacent to it is a really popular food join called Little Home. It serves nice North Indian food at a very reasonable price. It's really popular with the young working populace. Naturals Ice cream parlour is a hit with the hip crowd; on weekend nights you may find queues outside.

Budget[edit]
Bangalore has hundreds of fast food joints serving South Indian vegetarian food. They usually are identified with small round steel tables and diners standing around them having food. Dosas, idlis, vada's, curd rice, Vegetable Pulao, rice with sambar, lemon rice are usually standard fare. Quality widely varies, since most of them cater to working people.

The Adiga's chain. Restaurants to the south of Bangalore. Prominent among them are in: Jayanagar 4th Block, take the road facing BHS First Grade College, Basavanagudi. 
Adiga's Park, 585, 10th Main, 42nd cross, 5th Block Jayanagar. 
Adiga's Foodline, 502, 40th Cross, 8th block. 
Adiga's Delicacy, 105 Dickenson's road, Manipal Centre. 
Adiga's Majestic, (next to Fkcci Bldg), KG Rd. 
Adiga's Nalapaka, (across from HSBC Complex), Bannerghatta, Arikere. 
Anupams Coastal Express, Shivanand Circle. They make fantastic fish dishes. Neer Dosa with Chicken Pulimunchi, kori roti and chicken ghee roast are some things you really cannot miss. 
Anand Bhavan, Koramangala. This is a mostly breakfast and sweet place. It has many native foods such as Dosa, Idli, Vada, and Chutney. It has a wide range of Indian sweets such as Jalebis, and Rasgullas.
Brahmin's Coffee Bar (off ShankarMutt in Shankarapuram, Basavanagudi), ☏ +91 87226 64284. Famous for idly, vada and its delicious chutney. You also get khaarabath. Don't expect sambar for the vada here. 
12.9982677.569451 Central Tiffin Room(CTR) (Shri Sagar), 152, 7th Cross, 3rd Main, Margosa Rd, Malleswaram, ☏ +91 80 2331 7531. Another landmark hotel, dishing out some divine 'Benne masala dosa', which literally melts in the mouth. Famous for its Butter Masala Dosa. (updated Feb 2016)
Coconut Grove, Church St. Appams and Kerala parottas with a chicken sauce dish. Their lunch offer for ₹80 is also really good. A pretty good choice for reasonably priced quality seafood. Coco-Grove the outdoor 'beer cafe' extension is also worth a look. 
Corner House, Residency Rd, BTM Rd, Koramangala, Airport Rd, Whitefield Rd, Marthahalli and Shivananda Circle, ☏ +91 80 2558 3262. One of the best ice cream parlours offering a variety of treats. Their famed 'Death by Chocolate' (popularly known as DBC) is a must for all chocolate lovers and has attained a cult status. Can be tricky to find a spot during peak times and you may find yourself being 'encouraged' by the staff to leave quickly once you do. 
Fanoos (adjoining Johnson Market, off Brigade Rd). One of the joints for getting sheekh (beef) rolls in Bangalore. They come in various sizes- sheekh roll, sheekh jumbo, sheekh mambo, sheekh rambo and sheekh sambo- the latter of which is almost 2 in thick. There are other options like chicken, mutton and paneer rolls as well as kababs and shawarma. ₹30-100 per head. 
Hotel Empire (Other locations on Centre Street and Koramangala), 14 Pottery Road Richards Town (Next to Museum Inn), ☏ +91 80 40 414141. 10AM-3PM. Indian, Chinese, and Middle eastern cuisine until late night. Try the butter chicken, chicken kababs and parathas. Both the non-vegetarian and vegetarian food are good here and well priced. 
Hotel Janatha, 8th Cross Rd, Malleswaram. Makes some of the best vada sambhar and masala dosa in town. 
Indian Coffee House, Infantry Road. (updated May 2015)
Janani, J.P.Nagar. A great place to have breakfast, lunch or dinner, you can have idli and sambar for ₹10 and a cup of tea for ₹8, a north Indian roti curry for ₹32. If you want to have good Punjabi food, go upstairs and get a good meals under ₹150. 
Java, ☏ +91 80 4137 8888. G block of Diamond District apartment complex in Kodalli on the old Airport Rd. A hidden gem that serves buffet lunch and dinner for ₹150 on weekdays, ₹250 on weekends (prices 2008). The buffet consists of North and South Indian dishes and caters to vegetarians and to non-vegetarians. Reasonably priced (₹90-120 entree) a-la-carte selection is available outside of lunch and dinner hours. 
Kanti Sweets. KG Rd, Majestic, Malleswaram Circle, RT Nagar. Very good samosas, kachoris and North Indian sweets like rasmalai. Rapidly expanding chain, so there are plenty of branches all over the city now, which serve parathas and other food items as well. The main branch in Majestic is the best, and serves only samosas, kachoris and sweets. ₹10-50 per head. 
KC Das. This is a chain of Bengali sweets shops in Bangalore. The one on Church St is perhaps the most visible and famous but there are outlets on Coles Rd, BTM Layout. 
Kohinoor, Brigade Rd. Serves very reasonably priced Kerala Muslim style food. 
Lake View Milk Bar, MG Rd, ☏ +91 80 2558 7410. Excellent ice creams, club sandwiches and burgers. 
12.95518677.585562 Mavalli Tiffin Room (MTR), 11 Lal Bagh Rd, ☏ +91 80 2222 0022, +91 80 22221706. One of the very old traditional breakfast places in Bangalore. There are a few people who have been having their breakfast at MTR every day for the past 15 years. Closed between 2:45-3:30PM. Expect a long wait on weekends. Traditional 12-course Karnataka lunches are also available here for around ₹90 per head. Advance reservations recommended at weekends. Rava idlis, dosas and bisi bele bath are excellent. It has maintained its quality over the years and is very famous. It is on the road perpendicular to Lal bagh main gate. (updated Oct 2018)
Nandini. The Andhra fast food chain serves some excellent biriyani and chicken dishes. 
New Shanti Sagar, 80 Foot Rd. This is an reasonably reliable chain of vegetarian south Indian restaurants. Branches scattered all over the city, notably in Koramangala Jayanagar, Domlur. ₹50-200. 
Richies, MM Rd (Off Mosque Rd). Serves the kind of biryani that is the Bangalore original. It is midway on MM Rd, and hard to miss because of the crowds that throng its takeaway counter. One visits Richies only for the food—tables and chairs made of synthetic wood, and dim light from gaudy chandeliers don’t exactly make for great ambiance. A motley bunch of diners cram the place for lunch and dinner (they have added 2nd and 3rd floors). The biryani here is delicious, and you must love meat to love Richies. The menu is limited; but the mutton and chicken biryani stand out and they are not flavoured with the same masala, or heaven forbid, rice, their kababs are something nice and unique too. 
Savera Tea Shop. 24 hr tea shops near Russell Market in Shivajinagar and on MG Rd. Good place to go for a cup of tea in the dead of the night. Serves tea, Suleimani (honey+lemon) tea and a variety of biscuits. ₹3-15 
Shettara Beedi (food street). The entire street adjoining the famous VB Bakery at V V Puram is Bangalore's miniature version of Kuala Lumpur's Jalan Alor foodstalls. A haven for anyone who enjoys hawker fare, one can stall-hop and have a variety of snacks that'll satisfy even the most ravenous hunger and spend less than ₹100 in total. Some of the must-try dishes are dum-root and butter-bun congress at VB Bakery. The dosas, obbattu (sweet pancake), akkirotti (rice pancake), fried bondas, butter-gulkand, and masala-pepsi available at the various stalls are also delicious. The street comes alive only in the evenings (after 6PM) and that only vegetarian fare is available here. 
Shezan, Lavelle Rd and Cunningham Rd, ☏ +91 80 2224 9319, +91 80 2224 9667. Indian, Chinese and Continental cuisines with a good menu choice where beef, fish, prawn, mutton and chicken meat are available. Excellent steaks. 
Shiv Sagar, Narayan Pillai St (off Commercial St), ☏ +91 80 509-8892. Don't get put off by the location, It's a great place to eat. 
SLV chain. Prominent among them are in: Banashankari 2nd stage, opposite BDA park and the one in J.P.Nagar 2nd Phase near Ragigudda Temple 
Sree Krishna. Fast food a little further from the road connecting Lalbagh Westgate with Basavanagudi. 
Udupi Garden, 16th Main BTM Layout. Simple Udupi restaurant. Serves very good south Indian dishes at nominal prices. Also serves north Indian food. 
Upahara Darshini, DVG Rd, Basavanagudi. Another of Bangalore's new found Darshinis dishing out top notch masala dosa and Vada Sambhar. 
13.0056577.569243 Veena Stores, Margosa Rd, 15 Cross, Malleswaram. This place has some of the best Idlis and Vadas in this part of the world. They also make other dishes but Idli and Vada are mainstay. Don't expect to sit and eat because there is no seating. Stand and eat. Best time to go is mornings for breakfast before they run out of the day's stock. Try before 8AM although they are open some part of the day and evening. 
Vidhyarthi Bhavan (off Gandhi Bazar in Basavanagudi). A gastronomic haven offering some of the best masala dosa in the world. This quaint little place is so famous that it has not even bothered to change its age-old sign board, and who needs it anyway, the aroma wafting through the air is a good enough indication that you are in the vicinity of the place. Get there early for a breakfast, there's always a bee-line for places to sit. 
Mid-range[edit]
100ft Restaurant, 100 Foot Rd. Indra Nagar. Westernised cooking, but notably better than any other pasta serving restaurant in the area. The restaurant is a bit of a hybrid of store/restaurant. ₹300-500. 
Alibaba Cafe & Restaurant, ☏ +91 80 4091 7163. Frazer Town. Arabian, Persian and Bhatkali cuisine described as "An Arabian Lake in the Indian Ocean". A themed restaurant with the feel of Arabia, Persia and India. The "Shaiya Biryani" of the Bhatkali cuisine, the Al faham chicken barbeque out of the Arabian cuisine and the chicken Jujeh kabab from the Persian cuisine are all recommended. 
Caesar's Restaurant, MG Rd. Indian and continental food. Ambiance is good though the food is tad expensive. Parking is a problem. 
Canopy, PU Building, M.G. Rd. Open air, multi-cuisine North-Indian food. Cooking techniques date back to the independence era offering the unique taste. Great outdoor ambiance in the middle of the central business district. ₹125-750 
Ebony, MG Rd (on the 13th floor of the tallest building on MG Rd, Utility building). Stylish eatery with excellent evening views of the city. Service is a bit slow, but the ambiance makes it worth the wait. Book ahead for a terrace seat. ₹200-400 
The Egg Factory, St.Marks Rd, ☏ +91 80 4211 0041. Multi-cuisine, The menu, as the name suggests, is all based on the indispensable egg. Its also modelled on a factory with functional chairs and a menu that looks like an instruction manual. Its open for all day dining. Egg dishes from all over the world, including omelttes, scrambles, French toast, curries, sub's, pasta & desserts. Don't miss the fantastic huevos rancheros here, they make it as good as in Mexico. Innovative drinks, try the Chlorophyll Fix, it looks and sounds weird, but tastes like heaven. Highly relaxed service. 
Grill Maximus, 17th cross 4 main HSR Layout. Famous for the Mediterranean cuisine.Also serve Arabian Indian and Italian Food. Only A la carte menu is available. ₹200-500 
12.9757977.601474 Koshy's, St. Marks Rd (Below Church St). A Bangalore institution, serving a smattering of Western favorites (like fish and chips) along with the usual South Indian fare in a bohemian-for-India atmosphere. On weekends, they serve up greasy Western-style breakfast, including omelettes and Bombay (i.e, French) Toast. Appam and stew is their Sunday breakfast special and a must eat. Turn right at the entrance for the more expensive (and decidedly less charming) A/C room. ₹50-200. Smoky, with sluggish service, and not particularly clean Koshy's still has plenty of character and history but its getting harder to justify their skyrocketing prices. 
Little Italy, 100 Foot Rd. Indiranagar. A chic Italian vegetarian restaurant, faddish and over priced. Sometimes the staff switch off A/C if the tables are less than half-filled. 
Mainland China, Church St (Near Museum Rd), ☏ +91 80 2227 7722, +91 90 2224 5864. Upscale Chinese food. Good, fairly authentic food and excellent service. Serves a decent lunch buffet. Also new outlet on 100ft Road, Indiranagar. ₹500-800. 
Pinxx, Manipal centre (off MG Rd). A great place for Breakfast, lunch and dinner buffet. ₹200-400 per head. 
Le Rock Pub Cafe, Rest House Rd (Off Brigade Rd), ☏ +91 80 4123 1001. Hot coffee to chilled Kingfisher beer on the tap awesome cocktails and even hand rolled Havana cigars. Salads, sandwiches, jacket baked potatoes to entrees. LRC also offers an Oxy Bar, Bangalore's first. 
Sahib Sindh Sultan, Level 2, Forum Mall, Hosur Rd, Koramangala, ☏ +91 80 2206 7878. Train-themed restaurant with a delicious, upscale menu. It is supposed to showcase NWFP. Their kakori kebabs are excellent. It also serves wine with the food. Expect a long wait. Or book ahead and roam around the mall or grab a few drinks from the adjoining Firangi Paani. ₹150-500 
Samarkand, Gem Plaza, 66, Infantry Rd (East of Central St), ☏ +91 80 4111 3366. North West frontier food (i.e., kebabs, Afghani) in a kitschy atmosphere but the food is great. You will need to book on weekends. ₹300-600. 
Sue's Food Place, Krishna Temple Rd, Indira Nagar. A Caribbean style restaurant run by Sue (Susan John from Trinidad and Tobago). It has an excellent buffet. Their Jamaican jerk chicken, salads and desserts are lovely. A la carte menu is available on certain days. ₹200-500 
1947 Restaurant. Shop No:47, 4th Floor, 15th Cross Rd, Above Girias, Malleshwaram, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560003
Splurge[edit]
Bengaluru, La Classic Hotel Extraordinaire, Plot# 158, Yadavanahalli, Hosur Main road, Attibele (Opp. Applicomp(India) Ltd.), ☏ +91 80 3910 1000, +91 80 3910 1111. The only fine dining multi-cuisine restaurant outside Electronic City and on the way to Hosur caters to buffet breakfast, lunch and dinner apart from a selection from an international menu. 
Blue Ginger, Taj West End (just next door to Blue Bar). High-end Vietnamese restaurant with a beautiful setting and excellent food. 
Cafe Mozaic, 41/3 MG Rd (in the Taj Residency). Western-style dining in a casual atmosphere with some pool-side seating. Sundays before 3:30PM, there is an all-you-can-eat/drink champagne brunch for ₹1,000. 
Grasshopper, 45 Kalena Agrahara, Bannerghata Rd, ☏ +91 80 2659-3999, +91 98 4545-2646. Freshly prepared seven course meal served on the table. Reservation required. Closed on Mondays. 
Graze, Taj Residency, MG Rd. Has some of the best creative continental you will get in Bangalore. 
I.Talia, Park Hotel, Opposite 1 MG, Old Madras Rd. Has the best Italian food in town 
Karavalli, Residency Rd (at the Gateway Hotel), ☏ +91 80 2558-4545. Mangalorean, Goa, Karwar, and Kerala style cuisine. Best Indian food you will get when visiting BLR. 
The Leela Palace Bengaluru Dining. All-you-can-eat/drink brunch on Sunday is ₹2,000. They have 4 restaurants, Citrus Lounge (Brasserie kitchen), Zen (Pan Asian), Library Bar (serves all cuisine) and Jamavar (Authentic Indian). Generally overpriced compared to the Taj outlets (Blue Ginger, Graze, Karavalli) (updated Oct 2018)
Monsoon, Park Hotel, Old Madras Rd (Next to Taj Residency). 24 hr cafe with a variety of Continental Dishes, Indian, South East Asian and Mediterranean. Ideal location for private parties. 
Olive Beach, Wood St. A long time favourite that will serve you Italian meats and cheese in a nice setting, this is still among Bangalore's best. 
The Raj Pavilion, ITC Windsor Manor, Golf Course Rd.. 24/7 restaurant that offers the taste of the British Raj. Anglo-Lucknowi, Far East and Continental cuisine is served. Amongst the best in Bangalore. 
Sunny's, 34 Vittal Mallya Rd (at Embassy Diamante), ☏ +91 80 5132-9366, +91 80 5132-9391. Among the best restaurants in Bangalore. Try the starters, salads and pasta is fine here. Hot sandwiches for lunch. Also has a branch at Indira Nagar. About ₹1,200 for a 3-course meal for two, excluding drinks. 
Regional cuisine[edit]
Kadambam, Bull Temple Road, near Ramakrishna Ashram; West of Chord Rd (near Modi Eye Hospital in Rajajinagar). 
Kamat Yatrnivas, Gandhinagar; Bull Temple Road, Basavanagudi. Serves special N Karnataka meals with jowar (Sorghum) rotis. They now have a branch on Bull Temple Road where they have local artists perform when you have dinner. 
Maiya's, 30th Cross Rd, Jayanagar 4 Block; 11th Cross Malleshwaram; Sajjan Rao Circle, Basavanagudi, ☏ +91 80 4341 4400. Features a great amount of South Indian cuisine, and then lets you buy some more to take home. And in case that you don't like it, there are more places upstairs that have different cuisine (Jayanagar branch only). 
MTR 1924, Mini Forest, JP Nagar; St. Marks Road; Indiranagar;. New age chain from the folks who run Mavalli Tiffin Rooms (MTR) on Lalbagh Road. 
Nalapaka, Rajajinagar. Serves special N Karnataka meals with jowar (Sorghum) rotis, Holige (stuffed sweet rotis). Known for the distinctive Butter Dosa and different varieties of coconut chutneys. 
South Indies, Indiranagar; Infantry Rd, ☏ +91 80 4163 6363, +91 80 4163 6362. An upscale South Indian restaurant in Bangalore, that gives you a taste of authentic south Indian cuisine in an ambience that is equally tasteful. 
UpSouth, Mantri Square, Mallesharam; Orion Mall, Malleshwaram; Ecospace, Bellandur; 60 ft. Road, Koramangala, ☏ +91 80 2266 7378. A quick service restaurant with an upbeat, contemporary look. Be it the vibrant, youthful interiors or the presentation of food in the form of combos, Upsouth is all set to break the dull clutter. 
European[edit]
Cafe Y, Langford Rd (Near Prestige Elgin, Hosur Rd-Langford Rd junction), ☏ +91 80 5114 4561. Amazing sizzlers and steaks, nice ambiance. 
Friends Fast Food, Jyoti Nivas College Rd, Koramangala (300 m from Forum). Great Conti food at college prices. Casa Picola fans will like this one. 
Herbs & Spices, 80 Foot Rd (Above Planet M, 100 m north of Reliance Fresh). On. Great pasta, pizza, and desserts. 
Maharashtrian food[edit]
Kollapuri's, 429/31 30th Cross, 4th Block Jaya Nagar (Near Jain Mandir), ☏ +91 80 4121 1693, +91 80 2653 5207. An authentic Maharashtrian hotel run by Savaji. It serves bhakri, chapati and "Sheckle Edme" special Savaji stuffed roti with spicy sabjis and meat or other non veg items 
Rajvardhan Foods, 1291 25th Main Road, 9th Block Jaya Nagar East (Near Big Bazaar), ☏ +91 98 8630 3088, +91 98 8630 3089. Best known for its vadapav, sabudana vada, khichdi. It also offers bhakri, thalipeeth. The snacks and other food offered here is comparatively expensive. This is because it is Bangalore's only authentic Maharashtrian food outlet. It also serves food fresh, only prepared after placing the order, so the wait and price is compensated. The food quality is excellent. 
Odia food[edit]
Dalama, #37, 6th block, Koramangala, 100 ft Rd (near Kamat Hotel, Koramangala), ☏ +91 80 4166 0921. Authentic Odia cuisine including vegetable curries, chapati, meat, fish, prawn, crab and chicken delicacies. 
South Karnataka[edit]
Halli Mane, 3rd Cross, Malleswaram (close to Malleswaram Circle). Truly authentic and traditional Kannada style food. 
Janatha Hotel, 8th Cross, Malleshwaram. Another great place, famous for its butter masala dosas and vadas. 
Kamat Lokaruchi, Mysore Rd (just before Channapatna). Amazing food and ambience. Authentic Mangalorean meals. 
Kamat Yatrinivas, Majestic; All around the city. Authentic Mangalorean meals. 
Karavalli, Residency Rd (at the Gateway Hotel), ☏ +91 80 2558 4545. Mangalorean, Goa, Karwar, and Kerala style cuisine. 
Konkan, 6th cross, 6th Block, Koramangala, ☏ +91 80 2552 1530. Mangalorean and Goan style cuisine. 
Kodial's, 8th Cross Malleswaram. For authentic vegetarian Konkani cuisine. 
Kudla, Ramanashree Comforts, Richmond Rd. For seafood, serves excellent dishes. 
New Krishna Bhavan, 1st Cross Malleswaram. For authentic Mangalorean food, reasonably priced. Try the neer dosa and badam halwa. 
The Palms, 33 Church St (at the Highgates Hotel), ☏ +91 80 2559 7172. Mangalorean, Coorgi, and Malabari style. (shut for renovations) 
Upaahara Darshini, Jayanagar 3rd Block; DVG Road, Gandhi Bazaar. One of Bangalore's oldest food joints. Amazing dosas. 
Vidyarthi Bhavan, 32 Gandhi Bazaar, ☏ +91 80 2667 7588. Another very old and traditional breakfast place, exclusively known for its Masala Dosa. Similar to MTR, you can find people who have been having breakfast here since times immemorial. 
Bengali[edit]
6 Ballygunge Place, 1st Fl., 612, 12th Main, Indira Nagar (above Café Coffee Day). It has been rated best Bengali restaurant by times food guide Bengaluru. It serves excellent fish (esp their chital peti roast), dab chingri and luchis. (Its mocktails are avoidable however). Prices are slightly on higher side. May cost around ₹1,000 for two but the food quality is good. The owners have also added Calcutta-style chaat on top floor. ₹1,000 for two. 
36 Chowringhee Lane, 100ft Rd, BTM Layout (opp Reliance Fresh), ☏ +91 80 4124 0979. Authentic Bengali Cuisine. 
Bangaliana, 355, 1st 'B' Main, 7th Block, Koramangala (opp. HDFC Bank), ☏ +91 80 2571 1058. Authentic Bengali Delicacies (Breakfast, Lunch and Dinner) Restaurant, Take-away, Catering. Specialities: fish, mutton chicken and, of course, sweets. 
Bhojohori Manna, 668/B 6th Block, Koramangala Club Rd, ☏ +91 80 2550 3666. Free home delivery 
The Esplanade, KHB Colony, ☏ +91 80 4092 7878. Offers authentic Bengali cuisine. They also have a continental menu. 
Oh! Calcutta, St Mark's Rd. Part of a chain of restaurants across the country, and the best Bengali food available in the city albeit pricier than the other options. 
Sonar Bangla, 88/1, Shubh Arcade, 1st floor, 16th Cross, Margosa Rd, Malleswaram, ☏ +91 80 3367622. The restaurant undertakes orders of authentic Bengali food for gourmets who fancy a whole meal and also delivers it at the doorstep. Fish is considered sacred in the coastal state and is consumed universally. So, all fish lovers can take heart as the non-vegetarian cuisine is delivered, but not served at the restaurant. 
Andhra[edit]
Bheemas, Church St. If you have the penchant for spice this place is meant for you. 
Nagarjuna Chimney, Residency Rd; Jayanagar 3rd Block (near Old Galaxy Theatre; near ICICI Bank). Possibly have a few more branches elsewehere in Bangalore. The biryani is great, as are their meals which are served ritually on a banana leaf. Reach early for lunch, for there are always hordes waiting. 
R₹, off Brigade Rd. A renovation of the vintage R₹, the fun doubles here with the double storeyed restaurant, one serving Andhra and the other Hyderabadi cuisines. There's also alcohol, all the more reason to indulge on a Saturday afternoon. 
Tamil[edit]
Anjappar Restaurant, #50, 100 Ft. Road, 4th Block Kormangala. Chettinad cuisine 
Annachi, 100 Ft. Road, Indiranagar. Serves vegetarian and non-vegetarian food. Has some good chettinad style dishes. 
Annapoorna, Ulsoor (near Sai Baba Temple in Ulsoor. Need to get down at Ulsoor police station). Pure vegetarian food in Tamil style. 
Krishna Kafe, Koramangala (beside Anand Sweets). Traditional Chennai-style food. Dosas, idlis, idiyappam and the like with authentic Tamil sambar and chutney. This place is vegetarian-only. A vegetarian meal will cost you around ₹80. ₹40-100. 
Pongal, Jivan Bima Nagar (near the Indiranagar telephone exchange). Tamil Nadu food. Lots of dosa varieties, Podi dosa, parotta with kurma are good. Ambience is not that great, but this place is for those who need a quick bite without a big pinch on the wallet. 
Ponnuswamy, Koramangala (near the National Games Village, opposite to Legends of Rock), ☏ +91 80 4151 1919. Authentic south Tamil nadu food. Try the biryani and sukka fry. No alcohol or smoking. Also at Residency Rd., next to Imperial Hotel. 
Ice Cream Parlours[edit]
Corner House, 1 Airport Rd; All around the city, ☏ +91 96861 91973. Carlton Towers. This is the place for foodies looking for the best desserts in town. The "brown bomb" and "hot fudge" are a must have. Not a place for calorie counters. 
ibaco, Basavanagudi; Basaveshwara Nagar; BTM Layout; Coles Road; Indira Nagar; Jayanagar; Koramangala; Mantri Square; Phoenix Mall; RR Nagar; Wood Street; Yelahanka. 
Naturals Ice Cream, Indiranagar; Koramangala; Sarjapur; Dollars Colony, RMV Extension; St. Marks Road; Jayanagar; Basaveshwaranagar; Frazer Town; Malleshwaram; Arekere. 
Pabrai's Fresh and Naturalle Ice Cream, Wood Street, Ashok Nagar, ☏ +91 80 6453 0000. 
Phalaamritha Ice Cream Parlour, 8th Cross, 14/1 West Park Road,Malleswaram, ☏ +91 80 6567 5755. Serves 25 super smooth home-made ice cream flavours along with health drinks, varieties of kulfis, milk shakes, ice tea, ice cream, novelties and chaats. 
Richie Rich Ice Cream Parlour, ☏ +91 80 2226 9655. Three branches around the city, with a variety of natural ice creams, softies and many fast food items such as pav bhaji and vada pav.. Try the 'Elvis Presley' specialty or the traffic jam or 'Richie Rich' special. The 3 locations are on St. Marks Rd, Airport Rd. and Kumara Park East. 
Swensen's, Mantri Square, Malleshwaram; 80 ft. Road, Koramangala; 60 ft. Road, Sahakara Nagar; Ascendas Park Square Mall, Whitefield; Bangalore Central, Bellandur; BDA Complex, HSR Layout; J.P.Nagar (Marenhalli); Jayanagar, ☏ +91 80 4117 8235. The ultimate sundae experience. 
Yogi's, #86, 21st Main, Banashankari 2nd Stage (near BDA Complex), ☏ +91 98 4584 9025, +91 98 4539 7363. The "Sakkat Burger" and "Sakkat Mexican" are a must have. Wide range of burgers, sandwiches, ice creams, shakes and sundaes available. 
North Indian[edit]
Bay Leaf, Raheja Arcade, opposite Forum Mall, Kormangala. A really nice place with reasonable prices. 
Grameen, Raheja Arcade, opposite Forum Mall, Kormangala. One of the best places to have good vegetarian North Indian food. 
Hyderabadi biriyani, Banerghatta Rd (near IIM -B, beside HSBC Bank and above Fabmall). Serves good biriyani 
Mast Kalandar, All around the city. Very nice North India cuisine. It is very reasonably priced. 
Queens, Church Street, opposite Amoeba. Small restaurant but great food at reasonable prices. 
Rasilas, JP Nagar 7 Phase, Shreyas Colony (close to Brigade Millennium & Elita Promenade Apartments, near RBI layout). Nice place with very fine cuisine. 
Tijouri, Hotel Atria, Palace Rd, ☏ +91 80 2220 5205. 
Kund. 303, Ashoka Terrace, 5th Main Rd, Indira Nagar 1st Stage, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560038.
Italian[edit]
100 ft Boutique, 100 Foot Rd, Indira nagar (after Fab Mall when you are travelling from CMH Rd side, and a few stores after Benetton on the LHS if you're coming from Airport Rd), ☏ +91 80 4150 1781. Comparable to most continental resto-bars. The best part about it is that its a Boutique Restaurant, which means you can shop, while waiting for your meal to arrive, even after 9PM, which is when most other shops close in Banglaore. The Boutique houses many young designers. Levitate, showcases a wide array of eclectic street fashion and handcrafted kitsch from all over India. 
I-Talia, The Park, MG Rd, ☏ +91 80 2559 4666. Expensive, but arguably the best Italian food in town. 
Italia (previously Little Italy), Indiranagar. Nice vegetarian restaurant in Indira Nagar, a little expensive. Good food. 
Via Milano, Koramangala (near Sony World). Authentic Italian food. 3 course meal for 2 will cost an average of ₹2,000, (wine not included). 
Chinese[edit]
Beijing Bites. 11AM-3:30PM, 7PM-11PM. Chain restaurant inspired by Chinese & Thai cuisines, spread across Bangalore. ₹200-₹400. 
Caesar's Multi Cuisine Restaurant, Mahalakshmi Chambers, 9/2, MG Rd. (beside HSBC bank opposite ING Bank). 6:30PM–11:30PM. Variety of tasty food. Classic environment. 
Golden Lights, No.4032, 100ft Rd, HAL-II Stage, Indranagar, ☏ +91 80 2559 7722. 
Shanghai Junction, No.8, Sri Sai, 60 Foot. Rd, G Block, Sahakarnagar (behind Big Market), ☏ +91 80 41744477. 
Mainland China, Church St; 100 Foot Rd. Indiranagar. 
P!ing, No. 130, 1st Cross, 5th Block, Koramangala. Includes a dessert bay. Dim sum, sensible portions, good prices. 
Kerala[edit]
BigBoy Fried Chicken, (BFC), Vignan Nagar. 
Coconut Grove, Church Street. 
Continental Spice, Airport Rd (close to Diamond District). 
Gokulam Mess, GM Palya (3 km (1.9 mi) from Indiranagar). 
Hotel New Malabar, Kaggadasapura (Near level crossing). 
Hotel Ruchi, Vignana Nagar. 
K K Bakers, Malleshpalaya. 
Kaayal, AECS Layout; Jeevan Bhima Nagar. 
Kairali, Near Forum Mall, Koramangala. 
Kalavara, Vignana Nagar. 
Kerala Pavilion, Domlur (behind Shanti Sagar). Authentic Kerala food 
Little Home, 80 ft. Road, Koramangala (near Wipro K2 office). Very good south and central Kerala food. Bad service though. 
The Paramount Restaurant, Koramangala (near Jyothi Nivas College). 
Priyam Restaurant, Jagadish Nagar (Behind BEML). 
Tharavadu, Bommanahalli, Hosur Rd (After Silk Board). 
Vayal, Outer ring road(around Central mall) (After Silk Board). 
Dhabas[edit]
There are few dhabas catering to all tastes. South and North Indian fare is available at most places and is clean and cheap. A special mention is the green park dhaba on the outskirts on Bellary Road and Golconda Chimney on the old airport road in Marthahalli, opposite Shankara Eye Hospital. Golconda Chimmney has been renovated and has A/C and non-A/C sections, the non-veg spread is simply amazing, but the rates are steep if you have a traditional dhaba in mind. The ambience is nice. Try the chicken kathi rolls and the biryani.
12.9836977.613915 Bobby-da-Dhaba, Near Lavanya Theatre, St John's Road, Near Ulsoor, ☏ +91 96 6367 8382. 12:30PM-3:45PM, 7:30PM-11PM. The food is good (albeit slightly oily). It basically serves paranthas (with lots of butter), chaach, kheer and a number of side dishes (most notable being their shahi paneer and rajma). You may have to wait for a while in case it is full. So it's better to go slightly early, noon for lunch and 7:30PM for dinner to avoid rush). 
12.9977277.6219026 Manjit ka Dhaba, 107, 1st Floor, Wheeler Road, Near Railway Cross, Cox Town, Frazer Town, ☏ +91 80 4965 3065. noon to 4PM, 7PM-11PM. Budget dhaba. Tasty parathas (with butter) and couple of assorted vegetable curry options. Lassi. Dont expect ambience in dhabas. (updated Apr 2015)
Drink[edit]
body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .ambox{margin:0!important;border:none!important}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .mbox-text{font-size:100%!important;padding:8px 8px 8px 32px!important;line-height:normal}


This article does not match our manual of style or needs other editing. Plunge forward
with these suggested fixes: Please only use the Drink format and do not delete unused fields as it makes it difficult for others to add to the listing at a later time.

In Koramangala, Legends of Rock is near the Pizza Hut on 80 ft. Road.
Also great is the Jimi's Beer Cafe nearby, has a really nice ambience.
Firangi Paani at Forum Mall is a nice but expensive option.
Costa Coffee, Barista and CCD have their presence near Maharaja Hotel. Young working people spend a lot of their time here. You can get a truly multi national multi cultural feeling as there are several restaurants serving Spanish, Italian, Thai, Chinese, Indian, Mexican food. Hence, it is really popular with expatriates.
The area around Jyoti Nivas college is a popular hangout for the college going crowd, with a lot of eateries and cafes in the area. This area has a very hip/ fashionable feel to it.
Cafes[edit]
Barista Lavazza, ☏ +91 80 4207 5023, information@barista.co.in. An Indian startup cafe chain established in 1997 and more commonly known as Barista and now owned by Lavazza. The chain has more than 200 stores in India. It is found all over Bangalore with 32 retail outlets, most of them near IT corporate offices. 
12.971377.607121 Café Coffee Day, ☏ +91 80 4001 2345. Popularly known as CCD. Established in 1996, at Brigade Road, Bangalore, the chain has over 1,000 cafes throughout India. It is found all over Bangalore. 
Caffe Pascucci, 690/A, 15 Cross Road, 14th Main Road, Phase II, J P Nagar, ☏ +91 80 4091 2134. Italian coffee chain brand. In 2010, Pascucci set up its own coffee retail shop in India with 10 outlets in Bangalore at prominent localities like Jayanagar, JP Nagar, MG Road, Malleshwaram and Indiranagar. 
Cake Walk, #297, 100 Feet Rd, Indra Nagar, ☏ +91 80 2520 5393. 
Coffee Workers Co-op, Church St's Brigade Gardens. A venerable Bangalore institution, with waiters in traditional uniforms and customers slowly savoring the age-old tradition of coffee drinking - though there are just two choices of coffee: black or white. Have some delightful "masala dosa" here. 
Coffee World, ☏ +91 80 4111 2111, +91-9845296898. Can be found all over Bangalore. 
Costa Coffee, ☏ +91 80 4348 8888. British coffeehouse chain. Koramangala 4th Block, in Indranagar and another opposite Goethe-Institut, RMZ Eco Space on Sarjapur Rd and Sigma Mall, Brookesfield, Cunningham Rd, JNC Rd, and Jayanagar. Besides Coffee, Costa lays heavy emphasis on food with sandwiches, paninis, tostatos, pastas and many kinds of deserts, English muffins, a wide variety of cakes and desserts. 
Java City, Church St.. Pleasant old Bangalore atmosphere. Offers a wide variety of tea, coffee from all over the world including pizza, pasta, pastries, cookies, you name it they have it plus you get to see a unique sense of humor in their menu and on the walls. On Saturday and Sunday evenings, there is live music, rock and guitar. This place is simple, expatriate friendly and not at all pricy. There is another Java City near Lavelle Road. 
Travel on Menu Café. Popular for TOM Coffee. 
Pubs and bars[edit]
The pub scene is concentrated around the commercial business district in the heart of Bangalore. MG Road, Brigade Road, Residency Road, St. Marks Road, and Church Street have numerous pubs. Happy hours is typically between 6-8PM and at most pubs, the time for the last order is around 10:30PM.
Formerly having a reputation as the Pub City of India, Bangalore's buoyant pub and nightlife has been curtailed by police and regulatory action, and all bars and nightclubs must now close no later than 11:30PM.

Budget[edit]
Most bars and pubs in the city are somewhat upscale, but many inexpensive restaurants serve beer and good quality food.
If you just need to go out you could go to one of the bars, but if you would like to have a great social experience and are in the city for a considerable period of time consider becoming a member of one of the social expat clubs in the city. The IVES Club offers a meeting for its members every Saturday at one or the other popular nightclubs in Bangalore; its members are interns, expats, volunteers and exchange students residing in the city.

Mid-range[edit]
Beer Joint Pub, (aka BJP), Indiranagar, ☏ +91 80 2525 0346. 
Bull n Bush, 4th floor, Garuda Mall. Plays hip hop, house and occasionally trance. ₹500/- cover charge. 
Carpe Diem, Church St. It's a Power Metal haven. 
Ego's, Castle Street, off Brigade Rd. 
J'Cubez, Banashankari 2nd Stage, opp. BDA complex. For rock lovers 
Jimi's, Residency Road, Koramangala 80ft. Rd. A nice dark cozy bar along with Rock music and video. Best visited during weekends and is not hard on your pocket. 
Le Rock Pub Cafe, Rest House Rd (off Brigade Rd), ☏ +91 80 4123 1001. Open from 10AM-11:30PM. The latest watering hole in Bangalore. Rock music across the board screened on large plasma panels; every song can not only be heard but seen as well. Coffee, Kingfisher beer, cocktails, food and Bangalore's first oxy bar. 
Legends of Rock, 80 Foot Rd, 6th Block, Koramangala, ☏ +91 80 4130 3232. Watch the Legends perform on large format TVs. 
Olio, Koramangala, ☏ +91 80 4092 7888. Great ambiance with beer, wines and continental food. 
Opus, Palace Cross Road, near Sankey Rd, ☏ +91 80 2344 2580. A chilled-out, ex-pat friendly lounge with a large outdoor space. Has karaoke on most Sun and Wed (Kroaknights) as well as regular live music and DJ dance nights. You may need to book ahead on theme nights. 
Nasa, Church St. 
New Night Watchman, Corner of Church Street and Museum Rd. Little bit dingy but helpful bar staff - satellite TV has the Australia Network so you can watch Rugby Union and AFL games. 
12.9737377.607172 Pecos, Rest House Rd (Off Brigade Road), ☏ +91 80 4090 5462, +91 944 982 7428. 60s retro pub with a mural of Jerry Garcia. Often crowded on all 3 floors, including the pleasant roof-top seating area. Free popcorn with every pitcher of beer. Cards are available for frequent customers which make every tenth pitcher of beer free, but you may have to ask several times in order to acquire one and to get it updated. 
Purple Haze, Residency Road, Koramangala (close to Jyothi Niwas College). Popular for the classic rock that's played there. 
Sparks, Briage Road Extension, next to Brigade Towers. 
Styx (next to Cauvery Handicrafts on MG Road). They put the "Heavy" in heavy metal!! 
Sultanate of Swing, 4th floor, Garuda Mall. Mainly plays Rock, Retro, Heavy Metal and has a Video DJ. Free entry. 
Take 5, 54, MSK Plaza, HAL II Stage Indiranagar. A Jazz themed restaurant that serves great American style food and offers a large selection of beers. They don't always play jazz but the food and drink is consistently good. 
Tavern at The Inn, Museum Rd. 
The Bunker, off Residency Rd. 
Windsor Pub, Vasanth Nagar. (off Mount Carmel's in Kodava Samaja Building). A small place which serves only beer, good food and is nice for a family outing. But only limited tables. 
Zeus, #174 2nd Floor Manohar Crest, Brigade Rd (Above Health n Glow), ☏ +91 80 2532 3355. 11AM-11:30PM. Sports bar and lounge. 
Splurge[edit]
Most hotels have spiffy bars with every imaginable concoction of drinks available.

13th Floor, Barton Centre, MG Rd. Make a reservation. amazing view from the 13th floor 
12.9702777.610893 Arbor Brewing Company (ABC), 8 Magrath Rd, Allied Grande Plaza, Ashok Nagar (Opp. Garuda Mall, Magrath Rd), ☏ +91 80501 44477, info@arborbrewing.in. Daily noon to 12:30AM. Microbrewery that serves Belgian Triple, Smooth Criminal and Brassiere Blonde. Some of the smoothest beers in town and serves pub-style food. Has a nice vibe though it gets crowded during the weekend. (updated Dec 2018)
Aura, Cunningham Rd. 
Athena, The Leela Hotel, Airport Rd. Really popular on most days of the week. The upper VIP lounge is the best part of the club, but the rest of the club is beautifully appointed and attracts a hip crowd. 
Barleyz - The Brew House, Above Taco Bell, Sony World signal, Koramangala. Microbrewery 
Blue Bar, West End, Race Course Rd. Excellent drinks if you make sure Joel makes them. Officially they have a couple's only policy. Spontaneous dancing likely next to the bar. On weekends you need to buy drink-tickets for ₹1,500 to enter.. 
F-Bar, Le Meridien, Sankey Rd. Fashion Bar is a theme bar by FTV 
Fuga, Richmond Town. The best place for house music lovers. Expensive and fashionable. 
Firangi Paani, Forum Mall, Koramangala. 
Geoffrey's, Royal Orchid, Airport Rd. Really nice place 
Hint, 5th Floor, Bangalore Central, MG Rd. Tuesdays is ladies night (couples permitted). 
iBar, Park Hotel, MG Rd. 
Kosmo (Formerly Cosmo Village), 81 Ali Askar Road Cross (Off Cunningham Road). 3 separate areas including a terrace. This nightclub is a remodeled colonial villa on a quiet lane, with excellent DJs and expensive drinks, and attracts a wealthy clientele. 
Taika, Church St. (Off Brigade Rd). Usually open past midnight and has a huge dance floor. 3 bars and a lounge area. Entrance varies each night. 
The Beach, 100 Foot Rd. Indiranagar. Make a reservation. Starts with retro music, plays some good hip-hop and house towards the end. Makes you feel like you are in Goa. 
The Biere Club, Vittal Mallya Rd on Lavelle Road, (opp Sunny's).. Bangalore’s first craft brewery and a popular place for beer lovers. 
Toit, Indiranagar. Microbrewery 
Vaayu, 5th floor, Eve Mall, Brigade Rd. It has comfortable lounge seating, and is open air, giving some nice views over the city. 
Windmills Craftworks, #331, Road 5B, EPIP Zone, Whitefield, ☏ +91 80 2569 2012, +91 72 5902 4652, info@windmillscraftworks.com. Microbrewery 
Xtreme Sports Bara & Grill At Earthen Bowl, Ferns City, Doddanekkundi, Bengaluru, 77609 44477, support@earthenbowl.in
Sleep[edit]


This guide uses the following price ranges for a standard double room:


Budget
Under ₹1,500


Mid-range
₹1,500-4,500


Splurge
Over ₹4,500
.mw-parser-output .pricerange-table{border:1px solid #ccc;border-spacing:0;background:#f9f9f9;float:right;clear:right;margin:0.5em 0 0.5em 1em;width:30%;padding:8px}.mw-parser-output .pricerange-table td{padding:0}
Budget[edit]
A large number of budget hotels near the Bangalore City Railway Station are crowded in the area around the Dargah Tawakkal Mastan , O.T.C. Road, Chickpet, Near Sreenivasa Hospital, 1 km (0.62 mi) from the Majestic bus station. Ask for Brahmins Bakery area.

Citizen Lodge, Lady Curzon Rd (near Bowring Hospital, about 1 km (0.62 mi) from MG Rd). Bare bones motel-style establishment is well located but leaves much to be desired in terms of cleanliness and overall quality. Double non-A/C room costs around from ₹850. 
FabHotel 29th Church's Inn (formerly Church Street Inn), #29th Church Street, off M.G. Road, ☏ +91 70424 24242. 
Address 24 Inn, #54, Hebbal Kempapura, Behind Esteem Mall, 560024, ☏ +91 95177 79377. 
Hotel Grand Park, OTC Road, near Tavakal Mastan Dargah, Cottonpet, near Majestic, ☏ +91 80 22374786. ₹900. (updated Apr 2015)
Manju Lodge, Near Abhinay Theatre& Menaka Theatre Hospital Road Avenue Road, ☏ +91 80 22200679. ₹600. (updated Apr 2015)
Naga Residency, OTC Road, near Tavakal Mastan Dargah, Cottonpet, near Majestic, ☏ +91 80 41220539. ₹500. (updated Apr 2015)
Omshakthi palace, OTC Road, near Tavakal Mastan Dargah, Cottonpet, near Majestic., ☏ +91 80 26707927. ₹400. (updated Apr 2015)
Railway Retirement Room (inside the Central Railway Station). ₹850. (updated May 2015)
Red Mount Lodge, OTC Road, near Tavakkal Mastan Dargah, Cottonpet, near Majestic, ☏ +91 80 41580000. ₹1,200. (updated Apr 2015)
Royal Regency Lodge, S. C. Rd (next to Movieland theater), ☏ +91 80 4113 0202. Clean rooms and convenient to the city’s local transports like the City bus station and the City Railway Station. From ₹1500?. 
Shree Vaishnav Gujarati Samaj, Gandhinagar (near Sapna cinema, Kempe Gowda Circle). A secure and decent place to stay if you are there for a day or two. A nice canteen with Gujarati food available. In the vicinity there is another good place available for fast food/lunch named "SLV". Costs ₹50. 
T.A.P.paradise, Hospital Road Avenue Road; cross near Abhinay Theatre & Menaka Theatre, ☏ +91 80 22280522. ₹700. (updated Apr 2015)
U. G. Classic, OTC Road, Near Tavakal Mastan Dargah, Cottonpet, near Majestic. ₹1,200. (updated Apr 2015)
UG Deluxe, Majestic, Thulsi Thotta (stop near the small road opposite Upparpet Police station and next to Navaruchi restaurant, then take right and then immediate left on a small lane and at the end of it take right and you will see the lodge on your right). You may want to take an auto instead of walking down if you are going after a rainy day as your shoes will get dirty. A/C rooms - ₹750, Non-A/C rooms - ₹550. 
Vardhaman Paradise, Ganesh Lodge Building OTC Road, near Tavakal Mastan Dargah, Cottonpet, Majestic., ☏ +91 80 26707552. ₹250. (updated Apr 2015)
12.9710977.587651 YMCA, Nrupathunga Rd (Near Cubbon Park), ☏ +91 80 2221 1848. No-frills hotel. 
Others around Majestic, If you are free for an hour, you can just go around the Majastic theatre and the Kempe Gowda Bus Station and look for a budget hotel yourself, as there are many on small streets and roads around this place. Or, you can even trust (to some extent) a broker who voluntarily offers help, but be sure you take a good look at the rooms before you pay any money to the lodge and the broker. But there is a wrong notion in the minds of people in and around Majestic that whenever you go in pairs, they tend to look at you with a wrong and suspicious look. If coming with family, especially newly married, avoid the Majestic area.
Art of Living Hostel, Kanakapura Road, ☏ +91 8026080204, housing@vvmvp.org. Free food is given three times a day. Accommodation is shared between four people. The campus is undulating in terrain, and a free shuttle service is available between the numerous hostels and meditation centers. Very green campus with winding footpaths. Beware of snakes. (This hostel is two hours away from Bangalore city railway station in peak traffic.) Rs. 400. (updated Apr 2017)
Mid-range[edit]
Numerous serviced apartments exist in and around the area of Koramangala, though most are on the expensive side. Notable are the Mango suites, Mercure Grand, Lotus suites and Royal Orchid. Cheaper options exist near the JNC college and 1st block.

Elegano Serviced Apartments, #21, 5th B Cross, Vinayaka Layout, Stage 1, Hebbal Kempapura, Bangalore 560024, ☏ +91 6366773001, info@citi.space. Check-in: 12:00, check-out: 11:00. Premium 1 bhk & 2 bhk serviced apartments with fully equipped kitchen, home size refrigerator, microwave, toaster, coffeemaker, mixer grinder, stove, Washing Machine & free Wi-Fi. 
12.9792677.63772 Treebo Trend 9 Marks Inn, 9 St Marks Rd, ☏ +91 93228 00100. Complementary breakfast. 
Airavatam Serviced Apartment, 330/7, Axis Rd (alight at Axis Books Bus stop), ☏ +91 80 4038 1200. Clean rooms, clean attached bathrooms, wifi. Nearby to many restaurants. From ₹2200. 
Ajantha, 22 Mahatma Gandhi Rd, ☏ +91 80 2558 4321, reservation@hotelajantha.in, manager@hotelajantha.in, managingpartner@hotelajantha.inMULTIPLE-EMAIL. Good simple hotel with vegetarian restaurant. Sgl/dbl from ₹1500/₹1900, Cottage A/C ₹2700. 
Alcove Serviced Apartments Bengaluru, G-301, Raheja Residency, 3rd Block, Koramangala, ☏ +91 99 0057-8231, stay@alcove.co.in. Check-in: 24/7. Single room, independent 1 or 2 or 3 BHK apartments, air-con bedrooms with double beds and independent bathrooms, cableTV & DVD player. Kitchen with refrigerator, microwave, toaster, coffeemaker, mixer grinder and gas stove. Fully automatic washing machine, iron and ironing board, complimentary breakfast, free Wi-Fi, swimming pool, club house with billiards, table tennis, gym and tennis court. 
12.9824677.59453 Best Western The Capitol, Raj Bhavan Rd, ☏ +91 80 2228 1234, +91 80 2228 1800. 
The Bouvice, 141C, S.T. Bed Layout, 1st Main Kormangala, Sector 4, ☏ +91 80 4152 4429, +91 93 4285 6034, info@bouvice.com. A beautiful apartment hotel in Kormangala. 
Chairman's Club & Resort, No. 14/1, Kodigehalli Main Road, Sahakar Nagar, Hebbal (near Twin Tower) (22 km (14 mi) from the airport), ☏ +91 80-40703703, reservation@chairmansresort.com. Check-out: 24 Hours. Best for Airport transit passengers. It has AC and Suites rooms. It has a lounge bar (Lock N' Load), indoor swimming pool, Badminton court, garden restaurant, indoor AC restaurant free Wi-fi and a fitness center. Rooms & Suites, ₹2,500-7,000++. 
D-Habitat Hotel Apartments, ☏ +91 80 4150 1950. Koramangala Deluxe rooms, suites, studio, 2 and 3 bedroom apartments. Ideal for short-term and extended stay. Sgl/dbl ₹2500/₹3000. 
Fantasy Golf Resort (opp ITC-0 mins away from Bengaluru Airport), ☏ +91 99 7209-2701. 
Fortune Park JP Celestial, Race Course Rd (1.5 km (0.93 mi) from railway station and easy access to airport.), ☏ +91 80 4044-1234. 
Hotel Bangalore Gate (res@bangaloregate.com), 9 and 12, Gajanana Towers, K G Rd (opp. Maneka Theatre, 500 m away from Majestic & Bengaluru City Railway station; Metro Purple Sir M. Visveshwaraya), ☏ +91 99 4533 3999, book@hotelbangaloregate.com. Check-in: noon, check-out: noon. Executive, superior and premium rooms. All rooms are A/C with complimentary breakfast and Wi-Fi. 24 hours room service, 2 restaurants, ample car parking. ₹3,600-4,800. 
Hotel Komfort Terraces, No 301, 3rd floor, Bluemoon Complex M G. Road, ☏ +91 80 4009 7000. Check-in: noon, check-out: noon. ₹2381. 
Hotel Presidency, No. 22 Sadahalli Gate, Devanahalli Taluk, ☏ +91 80 2846-7175, enquiry@hotelpresidencyblr.com. 24/7 reception. 
Hotel St. Marks, St. Marks Rd. 
Hotel Vrindavan, off MG Rd and very near to MG. Rd/Brigade Rd junction. Nice hotel with great south Indian food. 
Hotel Woodlands, No 5, Rajaram Mohan Roy Rd (near Richmond Circle), ☏ +91 80 2222 5111. Mid-range hotel, very clean, great views of the city, delicious free South Indian breakfast buffet for ₹3,400 per night for an A/C double (two single beds pushed together). Nice location for exploring the city. Long walk to M.G. Road, Garuda Mall, and Commercial Street. 
Live Inn Bangalore Serviced apartments, Team Royal, 1st Main, 6th Block, Venkatareddy layout, 80ft Rd, Koramangala (Near Oasis Lifestyle Mall Koramangala), ☏ +91 98 8034 9785, info@liveinnbangalore.com. One, two and three bedroom apartments with Wi-Fi, direct telephone services, laundry, A/C, fully equipped kitchen and hot breakfast is served in your room Sgl/dbl ₹2000/₹2500. 
Maple Suites (Serviced Apartments), #142 & 143, Dollar Layout. 4th Main, BTM II Stage (Off Bannerghatta Road opp to Mantri Elite.), ☏ +91 80 4282 2428. Check-in: 12 noon, check-out: 12 noon. Long and short term stay. ₹1,999. 
Olde Bangalore, Tarabanahalli (near Bangalore airport), ☏ +91 99004 28729, marketing@oldebangalore.in. Resort and hotel, events, receptions, multi-cuisine food,corporate event facilities, conferences. (updated Nov 2015)
Prakruthi Club & Resort, Plot no. 12A, Hegganahalli village, Kundana Hobli, Devanahalli Taluk (11 km (6.8 mi) from the airport), ☏ +91 80 2849 4002, contactus@prakruthiclub.com. Accommodation for couples, family, or corporate bookings. Conference hall that can seat 120 people and meeting facilities. Coffee shop. Lounge bar, wifi. Cottages and roms, ₹2,500-₹9,000++. 
Silicon Hearth (formerly Silicon Suites), 174, Nagvarapalya, Rahat Bagh, Behind Big Bazaar (off Old Madras Rd, near Indiranagar), ☏ +91 99860 53292, dschatterjee@siliconhearth.com. (updated Sep 2017)
Stopovers Serviced Apartments (Stopovers), Diamond District, Old Airport Rd (Close to old airport road), ☏ +91 98 4513 9800. Check-in: 24 hr, check-out: 24 hr. Contemporary apartments. ₹4,500. 
Villa Camelot, #94/95, 4th Cross, ECC Rd, Prithvi Layout, Whitefield, ☏ +91 80 3272 3965, villacamelot9495@gmail.com. Bed and breakfast run by a North Indian couple in the back lanes of ITPL. Cozy atmosphere. From ₹1,500. 
13.04474277.6264514 Howard Johnson Bangalore Hebbal, 132, Thanisandra Main Road, Nagawara Junction (near Manyata Embassy Business Park), ☏ +91 8046 4670 00, reservations@hojobangalore.com. (updated Jul 2018)
Redstone Service Apartments HSR Layout, No 84, 16th Cross, 14th 'B' Main Rd, Sector 4, HSR Layout, ☏ +91 91080 06411, reservations@redstonevilla.in. Service apartments offers rooms for accommodation with high quality service. The service apartment has two floors along with kitchen and balcony. Spacious parking and hotel like amenities, dining area, fully equipped kitchen are some of the other special features of the apartment. (updated Sep 2021)
Splurge[edit]
12.9658277.598685 Chancery Pavilion, Residency Rd. Nice business hotel, good service and food About $200. 
12.9922577.581886 Lalit Ashok Hotel, Kumara Krupa High Grounds, ☏ +91 80 22 2404 2211 9, grandashok@nivalink.com. 
Hotel Royal Orchid, Adjoining KGA Golf Course, Airport Rd, ☏ +91 80 2520 5566, rooms@royalorchidhotels.com. Sometimes referred to as the "Royal Orchid Park Plaza". Not to be confused with Royal Orchid Central. 
12.967177.59577 ITC Gardenia, Residency Rd, ☏ +91 80 2211 9898, reservations@itchotels.in. 
12.9941477.585978 ITC Windsor, Sankey Rd, ☏ +91 80 22269898, reservations@itchotels.in. 
12.9607677.648479 The Leela Palace Bengaluru, Airport Rd, ☏ +91 80 2521 1234, gm.bangalore@theleela.com. (updated Oct 2018)
12.9734977.6182710 Oberoi Hotel, 37-39 MG Rd, ☏ +91 80 2558 5858. 
Park Hotel, 14/7 MG Rd (Metro Purple: Trinity), ☏ +91 80 2559 4666, resv.blr@theparkhotels.com. 
12.9537577.6394311 The Paul, 139/28, Domlur Layout (off Intermediate Ring Rd), ☏ +91 80 4047 7777. 
Streling Mac Hotel, 134, HAL Rd (near Manipal Hospital), ☏ +91 80 42494949. 
12.9767577.5752812 The Gateway Hotel, Bengaluru, 66, Residency Road, ☏ +91 8066604545, gateway.bangalore@tajhotels.com. The Gateway Hotel Bengaluru is among the top hotels in the city and has won the National Tourism Award for three years in a row. (updated Jan 2019)
13.0081477.5955313 Taj West End, Race Course Road, ☏ +91 80 5660-5660, westend.bangalore@tajhotels.com. Nestled amidst 20 acres of flora and defined by its illustrious heritage and colonial charm. Started by the Bronsons as a 10-room inn in 1887, it now has 117 magnificent rooms and suites. 
13.0081477.5955314 Taj MG Road, 41/3 MG Road1, ☏ +91 80 6660 4444, reservations.mgroad@tajhotels.com. A 5-star hotel (updated Jan 2019)
Stay safe[edit]
Bangalore is a relatively safe city during day time. However, most of Bangalore practically shuts down a little before midnight - even very safe residential areas can be very desolate by 11PM. In the morning people start getting out from 5 or 6 am, but it's usually still dark outside at that time, so exercise caution if you are in an unfamiliar area.
Some of the lower-income areas can be somewhat unsafe once it gets dark. Exercising caution and good sense will increase your chances of staying safe.

It is not advisable to walk alone along deserted alleyways or lanes after dark. Avoid doing so in areas that you are not sure are reasonably safe
Avoid using an auto-rickshaw if the driver is not alone, especially at night
Do not flaunt jewellery, high-end mobile phones / laptops, watches etc.
Do not withdraw large amounts of cash from ATMs in deserted areas.
Beware of pickpockets in crowded areas such as exhibitions, cricket matches, train stations, etc.
If you are returning late from a party, it is advisable to pre-book cabs through reputed companies such as Meru, Ola, or Uber as against flagging down an auto-rickshaw on the road
Exercise caution in stopping to help if you see a broken down vehicle at night, especially in lonely streets and in cases where you will be outnumbered
Rising incomes has brought an influx of people including white and blue collar immigrants, leading to disparities in earnings between locals, the casual labour immigrants and expatriates (people from other parts of the state and also from other countries) which arguably has resulted in a substantial increase in crime rates.

Connect[edit]
The area code for Bangalore is 080. When calling from overseas, dial +91 80 XXXX XXXX ( if the phone is a land-line connection). If you don’t have an Indian phone number, it is strongly recommended that you get a  pre-paid calling card if you plan on using your phone frequently. Because of new government regulations, you need a photocopy of your passport (visa and the ID pages), a color photo, and proof of local address (in Bangalore) when buying a pre-paid card. If you do not have the required paperwork, it is recommended that you ask a local friend to buy a pre-paid card on your behalf. Pre-paid cards are sold in a few of the shops that sell mobile equipment.
Public telephones are a good option and are available widely. Most shops that offer public phones sport easily visible "STD/ISD/PCO" signages. More often than not, public pay-phones are post-pay and there will be a person at the shop to take the payments. Check the bill generated from the machine and make the payment accordingly. Payments are always in Indian Rupees.

Cellular[edit]
Mobile phone coverage in the city is excellent. There are many service providers (Airtel, BSNL, Reliance Jio, Idea-Vodafone) offering a wide variety of plans. If you are planning on travelling around outside the metropolitan area it might be a good idea to buy a mobile phone and use one of the pre-paid plans to get yourself connected whilst you are still in the city. However, there may be network congestion in certain areas and hence, slow internet connections.

Internet[edit]
There are plenty of Internet centres which charge between ₹10-₹25 per hr. If you have laptop with WiFi connection, free internet services are available at some malls, restaurants, and hotels. However, free public WiFi is not the norm. MG Road and Brigade road now has street-wide free WiFi. Hop on to the Namma WiFi wireless network and register using your mobile number for a one-time password for internet access.
High speed USB data cards are very common and all telecom providers (see Connect section) offer these over-the-counter at their stores. Typically need some proof of identity and address to activate these. Nowadays, it is easier to just buy a sim card with 4G data and host a WiFi hotspot.

Cope[edit]
Bangalore is a clean city (compared to other major Indian cities such as Mumbai and Kolkata) and epidemics are rare. However, foreign tourists should be cautious about consuming water and eating at roadside stalls. It is recommended to use bottled water if the source of drinking water is unknown.
It is recommended to use mosquito repellents, either as a cream applied on the skin (ask for Odomos at local medical stores) or in the electronic form, during the evenings.
It is always a good idea to carry a minimal medicine kit with medicines for common diseases and conditions. Most of the international medicines are available in medical stores, though the name and brand may be different. So, it is advisable to do some research on the alternatives or consult a general physician, if needed.
Ambulances can be requested by calling 108.

Pharmacies[edit]
Pharmacies are dime a dozen and you should not have any problem locating one. You do not need any prescription for Modern Medicine Over the Counter drugs, or for ayurvedic medicine (proprietary and traditional), which are available for most common ailments like fever, headache, etc., But you will need prescription for other medicines, which are categorized as Schedule H drugs.

Hospitals[edit]
13.054677.591913 Aster CMI Hospital (after Bellary Rd/Hebbal Flyover continue straight onto NH44 then take slight left and then turn left), ☏ +91 80-43420100, customercare.aster@asterhospital.com. 24 hours. A super-specialty hospital, part of Aster DM Healthcare group. It has contemporary state-of-the-art facilities accommodating close to 500 beds and offers comprehensive primary care to quaternary care services with Centres of Excellence in Cardiac Sciences, Neurosciences, Gastroenterology Sciences, Surgery and Allied Specialties, Integrated Liver Care, Organ Transplant, Urology and Nephrology, Orthopaedics, Women’s Health, and Child & Adolescent Health. (updated May 2017)
Consulates[edit]
  Canada. 
  France. 
  Germany, 2nd & 3rd floor, Cash Pharmacy Building Corner St Marks &, Residency Rd (1.5 km (0.93 mi) from MG Road Metro Station(Purple)), ☏ +91 80 4530 0100. 08:00 to 15:00. 
  Israel. 
  Japan. 
  United Kingdom. 
Currency Exchange[edit]
You will not find money exchange kiosks/counters in all parts of Bangalore, because Bangalore is not a primary destination for most tourists nor is it the entry point for most tourists entering the region. However, most banks offer currency exchange in all their branch offices, as do some travel agencies. Exchange rates can vary somewhat, so it is advisable to shop around. Typically, travel agencies will offer a better exchange rate than banks. Some "extraoficial" agencies can be found around the commercial area of M.G. Road. Those will offer a good rate, without asking to take a copy of your passport. Price could be bargained. Always double check the bank notes once the exchange is made.

Go next[edit]
Devanahalli Fort - 35 km (22 mi) north of Bangalore city, in Bangalore Rural district.
Bannerghatta National Park - a popular tourist destination with a zoo, a pet corner, an animal rescue centre, a butterfly enclosure, an aquarium, a snake house and a safari park.
Nagarhole National Park  or Rajiv Gandhi National Park is 220 Kilometre from Bengalooru  and can be reached via Mysuru, Hunsur or HD Kote.
Bandipur National Park - A tiger reserve around 225 km (140 mi) away. It is famous for elephants, tigers, and precious sandalwood trees. It is spread over an area of 890 square kilometres (340 sq mi) and considered one of the most spectacular wildlife sanctuaries.
Nandi Hills - It is around 57 km (35 mi) from the city and provides a panoramic view of sunrise and sunset. One of the ways to go there is to go on a bicycle. The hill station has become a popular tourist spot because it is blessed with a pleasant environment throughout the year.
Srirangapatna, Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary, Mysore and Chamarajanagar come in a straight line. You will need half a day each for the first two places and two days each for the next two places. South of that line, around 34 km (21 mi) east from Mysore, Keshava Temple of Somanathapura offers marvelous architecture and stone sculptures.
Anshi National Park  or Kali Tiger Reserve which is at  distance of 500 Kilometre from Bengaluru city. River rafting and Kayaking is offered at Kali river near Dandeli.
Bhadra Tiger Reserve  is a tiger reserve on catchment area of river Bhadra. It is around 280 Kilometre from Bengaluru city.
Badami  A town in Bagakot district known for magnificent temple architecture of Chalukya period. World Heriage site Pattadakal and Aihole are nearby to Badami.



Routes through Bangalore






Hyderabad ← Anantapur ←

 N  S 

→ Hosur → Madurai


Belgaum ← Chitradurga ←

 N  S 

→ Vellore → Chennai


Hassan ← Nelamangala ←

 W  E 

→ Hoskote → Kolar


Mysore ← Srirangpatna ←

 W  E 

→  END
.mw-parser-output .routeBox{font-size:small;border-style:none;border-spacing:0 0;border-collapse:collapse;margin:0 auto}.mw-parser-output .routeBox td{padding:1px 2px}







This city travel guide to Bangalore is a usable article. It has information on how to get there and on restaurants and hotels. An adventurous person could use this article, but please feel free to improve it by editing the page.






