.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-unesco{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b1/WorldHeritageBlanc.svg")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-star{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e7/Cscr-featured.svg")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-ftt{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b0/Writing_Circle.svg/25px-Writing_Circle.svg.png")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-dotm{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/50/Yes_Check_Circle.svg/25px-Yes_Check_Circle.svg.png")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-otbp{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6e/Right_turn_icon_blue.svg/25px-Right_turn_icon_blue.svg.png")}

  Arunachal Pradesh on the map of Republic of India




Although most of Arunachal Pradesh is claimed by both China and Taiwan (as South Tibet), and India, it is under the effective control of the Indian government. As visitors wishing to visit have to obtain Indian visas, permits and so on, we treat it as a part of India here. This does not represent a political endorsement of the claims made by either side of the dispute.



Arunachal Pradesh is one of the northeastern states of India. It is bordered by Bhutan in the west, China in the north and northeast, Myanmar (Burma) in the southeast, and the states of Assam and Nagaland in the south.


Regions[edit]
Map of Arunachal Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh can be broadly classified into four regions-

Northern Region, it is sparsely populated with snow-capped mountains.
Southern Region, it is the most economically active zone. Most of the population live in the southern and eastern parts.
Eastern Region, it is a big tourism spot with many local mountain ranges like the Naga hills and the Patkai Bum.
Western Region, it is a very mountainous region with a big tourism centre for bikers.
Cities[edit]
  Arunachal Pradesh
27.193.61671 Itanagar — the state capital
27.0105392.646232 Bhalukpong — located in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh - home to Pakke Tiger Reserve and the Tipi Orchard Research Centre
27.2592.43 Bomdila — a small town with 3 famous Buddhist monasteries
27.15856995.4781614 Deomali — a village that is a treat for environmentalists, biologists, and nature lovers, with several varieties of fruits and rich flora and fauna
27.32292.2935 Dirang — a city with several forts and the remnants of Dirang Dzong (a fort)
28.061995.325946 Pasighat — one of the oldest places in the state, and an educational hub
27.2030992.398647 Rupa — a municipality of the state
27.583391.86678 Tawang — Himalayan town with the second-largest Buddhist monastery (gompa) in the world, built in 1681
28.6235895.036459 Yingkiong — a small town often used as the start of the journey to the Pemako area, on the border with Tibet
  Golden Pagoda in Arunachal Pradesh
Other destinations[edit]
28.4738294.748451 Mouling National Park — (humid and wet area) named after Mouling peak part of the Dihang-Dibang Biosphere Reserve
27.4596396.541462 Namdapha National Park — the largest national park in India, known for its biodiversity and for being home to the northernmost rain forest in India
Understand[edit]
Arunachal Pradesh was part of Tibet until 1914, when a treaty between the British Indian government and the Tibetan government brought the Himalayan region under British control. However, the then Republic of China considered the Tibetan government to be a local government that had no power to sign treaties with another sovereign state. As a result, China has refused to recognise the treaty, and continues to claim the region as part of Tibet.
Arunachal Pradesh was known as the North-East Frontier Agency (NEFA) till 1987, when it was renamed to the current name. The current name literraly means the "province of the dawn-lit mountains".

Talk[edit]
People of Arunachal Pradesh can speak and understand Hindi and English.  There are more than 36 major tribes and more than 306 sub-tribes, but most of them know Hindi.

Get in[edit]
Fees and permits[edit]
Foreigners need a Protected Area Permit (PAP) to enter the state. The PAPs are issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, but the easiest approach is to get your Indian visa with a special endorsement allowing travel in the state. Individual travellers are generally granted 15 days (extendable once), but are allowed access only into major towns and sights; travels off the beaten track generally require a registered tour group of four or more people.
Indian citizens require an Inner Line Permit (ILP) to enter the state, which can be acquired from any of the AP Houses situated in New Delhi, Kolkata and Guwahati. The ILP is provided for each of the following sectors:

Bomdila, Dirang, Tawang
Itanagar, Ziro
Namdapha, Changlang
One can get the ILP for any one of the above sectors.

By plane[edit]
The state has only one commercial airport in Pashigat, with Alliance Air flying to Tezpur. There is another airport for general aviation in Aalo (Along). Recently, an airline called FlyBig has launched tri-weekly services to and from the airport of Tezu.
If you are visiting Namdapha, then the nearest airport is in Dibrugarh, Assam. There are no direct flights to Itanagar, and the nearest airport is in Tezpur.
There is a helicopter service available from Guwahati to various destinations like Pasighat and Tawang. The service is operated weather permitting. The fares are reasonably priced. There are no public taxis operating at the helipad in Tawang. If you want to trek from the helipad to Tawang town, make prior arrangements for road transport before boarding the flight.

By car[edit]
If you are visiting Bomdila sector, then the easiest way to reach there is by road from Tezpur (Assam). One can then go to Tezpur by state transport buses. From Tezpur, shared vehicles are available every morning from 05:30. It's recommended to use a reputed travel agency to book seats. Requesting your driver to stop at Sela pass during the winter allows you to see picturesque snow-covered views. The roads are good and well maintained by Border Road Organisation (BRO), but there can be landslides in the rainy season.

Get around[edit]
By car[edit]
For first-timers driving by your own in mountainous roads is not recommended. There are numerous rental cars available in almost all cities in the state. The rental cars are generally safe and charge reasonably.

By bus[edit]
Arunachal Pradesh State Transport Services provides daily bus services between the cities. The bus might get jam-packed sometimes. The prices are very cheap and the journey is safe.

See[edit]
  Aji Lamu Folk Dance of Arunachal Pradesh
Bomdila is a great place for adventure sports, rafting, angling and trekking. The best time for trekking is October to February.
Pasighat is one of the oldest cities of Arunachal Pradesh. This is a great place for tourists who wish to experience the beauty of nature. The city is the entrance point for the Arunachal Pradesh.
Places to visit around Tawang include:

Tawang Monastery. A Tibetan Buddhist gompa (fortified monastery) that was constructed in 1681. It is the second-largest Buddhist monastery in the world.
Anni Gompa, a Buddhist monastery managed by nuns.
Nuranang Falls, a large waterfall near Tawang.
Tawang War Memorial is not to be missed. It is maintained by the Indian Army and has inscribed therein the names of those who died defending Tawang during the Chinese intrusion in 1962. A sombre place, it elicits awe, gratefulness and perhaps a tear in the eyes of many Indian visitors.
Do[edit]
Greener Pastures - An Eco-tourism venture that offers travelers an escape into the unexplored mountains of Arunachal Pradesh. They organize tribal cultural exchanges, treks, extreme river rafting challenges, and sightseeing tours around the region.
Kameng River Rafting: - This River was known as the Bhareli River, before it was renamed Kameng. This river flows on the India-Tibet border, in India it flows from Arunachal Pradesh. This is one of the most challenging rivers for river rafting in India.
Rafting - Brahmaputra is counted as one of the best rivers for rafting in the world. This river gives an amazing and exciting, lifetime memorable rafting expedition experience into the North-East of India. The Tsang Po River flows in the east side of Tibet, passing through great Himalayan. This river also passes through the Namche Barwa, highest unclimbed mountain and then reaches to Arunachal Pradesh. Brahmaputra river rafting is an challenging activity in which one can experience the “Zebra ock” and “Roaring Rikor”. Tourists can also set their camp on beaches in the night time. This journey also includes a ride at Dibrugarh on the Brahmaputra River also the densely forested river valley from the plains of Pasighat.
Biking - The curvy mountainous roads of Arunachal Pradesh offers stunning views of valleys. It is known as a biker's paradise. Biking through the sights of snow-capped mountains is a great experience.
Eat[edit]
  Red Rice With Pork pieces
Tibetan delicacies like thupka, momos or simple and delicious paratha-sabzi eaten hot from the roadside shacks on cold misty days are a treat. Most restaurants in Tawang serve them. A small shack called Annapurna serves delicious alu (potato) chips. The traditional Monpa cuisine uses a generous amount of chillies and fermented cheese which has a strong flavour.
Some traditional Arunachal dishes are:

Gyapa khazi is a type of pulao made of rice, fermented cheese, small dried fish or shrimp, chillies, ginger and other spices.
Khura is a pancake, often taken with tea.
Momo is made by stuffing minced pork and onions into dough and then steaming the dumpling in a three-layer steamer or frying them.
Thukpa is a soup filled with noodles, minced meat and vegetables, also known as der thuk. Ashum thukpa is made of maize, beans and meat.
Zan is the staple dish of the Monpa tribes. It is usually made of millet flour, and is served with vegetables or meat, to which fermented cheese, soya bean or herbs are added.
Drink[edit]
Getting tea or coffee is quite easy in Arunachal Pradesh. There are many local drinks which include local beers.

Saraku is a local alcoholic drink.
Apo is a local beer. It can be categorised as a rice beer. You cannot find it in shops as they are usually brewed in households and often served along with rice and chutney and is a part of a tradition and culture.
Stay safe[edit]
Arunachal Pradesh is a safe state. The inhabitants are generally friendly and ready to help visitors. However, there are dangers of altitude sickness for the visitors of the state, especially in the high mountainous areas. You are not advised to visit sensitive places near the Indo-China border. Stay inside your hotel and its premises in the night as going out between the mountains during the night might not be a good idea. The most important, Drive Carefully!, if you are driving in mountainous roads, speeding or overtaking might not be a safe choice. Avoid visiting the state in the rainy season. The heavy rains cause the roads to get really muddy and landslides are frequent which lead to road blocks. All the places are well guarded and the crime rate in this region is very low.

Go next[edit]
Assam - known for its lush tea gardens and wildlife,
Nagaland - known for its unique landscape and culture.
Manipur - a hybrid place with a mix of different cultures and tribes.
Mizoram - known for its cultural heritage.
Meghalaya- known for its exceptional wildlife and natural beauty. The world's wettest place Cherrapunji is also located here.
Tripura - known for being a fusion between modern and ancient world.





This region travel guide to Arunachal Pradesh is an outline and may need more content. It has a template, but there is not enough information present. If there are Cities and Other destinations listed, they may not all be at usable status or there may not be a valid regional structure and a "Get in" section describing all of the typical ways to get here. Please plunge forward and help it grow!







