.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-unesco{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b1/WorldHeritageBlanc.svg")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-star{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e7/Cscr-featured.svg")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-ftt{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b0/Writing_Circle.svg/25px-Writing_Circle.svg.png")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-dotm{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/50/Yes_Check_Circle.svg/25px-Yes_Check_Circle.svg.png")}.mw-parser-output .oo-ui-icon-otbp{background-image:url("https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6e/Right_turn_icon_blue.svg/25px-Right_turn_icon_blue.svg.png")}
Kanha National Park is in Madhya Pradesh in India.


Understand[edit]
  Male Tiger resting in Kanha National Park
Many wildlife species are present in Kanha National Park. These wildlife species creates the core of the Kanha national park, Kanha Kisli National Park which was taken under Project Tiger Reserve in 1974. This park is the only habitat for rare hard ground Barasingha in India.
Situated in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, Kanha National Park is one of the most beautiful and well managed of all national parks in India. It is well known not only within the tourists, natural history photographers and wildlife lovers but also to public at large. Tourist throng here to see the magnificent big cat tiger and one of the rarest deer the Hard ground Barasingha (Swamp Deer) also known as the jewel of Kanha National Park.
Many endangered species have indeed been saved here. Today Kanha is among the few most scenic and beautiful wildlife reserves in Asia. This 'Tiger Country' is the ideal home for both predator and prey. The romance of the Kanha National Park has not reduced over time – it is still as beautiful as described by Rudyard Kipling in The Jungle Book.
Located in the Mandla district of Madhya Pradesh, 160 km south from Jabalpur, Kanha National Park and Tiger Reserve extends over an area of over 1,940 km² of which 940 km² is designated core area and the rest buffer. The major feature of this region's interesting topography is the horseshoe shape valley and the whole park area is surrounded by the spurs of the Mekal. The Surpan River meanders through Kanha's central Maidans, grasslands that cover the extensive plateau.  Kanha National Park offers home to rare hard ground barasingha.
Kanha's sal and bamboo forests and rolling grasslands, are by far the most striking features of this region where sighting Swamp deer, Sambhar, Chital, Gaur and other denizens of jungle is common.

History[edit]
The park was created in 1955 by a special law and, since then, it has dedicated itself in preserving a variety of animal species. It was declared a tiger reserve in 1974 and since then has been under constant vigilance and conservation activities are being followed diligently.

Landscape[edit]
Main flora:
Shorea robusta, Lagerstroemia parviflora, Terminalia tomentosa, Dendrocalamus strictus
Main fauna:
Chital Cervus axis, sambar Cervus unicolor, barasingha Cervus duvauceli branderi, barking deer Muntiacus muntjak, chausingha Tetracerus quadricornis, gaur Bos gaurus, langur Presbytis entellus, wild pig Sus scrofa, jackal Canis aureus, sloth bear Melursus ursinus, wild dog Cuon alpinus, panther Panthera pardus, tiger Panthera tigris.
The main wildlife attractions in the reserve are Tiger, Gaur, Sambhar, Chital, Barasingha, Barking deer, Sloth bear, Jackal, Fox, Porcupine, Jungle cat, Python, Hare, Monkey, Mongoose and leopard. Including many reptiles, insects and butterflies you can enjoy the creation of God in its colour and splendor.
The bird species include Storks, Teals, Pintails, Pond herons, Egrets, Peacock, Pea fowl, Jungle fowl, Spur fowl, Partridges, Quails, Ring doves, Spotted parakeets, Green pigeons, Cuckoos, Rollers, Bee-eater, Hoopoes, Drongos, Warblers, Kingfishers, Woodpeckers, Finches, Orioles, Owls, and Fly catchers amongst many others.

Climate[edit]
The climate of this region is tropical. Summers are hot and dry with a maximum and minimum temperature of 42°C and 24°C. Winters are cold with an average maximum and minimum temperature of 24°C and 1°C, respectively. The annual average rainfall is 152 cm. The park is closed from July to mid October during monsoon.

Get in[edit]
Jabalpur has the nearest airport and railway head, about 3 hours away. Mandla is the nearest city.
Khatia (3 km from Kisli) and Mukki are the two main entry points to the Kanha National Park. From Jabalpur, Kisli is 165 km via Chiraidongri, and Mukki is 203 km via Motinala and Garhi. For travellers from Bilaspur (182 km), Raipur (190 km) and Balaghat (83 km), Mukki on State Highway No. 26 is more convenient. From Nagpur, Kisli is 259 km via Nainpur and Chiraidongri, and Mukki is 250 km via Balaghat.
With flight connectivity from Mumbai and Delhi it has become a very good option for travellers to come via Jabalpur.

Fees and permits[edit]
To enter the national parks tourism zone, tourists must pay an entry fees of ₹1370 per entry but entry for Mukki, Kanha, Kisli, Sarhi, Zone is ₹1370 per entry. Additional ₹360 guide charges. The national park can be visited only by Gypsies which are available in plenty at the entry gate or else can be booked via resort you are staying at. One Gypsy is allowed to carry maximum 6 tourists. For student groups entry fees can be made 50% on special request to the field director office in advance.
Foreign tourists have to pay double the entry fees of Indian tourist i.e. ₹1370 Entry Fees + ₹360 Guide Charges + ₹2000 gypsy charges= ₹3730 Mukki, Kanha, Kisli, Sarhi. For Kanha kisli national park zone, guide charges and ticket charges are same. All rates are in Indian Rupees.
The park is closed between 30th June and 30th September annually.

Get around[edit]
The best way of taking a safari in the park is in open Gypsy which are available and can be booked on reaching or directly through www.mponline.gov.in a government website. Present booking charges for safaris are ₹1230/= per safari. Rates for morning and evening rides are between ₹1500 to ₹2500 and ₹1000 to ₹1700 respectively. If you are reaching in main tourist season or week ends and holidays its better to book your Gypsy and pay your entry fees in advance or else you may just watch people going in yourself sitting at your resort.
Kawardha Palace:
Kawardha Palace is a three-hour drive from the Kanha National Park.  This beautiful resort was built in the period of 1936-39 by the king Dharamraj Singh.  This resort is spread in the area of eleven acres and beautiful Italian marble is used to built this resort.  Other places near to Kawardha Palace are Mandawa mahal, Krishna Temple, Madan manjari Mahal and Bhoremdeo Temple.
Excursions:
Bamni Dadar is near to Kanha National Park. This place is also known as the sunset point. It is famous among the tourists coming to visit Kanha National Park. Almost every tourists who comes to visit Kanha Sanctuary, also visits sunset point as well.  Sunset is the best time to capture the scenic beauty of Kanha National Park in the camera. Sunset from the Bamni Dadar is amazing.
Zones
Kanha national parks tourism area is divided into 4 zones - Kanha, Kisli, Sarai and Mukki with Kanha zone being the premium zone. Although all the zones are equally good as far as bio diversity is concerned but tigers in Kanha and Kisli zones are more accustomed to Gypsy and human traffic and so much easily sighted. To check Tourism maps of Kanha National Park see: Kanha National Park Tourism Zone maps

See[edit]
Bamni Dadar:
Bamni Dadar is well known as the sunset point. This place is quite famous among the tourists and mostly people visit this place to capture a wonderful view of sunset.  Animals like Sambar, Barking Deer, Gaur and the Four Horned Antelope can be easily seen here.
Kanha Museum:
Kanha Museum is located inside the park and is amazing place to visit. This is the best place to get information about the topography and different interesting aspects about the park.
Medicinal Plantation:
Medicinal Plantation Conservation Area or MPCA is located at village Boda Chhapri 2 km from village Mocha and worth a visit. But do remember to ask for a naturalist with good knowledge of plants and do not go on your own as this place is well inside dense forest. Best is to contact the local forest officers for permission and guide.

Do[edit]
Zones: Kanha tourism is divided in 4 zones Kanha, Kisli, Sarhi and Mukki with Kanha zone being the premium zone. It is good if you take morning safari to Kanha zone and evening to Kisli or Sarhi zones. [1]
Elephant Safari: This is one of the best ways to give a closer view to the animals of Kanha national park.  Tourists can enjoy the amazing sightseeing as well as enjoy the wild animals in their natural habitat [2]
Jungle walk (Nature trails): One of the best way to explore and understand the local bio diversity is on foot. Forest department has made jungle trails near Khatia entrance gate and Village Chhapri. To go on trail contact your accommodation provider or at the entrance gate. Nature trail at village chhapri is highly recommended for bird watchers.

Buy[edit]
There are a lot of options for buying stuff as Kanha is a highly commercialized forest.There are a huge number of stores available. You can try buying local handicrafts and t-shirts or key chains and woodworks. You can even buy stuff from the stores. most items are overpriced so use your sense and negotiate.

Drink[edit]
Popular brands of liquor are available at the wine shop at mocha.

Sleep[edit]
22.3354780.491931 Kanha Village Eco Resort (Kanha Village), Near Kanha NP, Village Boda Chhapri, Mandla (2 km from Mocha Bus Stand), ☏ +919977853263, info@kanhavillage.com. Check-in: 13:00, check-out: 12:00. An eco friendly wildlife resort with construction from locally available biodegradable material like clay, straw, etc. Bath area areas cement and RCC construction. Cottages have family pool, Air conditioners, mini refrigerator, writing table, sitting area, etc. Adjacent to a pond and dense forest so if lucky possibilities of viewing wildlife from resort is always there. Resort got "Best Eco Tourism Initiative Award 2010". They assert that they are the only place in Kanha which is following responsible and sustainable tiger tourism rules. US$120. 
 Kipling Camp, Village Mocha (District Mandla), info@kiplingcamp.com. Check-in: noon, check-out: noon. Kipling Camp was one of the first private wildlife resorts in India and is set in acres of unspoilt jungle and a lake. Kipling is also the home of Tara, the much-loved elephant who starred in Mark Shand’s best-selling book “Travels on my Elephant”. Tara loves to be bathed and scrubbed in the Banjar River, a great experience for many guests. 
 The Krishna Jungle Resort, Village Mocha (District Mandla), ☏ +91 761 4004023. Check-in: noon, check-out: noon. US$150 per person on Jungle Plan. 
77.41241523.2672122 Gawa Kanha Resort, Malajkhand, Near Mikki Gate, Balaghat, ☏ +91 80708 08029. Check-in: noon, check-out: noon. Spread over 40.2 acres, the Guava (called “Gawa” locally) orchard at Malajkhand is home to a wonderful biodiversity. The orchard contains 2,200 fruit-bearing guava trees. The orchard also houses a herbal nursery where many carefully selected medicinal plants are seeded and nurtured with immense care. The resort is also being developed into a complete biodiversity park, with a large variety of flora and fauna available on its campus. The resort is a marvel of energy conservation. Except for a little usage for some emergency needs, the resort is completely managed through its own renewable energy setup of full of solar powered plants. One can take beautiful nature walks or roam around to the nearest townships in its electric powered golf cars. ₹4000/₹2600 on twin sharing basis. 
 Shergarh tented camp. With only six tents, Shergarh is arguably the most personal of Kanha's many accommodations. Activities include morning and afternoon game drives, hiking, and a selection of bicycles. 
 Kanha Earth Lodge, Kanha National Park, Village - Narna, ☏ +91 - 124 - 4222657. Kanha Earth Lodge is tucked in a forested area of 16 acres adjoining the buffer zone of Kanha in a small tribal hamlet. It is set in deep jungles away from the tourism hub of Kanha, 9.5 km from the Khatia/Kisli park gate. There is good opportunity to view a variety of mammals and birds around the lodge itself. The lodge's architecture was inspired by the Gond tribal villages which are situated on the fringes of Kanha, making it blend with the forest and rural architecture. Local material and manpower was used extensively in building the lodge; many construction workers were trained and are now part of the permanent lodge team. 
 Singinawa Jungle Lodge, Village Kohka, Tehsil Baihar, Kanha National Park, ☏ +91 - 124 - 4908610. Check-in: 1PM, check-out: noon. Singinawa Jungle Lodge is located near Mukki gate and Baihar. This lodge has luxurious accommodation having 12 cottages and 2 jungle bungalows. They also have spa, swimming pool and more. Good place to experience the wildlife, natural beauty of Kanha and jungle safari. 
 Kanha Resort, Chapri Road, gram: mocha, Dist. Mandla Kanha National Park, info@mpholidays.com. Kanha resorts is spread in 10 acres of with 16 AC cottages. It is surrounded by all over thick valley of forest. 
22.33680.4883 Kanha Eco Lodge, Unit of Kanha Village Eco Resort, Near Kanha national park, Village Boda Chhapri, Panchayat Mocha (Take a left turn from village Mocha towards village Boda Chhapri, reach T joint after 2.5 km and take left turn towards village Kutwahi. After 200 meters turn right on mud road towards Kanha Village eco Resort and reach Kanha eco lodge, adjacent to mother unit), ☏ +91 9977853263, info@kanhavillage.com. Kanha Eco Lodge is an eco friendly budget wildlife lodge with 8 mud houses having modern amenities. It has a multi cuisine restaurant, swimming pool, TV lounge and serves Jain food also. 
22.33680.4884 Grand Tiger Resort, Near Mukki Gate Kanha National Park Village Manjitola (1.1 km from the Mukki Gate of Kanha National Park), ☏ +91 8889502888, grandtigerresort@gmail.com. Check-in: 12:30PM, check-out: 11:30AM. The resort is spread over an area of around 3 acres and is surrounded by lush green forest filled with sal and bamboo trees. Offers accommodation in elegant A.C. rooms equipped with modern amenities, including hot and cold running water, a badminton court, doctor on call, drive-in parking, Internet connection on request, jungle safaris, laundry service, a multi-cuisine restaurant, nature walks, backup power, a souvenir shop, a swimming pool and a volleyball court. 
 Hotel Kanha Treasure, Hotel Kanha Treasure, Opp Kanha National Park, Near Mukki Gate, Village Samnapur (Mukki Gate of park, 3 min. walking distance), ☏ +91 9039055445, shailesh.savaria@ymail.com. Check-in: noon, check-out: noon. AC and non-AC cottages, big swimming pool, children's swimming pool, table tennis, gym, playground, music systems, safari, "jungle feeling" resort. $53 non AC deluxe cottage Including All Meals. (updated Feb 2017)
 Kanha Kisli National Park, kanha national park (mukki), ☏ +91 9039055445, kanhakislinational1@gmail.com. (updated Feb 2017)
 hotel kanha, ☏ +91 98933 92495, shaileshsavaria@gmail.com. Check-in: 12 noon, check-out: 12 noon. safari available in kanha national park, mukki , kanha , kisli , sarhi rs.3500. (updated Apr 2019)
Camping[edit]
Backcountry[edit]
Stay safe[edit]
Go next[edit]
Bandhavgarh - Golbro Tiger View Resort (GTV Resort), near petrol pump, Tala, Bandhavgarh website
Kanha Kisli National Park - Kanha Kisli National Park - Contact Shailesh Savaria - 9893392495. [3]





This park travel guide to Kanha National Park is an outline and needs more content. It has a template, but there is not enough information present.  Please plunge forward and help it grow!