Fort in Maharashtra State, India
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Harishchandragad" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR  (December 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article is written like a manual or guidebook. Please help rewrite this article from a descriptive, neutral point of view, and remove advice or instruction.  (May 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
.mw-parser-output .infobox-subbox{padding:0;border:none;margin:-3px;width:auto;min-width:100%;font-size:100%;clear:none;float:none;background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .infobox-3cols-child{margin:auto}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-header,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-subheader,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-above,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-title,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-image,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-full-data,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-below{text-align:center}HarishchandragadKalbhairav pinnacle, Konkan Kada, HarishchandragadHighest pointElevation1,422 m (4,665 ft)Coordinates.mw-parser-output .geo-default,.mw-parser-output .geo-dms,.mw-parser-output .geo-dec{display:inline}.mw-parser-output .geo-nondefault,.mw-parser-output .geo-multi-punct{display:none}.mw-parser-output .longitude,.mw-parser-output .latitude{white-space:nowrap}19°23′18″N 73°46′33″E﻿ / ﻿19.388239°N 73.77594°E﻿ / 19.388239; 73.77594Coordinates: 19°23′18″N 73°46′33″E﻿ / ﻿19.388239°N 73.77594°E﻿ / 19.388239; 73.77594Geography.mw-parser-output .locmap .od{position:absolute}.mw-parser-output .locmap .id{position:absolute;line-height:0}.mw-parser-output .locmap .l0{font-size:0;position:absolute}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pv{line-height:110%;position:absolute;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pl{line-height:110%;position:absolute;top:-0.75em;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pr{line-height:110%;position:absolute;top:-0.75em;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pv>div{display:inline;padding:1px}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pl>div{display:inline;padding:1px;float:right}.mw-parser-output .locmap .pr>div{display:inline;padding:1px;float:left}HarishchandragadAhmednagar district, India
            Parent rangeWestern GhatsClimbingEasiest routeHike/scramble
Harishchandragad is a hill fort in the Ahmednagar district of India. Its history is linked with that of Malshej Ghat, kothale village and it has played a major role in guarding and controlling the
surrounding region.

Contents

1 History
2 Notable Places of Interest

2.1 Saptatirtha Pushkarni
2.2 Kedareshwar Cave
2.3 Kokan Kada (कोकण कडा)
2.4 Taramati peak
2.5 Caves on Harishchandragad
2.6 Nageshwar temple near Khireshwar
2.7 Temple of Harishchandreshwar


3 How to reach
4 Hiking to the Fort

4.1 Way from Khireshwar
4.2 Way from Belpada
4.3 Way from Pachnai


5 Drinking water
6 Notes
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



History[edit]
The fort is quite ancient. Remnants of Microlithic man have been discovered here. The various Puranas (ancient scriptures) like Matsyapurana, Agnipurana and Skandapurana include many references about Harishchandragad. Its origin is said to have been in the 6th century, during the rule of Kalachuri dynasty. The citadel was built during this era. The various caves probably have been carved out in the 11th century. In these caves are idols of Lord Vishnu. Though the cliffs are named Taramati and Rohidas, they are not related to Ayodhya. Great sage Changdev (one who created the epic Tatvasaar), used to meditate here in the 14th century. The caves are from the same period. The various constructions on the fort and those existing the surrounding region point to the existence of diverse cultures here. The carvings on the temples of Nageshwar (in Khireshwar village), in the Harishchandreshwar temple and in the cave of Kedareshwar indicate that the fort belongs to the medieval period, since it is related to mahadeva as a totem of tribes Mahadev Koli. They were controlling the fort before Moguls.
Later the fort was under the control of Moguls. The Marathas captured it in 1747.

  A panoramic view from the basement
Notable Places of Interest[edit]
Saptatirtha Pushkarni[edit]
To the east of the temple is a well-built lake called “Saptatirtha”. On its bank are temple-like constructions in which there are idols of Lord Vishnu. Recently these idols have been shifted in the caves near the temple of Harishchandreshwar. These days many trekkers have been responsible for the sad plight of this place,[citation needed] as they throw plastic wastes and other things in the pond.[citation needed] 7 years back the water was potable, and now it isn't suitable even to swim. (However, this water is so cold in summer that you can actually feel like you are standing in a refrigeration unit.) 

  Kedareshwar Cave. Local legend holds that when the fourth pillar breaks, the world will come to an end.
Kedareshwar Cave[edit]
Towards the right of Harishchandreshwar temple, there is the huge cave of Kedareshwar (see picture), in which there is a big Shiva Linga, which is completely surrounded by water. Its height from the base is five feet, and the water is waist-deep. It is quite difficult to reach the Shiva Linga because the water is ice-cold. There are sculptures carved out in the cave. In the monsoon it is not possible to reach this cave, as a huge stream flows across the way. Actually this is the origin of River Mangalganga.
As can be seen from the picture, there is a huge rock above the Shiva Linga. There were four pillars built around the Shiva Linga to support the cave.
Another interesting thing about this place is that water seeps into this temple from the four walls on an everyday basis. And owing to the water being very cold, it's difficult to reach inside too. The water continues to seep in during all the seasons during the year. During rainy season the water level in this cave becomes almost waist high.

  Kokankada
Kokan Kada (कोकण कडा)[edit]
This cliff faces west and looks down upon the Konkan. It provides views of the surrounding region. The cliff has an overhang, but has been climbed many times. Sometimes a circular rainbow (the Brocken spectre phenomenon) can be seen from this point. It can be seen only when there is a bit of mist in the valley, and the sun is right behind the person facing the valley. One phenomenon that can be observed at this place is the vertical cloud burst, in which the clouds nearing the cliff get sucked into the pit fall area below and are thrown vertically into the sky reaching more than 50 feet (15 m), creating the impression of a wall that is rising straight from the edge of the cliff without entering the landmass area. If you happen to visit this place in April-May, then throw your panama cap from the cliff and enjoy it rising high and falling back on the plateau.

Taramati peak[edit]
Also known as Taramanchi. This is the top most point on the fort (1429 meters). Leopards are seen in the forests beyond this peak. From here we can have a glimpse of the whole range of Naneghat and the forts near Murbad.
From this Taramati point, we can have a glimpse of forts till Siddhagad near Bhimashankar in the south and Napta twin peaks, Ghodishep (865 meters), Ajoba (1375 meters), Kulang fort (1471 meters) in the north near the Kasara region.

  A panoramic view from the peak
Caves on Harishchandragad[edit]
These caves are spread out all over the fort. Many of these are situated at the foot of Taramati peak and are the place of accommodation. A few are near the temple, whereas some are near the citadel and some far away in the forests. A 30 feet (9.1 m) deep natural cave is on the northwestern side of the fort, to the right of Kokan Kada. Many other caves are still said to remain undiscovered.

Nageshwar temple near Khireshwar[edit]
This is a great antique construction, and diverse artistic works are seen on this. On the ceiling of the temple are carvings. The main attraction of the carvings here is the 1.5 m long sculpture of Lord Vishnu in the sleeping posture, popularly known as "Sheshshayi Vishnu" in Marathi. It is rare and hence holds a lot of importance. There are a lot of legends told about this sculpture. There are caves near the temple.

  Temple of Harishchandreshwar
Temple of Harishchandreshwar[edit]
  Ganapati, Harishchandreshwar Temple
This temple is marvelous example of the fine art of carving sculptures out of stones that prevailed in ancient India. It is about 16 m high from its base. Around this temple there a few caves & ancient water tanks. The river Mangal Ganga is said to originate from one of the tanks located close to the temple. The top of the temple resembles construction with the north-Indian temples. A similar temple is situated in Buddha-Gaya. Here we can see many tombs, in which a typical construction is seen. These are built by well-finished arranging stones one on top of the other. There are three main caves near the temple. The cisterns near the temple provide drinking water. A short distance away, another temple called Kashitirtha is located. The fascinating thing about this temple is that it has been carved out from a single huge rock. There are entrances from all four sides. On the main entrance there are sculptures of faces. These are faces of guards of the temple. On the left side of the entrance is a Devsnagsri inscription, which is about saint Changdev.

How to reach[edit]
Harishchandragad lies where the boundaries of Thane, Pune and Ahmednagar districts converge.
1) From Thane District:
One has to board the bus for Nagar from Kalyan & alight at ‘Khubi Phata’. From there we reach the village of Khireshwar by bus or private vehicle. This village is 7 km from the foothills of the fort.
2) From Pune District:
There is a daily bus from Shivajinagar ST stand (Pune) to Khireswar village.
3) From Ahmednagar District:
One has to board the bus for Nashik or Mumbai & alight at Ghoti village. From Ghoti, we have to board another bus to Sangamner via Malegaon & alight at Rajur village. From here, 2 ways diverge to the fort.
1) From Rajur, one has to board the bus or a private vehicle to the village of Pachanai. From here, the way is straight to the topmost point.
2) Recently, the way from Rajur to kothale (Tolar Khind) has been made available. From Tolar Khind (Tolar valley), the temple is about 2–3 hours by walking.
3) from kotul to kothale bus facilities available way to tolar khind every hour bus going towards kothale, private vehicles also available on this route.

Hiking to the Fort[edit]
There are 4–5 known ways up to the fort, the most usual being the following ones:

Way from Khireshwar[edit]
The way beside the caves, where water tanks are seen, proceeds further to Junnar Darwaaja (entrance From Junnar). From here, the route goes straight to Tolar Khind. Walking a few minutes from Tolar Khind, we come across a rock-patch on which railings are fixed. After ascending the railings, we come to the plateau region on which less dense forests are seen. From here, we have to cross 7 hills and after a walk of 2–3 hours, we reach the temple of Harishchandreshwar, the temple of Lord Shiva.
Also there is one interesting short route if one has to skip the seven hills. By this route, you can reach the temple in 1 hour instead of 2 hours through seven hills but this route goes through very very dense forests hence if you are in group of many people, this route can be tried. After climbing the rock patch from the Tolar Khind, follow the usual trek route going ahead and at one point, you will encounter two ways one to the right goes to the temple through seven hills and the straight one goes below the Balekilla (citadel) through very dense forests and this route reaches to the seventh mountain directly.

Way from Belpada[edit]
The third way is specially meant for hikers, which is via Sadhleghat. One should board the bus for Malshej Ghat and go to the village of Belpada via Savarne village on the Malshej-Kalyan road. From here, the route goes through Sadhleghat. Here one has to climb a straight rock patch on which grips are provided. The temple is situated at a height of about 1 km from Belpada. The total distance is about 19 km. This route is not very popular and less used. Trekkers are advised to take guide and very slippery in rainy season.

Way from Pachnai[edit]
  Five waterfall which recognize Pachnai
There is another way to reach Harischandragad is from Pachnai village, a village you can reach by buses or private vehicles. Buses coming from Rajur, Akole or from Kotul. From Kotul the distance is 25 km with buses going every hour towards Pachnai & Kothale. From kothale pachnai is 5 km away, you can reach there by local transport. Harischandragad is 3 km away from Pachnai. To reach Harischandragad you need to go by foot. On this way there is a small pond of pure natural water available at that pond. The history of that pond is that some years ago this pond provided water for all cowboys who came from the nearest villages. Pachnai is surrounded by mountain and in monsoon you can get visual of five falls from base.

Drinking water[edit]
The water tanks near the caves provide water all round the year for basic needs. The perennial stream running near the caves is the major source for drinking water. It is advisable to refrain from drinking water at the tank near to caves. While in monsoon, there are a number of waterfalls around the caves which provide potable water. Potable water is available from the tanks which are present in the temple compound.
On weekends during summer and winter, the villagers sell lemon water and buttermilk at 2–3 points between Tolar Khind and Harishchandreshwar. Basic meals are available at 7–8 temporary shacks over the weekend. Even tents can be provided by local people for accommodation.

Notes[edit]
In monsoon, proper care should be taken while trekking in the rockface after Tolar khind. It is advisable not to walk on the rock face in monsoon particularly during night where one can experience heavy rainfall with thunder strikes.
ST bus timings from Pune for trekkers

Take a 4:30 am ST bus from Shivajinagar to Kalwan via Nasik
Get down at Ale-Phata around 6:30 am
Take another bus going to Kalyan from Ale-Phata. You will have 2 to 3 buses around 7:00 am
Reach Khubi-Phata village around 7:45 am and start walking towards Khireshwar along Pimpalgaon Joge dam. You will reach Khireshwar, the base village in 1 hour
While coming to Pune, around evening, there are many buses available around 5:30 pm from the Khubi Phata village on Malshej road.

See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Harishchandragad.

List of forts in Maharashtra
References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

External links[edit]
Harishchandragad Information website
Junnar Tourism's Official Website
Parashar Agritourism Website
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vteWestern GhatsRivers
Bhadra
Bhavani
Bhima
Chalakudy
Chittar
Godavari
Gurupura
Kabini
Kali
Kallayi
Kaveri
Koyna
Krishna
Kundali
Malaprabha
Manimuthar
Netravati
Pachaiyar
Parambikulam
Saraswati
Savitri
Sharavati
Tambaraparani
Tapti
Tunga
Venna
Regions
Desh
Goa Gap
Konkan
Malabar
Malenadu
North Malabar
Kongu Nadu
Palakkad Gap
Tulu Nadu
Peaks
Agastya Mala
Anamudi
Anginda
Anjaneri
Banasura
Biligirirangana Betta
Brahmagiri
Chembra
Dhodap
Doddabetta
Gangamoola
Harishchandragad
Kalsubai
Kemmangundi
Kudremukh
Kumarikkal Mala
Kodachadri
Kumara Parvata
Meesapulimala
Mullayana Giri
Marunthuvazh Malai
Nedumpara Peak
Ponmudi
Pushpagiri
Paithalmala
Raigad
Salher
Saptashrungi
Sispara
Sonsogor
Tadiandamol
Taramati
Vavul Mala
Vellarimala
Ranipuram
Vagamon
Hills
Ambanad Hills
Anaimalai Hills
Biligiriranga Hills
Cardamom Hills
Nilgiri Mountains
Satmala Range
Selbari Range
Palani Hills
Trimbakeshwar Range
Waterfalls
Abbey
Chunchanakatte
Dudhsagar Falls
Gokak
Irupu
Jog
Kalhatti
Mallalli Falls
Sathodi
Lushington
Sivasamudram
Athirapally Falls
Vazhachal Falls
Hogenakkal
States
Tamil Nadu
Gujarat
Karnataka
Kerala
Maharashtra
Goa
Parks &Reserves
Annekal Reserved Forest
Aralam Reserved Forest
Agasthyamala Biosphere Reserve
Agasthyavanam Biological Park
Bandipur National Park
Bannerghatta National Park
Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary
Bhimgad Wildlife Sanctuary
Brahmagiri Wildlife Sanctuary
Chandoli National Park
Chimmony Wildlife Sanctuary
Chinnar Wildlife Sanctuary
Dandeli National Park
Eravikulam National Park
Grass Hills National Park
Kali Tiger Reserve
Kalakkad Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve
Karian Shola National Park
Karnala Bird Sanctuary
Koyna Wildlife Sanctuary
Kudremukh National Park
Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary
Mudumalai National Park
Mudumalai Tiger Reserve
Mukurthi National Park
Nagarhole Rajiv Gandhi National Park
New Amarambalam Reserved Forest
Neyyar Wildlife Sanctuary
Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve
Palani Hills National Park
Parambikulam Tiger Reserve
Peechi-Vazhani Wildlife Sanctuary
Peppara Wildlife Sanctuary
Periyar National Park
Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary
Radhanagari Wildlife Sanctuary
SAI Sanctuary
Sathyamangalam Wildlife Sanctuary
Shendurney Wildlife Sanctuary
Silent Valley National Park
Someshwara Wildlife Sanctuary
Grizzled Squirrel Wildlife Sanctuary
Talakaveri Wildlife Sanctuary
Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary
Places
Bhivpuri
Chiplun
Chiplun
Kalsubai
Khandala
Kudremukh
Kodagu
Karjat
Kasara
Lonavala
Lavasa
Mahabaleshwar
Malshej Ghat
Matheran
Panchgani
Raigad Fort
Rajgad Fort
Shivneri Fort
Tamhini Ghat
Ghats
Amboli Ghat
Bhor Ghat
Tamhini Ghat
Amba Ghat
Bhor Road Ghat
Chorla Ghat
Goa Gap
Kasara Road Ghat
Kumbharli Ghat
Malshej Ghat
Naneghat
Charmadi ghat
Shiraadi ghat
Bisle ghat
Sampaje ghat
Palakkad Gap
Varandha Ghat
Related
Mountains of Kerala
Mountains of Maharashtra

vteForts in MaharashtraAhmednagar district
Ahmednagar Fort
Bahadurgad
Bhairavgad
Bitangad
Harishchandragad
Kaladgad
Kharda
Kunjargad
Madan Fort
Manjarsumbha fort
Pabargad
Patta Fort
Ratangad
Akola district
Akola Fort
Balapur
Narnala
Amravati district
Amner Fort
Gawilghur
Aurangabad district
Antur Fort
Daulatabad Fort
Chandrapur district
Chandrapur Fort
Ballarpur Fort
Bhadravati Fort
Manikgad
Dhule district
Bhamer
Laling
Thalner
Kolhapur district
Bhudargad
Gandharvgad
Panhala
Pargadh
Pavangad
Samangad
Vishalgad
Latur district
Udgir
Mumbai City district
Bombay Castle
Dongri Fort
Fort George
Mahim Fort
Mazagon Fort
Riwa Fort
Sewri Fort
Sion Hillock Fort
Worli Fort
Mumbai Suburban district
Castella de Aguada
Madh
Nagpur district
Sitabuldi
Nanded district
Kandhar Fort
Nashik district
Aavandhagad
Achala Fort
Ahivant Fort
Alang
Anjaneri
Ankai Fort
Bahulagad
Bhaskargad
Chandwad
Chauler Fort
Dermal
Dhodap
Hargad
Harihar fort
Hatgad
Indrai
Kanchangad
Kanhergad
Kavnai fort
Kulang
Madangad
 Malegaon
Mangi-Tungi
Moragad
Mulher
Nhavigad
Rajdher fort
Ramsej
Salher
Salota
Saptashrungi
Tankai fort
Tringalwadi
Waghera
Osmanabad district
Naldurg Fort
Paranda Fort
Palghar district
Bassein
Kaldurg
Tandulwadi
Pune district
Anghaai Fort
Bhorgiri Fort
Chawand
Dhakoba
Ghangad
Hadsar Fort
Induri Fort
Jivdhan
Kailasgad
Kawla
Korigad/Koraigad
Lohagad
Malhargad
Manaranjan
Mangalgad
Morgiri Fort
Narayangad
Nimgiri
Purandar
Rajgad
Rajmachi
Rayri Fort
Rohida
Sangram Durg
Sindola Fort
Shaniwar Wada
Shivneri
Shrivardhan
Sinhagad
Tikona
Torna
Tung
Vajragad Fort
Visapur
Raigad district
Agarkot
Avchitgad
Bhimashankar Fort
Bhiwgad
Birwadi
Chambhargad
Chandragad
Dhak Bahiri
Dronagiri
Gadad Bahiri
Ghangad
Ghosalgad
Irshalgad
Karnala
Khaderi
Khanderi
Kondhawi Fort
Korlai
Kothaligad Peb fort
Kulaba
Kurdugad
Lingana
Maangad
Madgad
Malanggad
Mangalgad (Kangori)
Manikgad
Mirgad
Mrugagad
Murud-Janjira
Padargad
Padmadurg/ Kasa Fort
Prabalgad
Raigad
Ratnagad
Revdanda
Sagargad
Samrajgad
Sankshi Fort
Sarasgad
Sarjekot
Songad
Songiri Fort
Sudhagad
Surgad
Talagad
Underi
Vikatgad Peb fort
Ratnagiri district
Aambolgad
Anjanwel
Bankot
Fattedurg
Gopalgad
Govindgad
Gowalkot
Jaigad
Kanakdurg
Mahipatgad
Mandangad
Prachitgad
Prunagad
Rasalgad
Ratnagiri Fort/ Ratnadurg
Sumargad
Suvarnadurg
Yashwantgad
Satara district
Ajinkyatara
Bhairavgad
Bhushangad
Chandan-Vandan
Dategad
Gunavantgad
Jangali Jayagad
Kalyangad
Kamalgad
Kenjalgad
Mahimangad
Pandavgad
Prachitgad
Pratapgad
Sajjangad
Santoshgad
Vairatgad
Vardhangad
Varugad
Vasantgad
Vasota
Sindhudurg district
Aasavgad
Bharatgad
Rajkot Fort
Sanrjekot
Sindhudurg
Vijaydurg
Thane district
Aajobagad
Aasawa
Arnala
Asherigad
Ballalgad
Balwantgad
Belapur Fort
Bhairavgad
Bhandargad
Bhavanigad
Bhupatgad
Chanderigad
Dahanugad
Daulatmandal
Dharavi
Durgadi Fort
Gambhirgad
Ghodbunder Fort
Gorakhgad
Gotara
Jivdhaanigad
Kamandurg
Kelwegad
Kohojgad
Mahuli
Malang gad
Palasgad
Pankot
Tahuli
Segwa
Shirgav Fort
Siddhgad
Tarapur Fort

vte Forts in IndiaVijayanagara
Gingee
Bangalore
Udayagiri
Vellore
Deccan sultanates
Ahmednagar
Daulatabad
Gawilghur
Golconda
Narnala
Panhala
Gujarat Sultanate
Bhadra
Delhi Sultanate
Aligarh
Bandhavgarh
Hathras
Qila Mubarak
Siri
Tughlaqabad
Salimgarh
Nayak dynasty
Chitradurga
Bekal
Dindigul
Gingee
Tiruchirapalli Rock
Chandragiri Fort
Hosdurg
Malwa Sultanate
Mandsaur
Mandavgadh
Faruqi dynasty
Asirgarh
Laling
Thalner
Rajputs
Achalgarh
Amber
Bhangarh
Chittor
Jaigarh
Jaisalmer
Jalore
Junagarh
Kankwadi
Kumbhalgarh
Nahargarh
Qila Rai Pithora
Taragarh
Lal Kot
Gwalior
Kalinjar
Hinglajgarh
Mehrangarh
Narwar
Senapati fortress
Sabalgarh
Bahu
Kangra
Ranthambore
Bhatner fort
Maratha Empire
Dongri
Harishchandragad
Kolaba
Lohagad
Sudhagad
Sinhagad
Tikona
Panhala
Pratapgad
Vishalgad
Rajgad
Sindhudurg
Vijaydurg
Shivneri
Raigad
Gajendragarh
Gingee
Shaniwar Wada
Jhansi
Hinglajgarh
Manora
Visapur
Sadashivgad
Mughal Empire
Purana Qila
Chanderi
Agra
Allahabad
Fatehpur Sikri
Red
Akola
Hari Parbat
Ramnagar
Jat
Bawana Fort
Gohad
Lohagarh
Nahar Singh Mahal
Kingdom of Mysore
Devanahalli
Palakkad
Bekal
Sankagiri
Siddi
Murud-Janjira
Belapur
Underi
Travancore
Vattakottai
Udayagiri
East
Portuguese
Bassein Fort
Bombay Castle
Mahim
Arnala
Castella de Aguada
Diu Fort
Surat Castle
Fortim do Mar, Diu
Fortim do Mar, Simbor
Emmanuel
Fort Anjediva
Korlai
Madh Fort
St Thomas, Tangasseri
St. Angelo
Pallipuram
Aguada
Fort Tiracol
Anjediva
Cranganore
Ghodbunder
Fortaleza de Chaul
Ponda Fort
Chapora Fort
Fortaleza de São Sebastião de Tivim
Cabo de Rama
Corjuem Fort
Mormugão fort
Rachol Fort
Fort of São Tiago of Banastarim
Sikh Empire
Jamrud
Kamlah
Multan
Harkishangarh
Lahore
British Raj
Anchuthengu
St. George
William
Bombay
Riwa
Worli
Mazagon
Sion Hillock
Sewri
Mahim
Tellicherry
St. David
Sur Empire
Chunar
Rohtasgarh
Munger
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Barabati
Raibania
Ahom dynasty
Talatal Ghar
Kareng Ghar
Rang Ghar
Garchuk Lachit Garh
Kakatiya dynasty
Warangal
Bahmani Sultanate
Bidar
Gulbarga





