Fort in India



This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

      This article may be too technical for most readers to understand. Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts, without removing the technical details.  (June 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The talk page may contain suggestions.  (June 2010)
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Narnala" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR  (September 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
    
 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
  Narnala (Marathi नरनाळा) photo by dhiraj hadole
Narnala Fort or Narnala Killa Sarkar, also known as Shahnoor Fort, is a hill fortress in the Satpura Range of Vidarbh, Maharashtra, India, named after the Rajput Solanki Chaulukya Ruler, Raja Narnal Singh, also known as Narnal Singh Swami. It was renamed as "Shahnoor" by Islamic rulers but again acquired, rebuilt and got its name "Narnala" by ruler RaoRana Narnal Singh  Solanki, who migrated from Rajasthan, Tonk district, originally by Patan, Gujarat and was a descendant of Narnal Singh Swami.

Contents

1 Rulers of Narnala
2 About Narnal Singh
3 Details
4 Location
5 History
6 The Islamic architecture
7 Major features
8 Other buildings within the complex
9 See also
10 References



Rulers of Narnala[edit]
Briefly, the fort was first established in around 10 century A.D. by Gond Kings and major fortifications were made by Narnal Singh Swami and some by RaoRana Narnal Singh Solanki, like the Mahakali Gate. It was then taken over by other Islamic rulers. In the mid 15th Century, it was occupied and rebuilt by the Mughals, becoming one of Berar Subah's thirteen sarkar. Later, in the late 17th century, it was under Maratha Empire, controlled by Bhosale of Nagpur Kingdom and their reliable regent and Sardar, earlier the ruler of Narnala, the Solanki Rajput Killedar family of RaoRana mentioned above.
After built by RajGond People,
1) A Somvanshi Kshatriya,
Chaulukya Rajput ruler Narnal Singh Swami
2) Rajgond of Devgarh-Nagpur (around 1400 CE)
3) Bahamani Sultanate (1422–1436)
4) Farooqui dynasty (1437)
5) Fathullah Imad-ul-Mulk (1490)
6) RaoRana Narnal Singh Solanki
7) Burhan Imad Shah, Imad Shahi Dynasty (1572)
8) Ahmadnagar Sultanate
9) Mughals (1597–98)
10) Maratha Empire (1701–1803), Raje Parsoji Bhosale's regent & descendant of the RaoRana, later known as The Thakur Rajput Killedar and their descendants, until 1803.

About Narnal Singh[edit]
Raja Narnal Singh or Narnal Singh Swami was a scion of Somvanshi Kshatriya Rajput Chaulukya ruler, on whose name the fort is named. The fort was ruled by several rulers and killedars after him thus making a lot of changes in the original Rajput style. After him, his descendant from the north & descendant of the ruling family of Rao Raja of Rajasthan came to this fort.
Kunwar Rao Narnal Singh, earned the title 'RaoRana", thus becoming "Rana" of the Mahur Sarkar, along with his younger brother got 32 villages as a grant in Narnala, by Imadshahi Dynasty, by son of Fathullah Imad-ul-Mulk, ruler of Berar Sultanate a Kanarese Hindu, converted to Islam and special rights of the Narnala fort,  by Rajgond of Devgarh.
After fall of Imad Shahi Dynasty, the Rana left Mahurgad, because of disagreement with the later rulers, the Mughal, declining Mughal sovereignty thus lost the land and fort rights in a small battle to Mughal subhedars. After this the Rana joined RajGond of Devgarh, and his descendants fought against mughals alongside Rani Durgawati, and were granted the title ThakurRao of Narnala Sarkar, by the ruler RajGond Raja of Devgarh.
After the fall of Gonds, they were invited to join Marathas by Raja Bahadur Bhosale of Nagpur who discovered this family to be of great valour and experienced in Narnala and surrounding forts. Thakurrao Harisingh Rana joined Bhosale and served Maratha Empire, after knowing that the Bhosales are descendants from Maharanas of Mewar.
Raghoji I Bhonsle, granted him title "Killedar" of Narnala, Gawilgad & 8 other forts of Melghat, along with the Zamindar Patilki rights of 13 villages and Deshmukh of 21 villages in Malkapur pargana in the sarkar of Narnala. Even after being promoted to title Deshmukh, most of the family members carry the surname Patil or Sarpatil/Ranapatil, as this title has different respect amongst people of Maharashtra & due to respect of the trust shown by the Raghoji I Bhonsle, the Raje Bhosale of Nagpur Kingdom.
A younger brother of the then Killedar Sriman Thakurrao Rana Sar Patil (Deshmukh), shifted his capital to from Malkapur to Nadgaon, dividing the family in two parts. There are 8 houses of the family for till now. The title holder Zamindars of which are as follows:
1) The younger branch of family is Nadgaon branch of Zamindars, carried the title Vatandar, Rao and Patil. Later, the descendants earned various titles in pre-independence period like Rao Sahib, Diwan Bahadur, Rao Bahadur,etc. Most honoured and notable person of this family is Smt. Pratibha Patil, the ex- President of India, also the daughter of the Rao Patil of Nadgaon.
2) The elder branch of family is Malkapur branch of the Zamindars, carrying the titular rights of Deshmukh Vatandar Thakur Rao, and held the office of Pargana officer of Taluka. But after the khalsa of the watan rights and the pargana officer's responsibilities of his grandfather, the elder descendant, Sriman Rana Thakur Onkarsinghji with the suggestion from HH Rana of Barwani and help from Rana of Pratappur, permanently shifted to Talode, Khandesh in the late 19th century.

Details[edit]
It consists of three small forts: Zafarabad (or Jafarabad) fort on the east, Narnala in the centre and Teliagarh to the west. The lake within the centre of the complex is said to possess healing properties and according to legend contained the philosopher's stone, though no stone was found when the lake dried up in the drought and Indian famine of 1899-1900.
Occupied since at least the Khalji dynasty, the fort is well known for the Muslim saint Burhanuddin, "Bagh Sawar Wali", and it is said that many white tigers were seen with him at that time. Adli Beg or Atalu Beg carved many Arabic inscriptions into the fort and the Kadak Bijli cannon. It is also the birthplace of the Mughal Aurangzeb's great-grandson.

Location[edit]
The fort is located in the Akot Taluka of Akola district, Berar at coordinates of 21°14'38"N 77°01'40"E. The closest city is Akot, which is 18 km away. It is at the southernmost tip of the Satpura Hills at an elevation of 932 meters above sea level.[1] Currently the fort falls within the Melghat Tiger Reserve.
Climate of Narnala fort is classified as Humid subtropical (Cwa) as per Köppen-Geiger climate classification with mild to cool winters (November to March), wet Monsoon season (June to October) and hot long summer (March to June). Temperature ranges from 0 °C to 23 °C in winter, 17 °C to 42 °C in summer and 15 °C to 30 °C in Monsoon.

  The third-longest cannon in India, at 27 feet
History[edit]
  Narnala fort, circa 1860
  Mahakaali gate is Beautifully carved
  Shows the fortification of Narnala
The exact date of construction is not known. The first fortifications, according to local legend, were made by Naryendrapai or Narnal Singh Swami, a descendant of the Somvanshi Kshatriya Pandavas and at the time Emperor of Hastinapur, (Delhi), a branch from Somvanshi Kshatriya Chaulukya ruler of Ayodhya, whose descendant 
"Raorana Narnal Singh", later in early 16th century ruled Narnala for some years. It likely predates 1400 CE as Firishta -the Persian historian- records that Ninth Badshaha Shahbudeen Ahmad Shah I Wali (1422 CE to 1436 CE) during construction of the Gawilgarh fort, made repairs to Narnala fort when he camped at Achalpur (Elichpur) from 1425 to 1428. This would mean that the Narnala fort was constructed before Bahmani rule.[2]
In 1437, when Nashir Khan the subhedar of Khandesh invaded Berar, the governor of the province (also called Khan-i-Jahan), remained loyal to his master, Ala-ud-din Ahmad Shah II (son of Ahmad Shah I Wali) and retreated to Narnala. He was besieged by disaffected nobles and Nashir Khan, but managed to break through the besieging force with help of Khalaf Hasan Basri who was sent by Ala-ud-din Ahmed Shah II. Nasir Khan was defeated.[3]
In 1487 CE Narnala along with Gawilgarh came under the control of Fathullah Imad-ul-Mulk, the founder of Imad shahi dynasty at Ellichpur (or Achalpur). He appointed some regents to rule different parts and forts of the empire, for e.g. RaoRana  Narnal Singh Solanki as Governor of Narnala and sometimes Gawilgad.[4]
In 1572 Burhan Imad Shah (also of the Imad Shahi dynasty) was confined in Narnala by his minister Tufal Khan. This gave Murtaza Nizam Shah of Ahmadnagar a pretext to lay siege to the fortress. He captured both king and minister, subsequently putting them to death. Thus the fort passed into the hands of the Ahmednagar kings. In 1597–98, the fort was captured by Akbar's officers, Saiyid Yusuf Khan Mashhad and Shaikh Abul Fazl, and renamed Shanur. from the officer who held it for the Sultan of Ahmadnagar.[5] During Akbar's rule, Narnala was one of the Sarkars of Berar Subah (see Berar Subah).
Sardar Beg Mirza and Qader Beg Mirza, hereditary descendants of the Mughal dynasty in the 18th century, stayed near Argaon because Shah Beg Subedar of Berar held the fort.
Narnala was captured by Parsoji Bhosale in 1701 CE and he appointed the Raorana Family descendants the Thakurraos as the governor of Narnala  and the surrounding forts and Narnala remained with the Marathas till it was taken over by the British in 1803 CE.

The Islamic architecture[edit]
It is also said that the Shahnoor fort is modified /built by the Sultan Mahmoud Gazhnavi because he is a follower of Bagh-sawar wali Burhanuddin, maintained after Imad shahi dynasty and after this Akbar invaded Berar and was maintained by Mughals. Mughals recreated the Narnala Fort with Mughal architecture and built mosque at the fort. By his killedar, Shah Dulha Rehman Ghazi of Ellichpur (now Achalpur) was maternal cousin of Sultan Mehmood Ghaznavi and maternal grandson of Sultan Nasiruddin. He marched for battle against Rajah Eil. Through the route of Shahnoor Fort he stayed here threefold night and prayed.
Ahmad Shah Bahamani got the fort repaired around 1425 when he constructed Gavilgad with a view to obstructing the invaders from the north frontier of his kingdom. Nearly all the present buildings seem to be of Islamic origin as the later Islamic rulers modified them. The fort passed on to Fathullah Imad-ul-Mulk when he became an independent ruler by 1490 as he was the Subhedar of Berar under the Bahamanis. Gavilgad was also passed on to him. 
Later, Burhan Imad Shah was imprisoned on this fort by one of his Amirs Tufalkhan who crowned himself. In the battle that was fought between Tufalkhan and Murtaza Nizam Shah in 1572 Tufalkhan was defeated and had to flee and took asylum with Muhammad Shah of Khandesh. On being threatened by Murtaza Nizam Shah of dire consequences if the asylum was continued, Muhammad Shah of Khandesh, refused to give refuge to Tufalkhan who was forced to return to Narnala fort and stay there. The fort was invested by the army of Murtaza. The fort surrendered and Tufalkhan and also Burhan Imad Shah were imprisoned along with 40 others. They were confined in the fort of Lohagad where they died while in captivity. Some historians say that all of them were poisoned under the orders of Murtaza Nizam Shah. After the battle that was fought between the armies of the Ahmadnagar kingdom and the Emperor Akbar on 26 January 1597 in which the armies of the Adilshahi Emperor who along with the Kutub Shah of Golconda was an ally of Nizamshah emerged successful. The fort can now ho ascended by a motorable road. About halfway up it crosses first one and then another piece of level ground, each thickly sprinkled with Islamic tombs.
The path passes two other strong gateways and one slighter one before entering the heart of the fort, and climbs meanwhile to the uppermost glials. Between the last two gateways are the domed tombs of Bagh Savar Wali and Gaz Badshah Wali, the former not only rode a tiger in his life but the old Gazetteer slates "even now a tiny white tiger may be seen at night going to and from his tomb." Passing the last gateway one comes almost at once before the Ambar Bangala, the kacheri of former days.
After his expedition across the Gangetic plains in 1017, of Al-Biruni to compose his Tarikh Al-Hind in order to understand the Indians and their beliefs.

Major features[edit]
The fort covers an area of 362 acres (1.46 km2). The major features and architecture were done by Hindu rulers, mainly the Solanki Rajput Killedars and the rulers of Gondwana, I.e., the RajGond, but modified by Islamic rulers into Islamic style by the time. It has 360 watchtowers, six large and twenty-one small gates. The large gates are called the Delhi darvaza, the Sirpur darvaza, the Akot darvaza, and the Shahanur darvaza. The innermost of the three gate-ways is the Mahakali gate named by Killedar family as Goddess Mahakali is their family deity. It is built of white sandstone and is highly ornate. It is decorated with conventional lotus flowers, a rich cornice, and later flourished with Arabic inscriptions, and flanked by projecting balconies with panels of stone lattice-work displaying considerable variety of design. It is considered an example of Sultanate style of architecture.[6] An inscription records the fact that the gate was built in the reign of Shahab-ud-din Mahmud Shah (Bahmani) by Fathullah Imad-ul-Mulk in 1486. A short verse from the Quran is also inscribed. The fort still display " Ashtakamal" eight petals Lotus which was the symbol of Narnal Singh's Solanki dynasty goddess Khimaj or Mahalaxmi. These lotuses are visible on the mosques and many other places. Hence it is evident that Islamic rulers made changes in Narnal Singh's original architectural construction and converted the place in Moghul/Islamic form. It was impossible for any ruler to rebuild the entire fort considering the geographical location of the fort.
It has an aqueduct and drains to catch rainwater. Along with 19 tanks, four of which are full throughout the year, this ensured a plentiful water supply to the fort residents.

Other buildings within the complex[edit]
  There was a Mahakali Goddess Temple in the staircase of Gate. The idol was possibly destroyed by Mughal rulers
  This is Palace which was for Queens
This section is in list format but may read better as prose. You can help by converting this section, if appropriate. Editing help is available.  (October 2020)
Mahakali Temple - The Mahakali Dwar or door named after a temple of Mahakali in the beginning of fort which is in ruins now. It has been said that the temple had idols of deities which was later stolen.
Rani Mahal - Rani Mahal or Rani Palace is still standing. It was the place of residence for the Ranis,  Conquibines and guest women.
Peshva Mahal - Peshva came here and stayed along with the Bhosale Maharaja of Nagpur for an important meeting, the place is called Peshva Mahal also in ruins now.
Baradari
Sarrafkhana
Arsenal of old guns called nau-gazi tope, meaning 9-yard gun, a reference to its length and not range
Elephant stables of Narnal Singh and Bhosale Maharaja.
The ruins of a palace erected specially in honour of Raja Raghuji Bhonsle
Another mosque on Teliagad built by Bahamanis.
The Jama Masjid, now in ruins, is said to have borne an Arabic inscription recording its construction in 1509 by Mahabat Khan, but this has disappeared.
A small mosque attributed to Aurangzeb.
[2]

See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Narnala Fort.

List of forts in Maharashtra
References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ [1] Archived 7 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine

^ Jump up to: a b .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}"Imperial Gazetteer2 of India, Volume 18, page 379 - Imperial Gazetteer of India - Digital South Asia Library". Dsal.uchicago.edu. Retrieved 15 September 2013.

^ Haig, Sir Wolseley (1907). Historic landmarks of the Deccan - Sir Thomas Wolseley Haig - Internet Archive. Printed at the Pioneer Press. p. 156. Retrieved 15 September 2013. nasir khan narnala.

^ [2] Archived 26 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine

^ "MAHARASHTRA TOURISM, The Official Website of Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation Ltd. - NarnalaAkola_AchalpurForts". Maharashtratourism.gov.in. Retrieved 15 September 2013.

^ [3] Archived 30 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine


.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vteForts in MaharashtraAhmednagar district
Ahmednagar Fort
Bahadurgad
Bhairavgad
Bitangad
Harishchandragad
Kaladgad
Kharda
Kunjargad
Madan Fort
Manjarsumbha fort
Pabargad
Patta Fort
Ratangad
Akola district
Akola Fort
Balapur
Narnala
Amravati district
Amner Fort
Gawilghur
Aurangabad district
Antur Fort
Daulatabad Fort
Chandrapur district
Chandrapur Fort
Ballarpur Fort
Bhadravati Fort
Manikgad
Dhule district
Bhamer
Laling
Thalner
Kolhapur district
Bhudargad
Gandharvgad
Panhala
Pargadh
Pavangad
Samangad
Vishalgad
Latur district
Udgir
Mumbai City district
Bombay Castle
Dongri Fort
Fort George
Mahim Fort
Mazagon Fort
Riwa Fort
Sewri Fort
Sion Hillock Fort
Worli Fort
Mumbai Suburban district
Castella de Aguada
Madh
Nagpur district
Sitabuldi
Nanded district
Kandhar Fort
Nashik district
Aavandhagad
Achala Fort
Ahivant Fort
Alang
Anjaneri
Ankai Fort
Bahulagad
Bhaskargad
Chandwad
Chauler Fort
Dermal
Dhodap
Hargad
Harihar fort
Hatgad
Indrai
Kanchangad
Kanhergad
Kavnai fort
Kulang
Madangad
 Malegaon
Mangi-Tungi
Moragad
Mulher
Nhavigad
Rajdher fort
Ramsej
Salher
Salota
Saptashrungi
Tankai fort
Tringalwadi
Waghera
Osmanabad district
Naldurg Fort
Paranda Fort
Palghar district
Bassein
Kaldurg
Tandulwadi
Pune district
Anghaai Fort
Bhorgiri Fort
Chawand
Dhakoba
Ghangad
Hadsar Fort
Induri Fort
Jivdhan
Kailasgad
Kawla
Korigad/Koraigad
Lohagad
Malhargad
Manaranjan
Mangalgad
Morgiri Fort
Narayangad
Nimgiri
Purandar
Rajgad
Rajmachi
Rayri Fort
Rohida
Sangram Durg
Sindola Fort
Shaniwar Wada
Shivneri
Shrivardhan
Sinhagad
Tikona
Torna
Tung
Vajragad Fort
Visapur
Raigad district
Agarkot
Avchitgad
Bhimashankar Fort
Bhiwgad
Birwadi
Chambhargad
Chandragad
Dhak Bahiri
Dronagiri
Gadad Bahiri
Ghangad
Ghosalgad
Irshalgad
Karnala
Khaderi
Khanderi
Kondhawi Fort
Korlai
Kothaligad Peb fort
Kulaba
Kurdugad
Lingana
Maangad
Madgad
Malanggad
Mangalgad (Kangori)
Manikgad
Mirgad
Mrugagad
Murud-Janjira
Padargad
Padmadurg/ Kasa Fort
Prabalgad
Raigad
Ratnagad
Revdanda
Sagargad
Samrajgad
Sankshi Fort
Sarasgad
Sarjekot
Songad
Songiri Fort
Sudhagad
Surgad
Talagad
Underi
Vikatgad Peb fort
Ratnagiri district
Aambolgad
Anjanwel
Bankot
Fattedurg
Gopalgad
Govindgad
Gowalkot
Jaigad
Kanakdurg
Mahipatgad
Mandangad
Prachitgad
Prunagad
Rasalgad
Ratnagiri Fort/ Ratnadurg
Sumargad
Suvarnadurg
Yashwantgad
Satara district
Ajinkyatara
Bhairavgad
Bhushangad
Chandan-Vandan
Dategad
Gunavantgad
Jangali Jayagad
Kalyangad
Kamalgad
Kenjalgad
Mahimangad
Pandavgad
Prachitgad
Pratapgad
Sajjangad
Santoshgad
Vairatgad
Vardhangad
Varugad
Vasantgad
Vasota
Sindhudurg district
Aasavgad
Bharatgad
Rajkot Fort
Sanrjekot
Sindhudurg
Vijaydurg
Thane district
Aajobagad
Aasawa
Arnala
Asherigad
Ballalgad
Balwantgad
Belapur Fort
Bhairavgad
Bhandargad
Bhavanigad
Bhupatgad
Chanderigad
Dahanugad
Daulatmandal
Dharavi
Durgadi Fort
Gambhirgad
Ghodbunder Fort
Gorakhgad
Gotara
Jivdhaanigad
Kamandurg
Kelwegad
Kohojgad
Mahuli
Malang gad
Palasgad
Pankot
Tahuli
Segwa
Shirgav Fort
Siddhgad
Tarapur Fort

vte Forts in IndiaVijayanagara
Gingee
Bangalore
Udayagiri
Vellore
Deccan sultanates
Ahmednagar
Daulatabad
Gawilghur
Golconda
Narnala
Panhala
Gujarat Sultanate
Bhadra
Delhi Sultanate
Aligarh
Bandhavgarh
Hathras
Qila Mubarak
Siri
Tughlaqabad
Salimgarh
Nayak dynasty
Chitradurga
Bekal
Dindigul
Gingee
Tiruchirapalli Rock
Chandragiri Fort
Hosdurg
Malwa Sultanate
Mandsaur
Mandavgadh
Faruqi dynasty
Asirgarh
Laling
Thalner
Rajputs
Achalgarh
Amber
Bhangarh
Chittor
Jaigarh
Jaisalmer
Jalore
Junagarh
Kankwadi
Kumbhalgarh
Nahargarh
Qila Rai Pithora
Taragarh
Lal Kot
Gwalior
Kalinjar
Hinglajgarh
Mehrangarh
Narwar
Senapati fortress
Sabalgarh
Bahu
Kangra
Ranthambore
Bhatner fort
Maratha Empire
Dongri
Harishchandragad
Kolaba
Lohagad
Sudhagad
Sinhagad
Tikona
Panhala
Pratapgad
Vishalgad
Rajgad
Sindhudurg
Vijaydurg
Shivneri
Raigad
Gajendragarh
Gingee
Shaniwar Wada
Jhansi
Hinglajgarh
Manora
Visapur
Sadashivgad
Mughal Empire
Purana Qila
Chanderi
Agra
Allahabad
Fatehpur Sikri
Red
Akola
Hari Parbat
Ramnagar
Jat
Bawana Fort
Gohad
Lohagarh
Nahar Singh Mahal
Kingdom of Mysore
Devanahalli
Palakkad
Bekal
Sankagiri
Siddi
Murud-Janjira
Belapur
Underi
Travancore
Vattakottai
Udayagiri
East
Portuguese
Bassein Fort
Bombay Castle
Mahim
Arnala
Castella de Aguada
Diu Fort
Surat Castle
Fortim do Mar, Diu
Fortim do Mar, Simbor
Emmanuel
Fort Anjediva
Korlai
Madh Fort
St Thomas, Tangasseri
St. Angelo
Pallipuram
Aguada
Fort Tiracol
Anjediva
Cranganore
Ghodbunder
Fortaleza de Chaul
Ponda Fort
Chapora Fort
Fortaleza de São Sebastião de Tivim
Cabo de Rama
Corjuem Fort
Mormugão fort
Rachol Fort
Fort of São Tiago of Banastarim
Sikh Empire
Jamrud
Kamlah
Multan
Harkishangarh
Lahore
British Raj
Anchuthengu
St. George
William
Bombay
Riwa
Worli
Mazagon
Sion Hillock
Sewri
Mahim
Tellicherry
St. David
Sur Empire
Chunar
Rohtasgarh
Munger
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Barabati
Raibania
Ahom dynasty
Talatal Ghar
Kareng Ghar
Rang Ghar
Garchuk Lachit Garh
Kakatiya dynasty
Warangal
Bahmani Sultanate
Bidar
Gulbarga

vteBerar-related topicsHistory
Berar Sultanate
Berar Subah
Hyderabad State
Berar Province
Berar Division
Central Provinces and Berar
Madhya Pradesh State
Maharashtra State
Forts
Gawilgarh Fort
Mahur Fort
Narnala Fort
Balapur Fort
Akola Fort
Cities
Ellichpur
Balapur
Mahur 
Washim
Mehkar







