This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Sitabuldi Fort" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR  (April 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



.mw-parser-output .infobox-subbox{padding:0;border:none;margin:-3px;width:auto;min-width:100%;font-size:100%;clear:none;float:none;background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .infobox-3cols-child{margin:auto}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-header,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-subheader,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-above,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-title,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-image,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-full-data,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-below{text-align:center}Sitabuldi FortNagpur, Maharashtra Entrance to the Sitabuldi fortCoordinates.mw-parser-output .geo-default,.mw-parser-output .geo-dms,.mw-parser-output .geo-dec{display:inline}.mw-parser-output .geo-nondefault,.mw-parser-output .geo-multi-punct{display:none}.mw-parser-output .longitude,.mw-parser-output .latitude{white-space:nowrap}21°8′54″N 79°5′6″E﻿ / ﻿21.14833°N 79.08500°E﻿ / 21.14833; 79.08500TypeLand fortSite informationOwnerArmy of  IndiaOpen tothe public26 January, 1 May (Maharashtra Day), and 15 AugustSite historyBuilt1702Built byRaja Bhakt Buland ShahMaterialsStoneBattles/warsBattle of SitabuldiGarrison informationGarrisonIndian Army's 118th infantry battalioOccupantsMahatma Gandhi, King George V and Queen Mary
  Sitabuldi market street, one of Nagpur's commercial areas
  Entrance gate of Tekdi Ganesh temple
Sitabuldi Fort (Marathi: सीताबर्डी किल्ला), site of the Battle of Sitabuldi in 1817, is located atop a hillock in central Nagpur, Maharashtra, India. this fort was built by a Gond king, Raja Bhakt Buland Shah in year 1702, then with some political reason or negotiation  between bhosels and rajgonds this capital of gonwan kwon, so it is wrong to say that Sitabuldi Fort was built by bholes rather it was built by rajgond king. then just before he fought against the British East India Company during the Third Anglo-Maratha War.[citation needed] The area surrounding the hillock, now known as Sitabuldi, is an important commercial hub for Nagpur.[1] To the south is Nagpur Railway Station and behind it is Tekdi Ganapati, a temple of Ganesha.[2] The fort was a home to the Indian Army's 118th infantry battalion (Territorial Army) Grenadiers till 2019.[3][4]

Contents

1 Battle of Sitabuldi

1.1 Battleground
1.2 Battle


2 During the British Raj
3 Current status
4 See also
5 References



Battle of Sitabuldi[edit]
Sitabuldi Fort, a major tourist attraction in Nagpur, is situated on two hillocks: "Badi Tekri", literally meaning "big hill", and "Choti Tekri", meaning "small hill" in Hindi. The Sitabuldi hills, though then barren and rocky, were not entirely unoccupied. Tradition holds that Sitabuldi got its name from two Yaduvanshi brothers – Shitlaprasad and Badriprasad Gawali, who ruled the area in the 17th century. The place came to be known as "Shitlabadri", which during British rule became "Seetabuldee", and later assumed its current form, "Sitabardi" or "Sitabuldi". The Battle of Sitabuldi was fought in November 1817 on these hillocks between the forces of Appa Saheb Bhonsle of Nagpur and the British.
After the death of Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj on 3 April 1680, the Marathas continued the battle with Mughals (Aurangzeb), Sambhaji, Rajaram and then the Shahu (son of Sambhaji). the Maratha Empire was under the governance of the Peshwas of Pune under the Flagship of Chatrapati ShahuSatara, who had appointed the Gaekwads of Baroda, the Holkars of Indore, the Scindias of Gwalior, while the Bhonsles of Nagpur were Independent Sansthan. The Maratha confederacy, as the five families were known, was still a formidable force.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, the Marathas tried to overcome the gradual supremacy of the East India Company, while the British prepared to suppress the Marathas. At the beginning of the 19th century, during the Second Anglo-Maratha War, the victorious British annexed territories of the Marathas.
Mudhoji II Bhonsle, also known as Appa Sahib, ascended the throne of Nagpur in 1816. On 23 November 1817, he told the British resident that he intended to receive a Khilat sent to him by the Peshwa which would make him Senapati of the Marathas. The British Resident, Jenkins, "did not like this idea and the growing contact between Mudhoji and Baji Rao," but Appa Saheb ignored him and proceeded with the ceremony.[5]
On 24 November 1817, Appa Sahib publicly received the Khilat and accepted the commission appointing him Senapati of the Maratha armies. He then mounted his elephant and addressed his principal Sardars. Surrounded by his troops, he proceeded to the camp at Sukhardara. The royal standard was displayed, the army was drawn up, salutes fired from artillery stations, and nothing was omitted which could add to the pomp of the ceremony.
On the morning of 25 November 1817, communication between the residency and the city was prohibited. The resident Harakars were refused permission to carry a letter to the darbar and the markets were closed to English troops. The resident decided to delay taking any decisive measures. Towards noon of 25 November, a group of 2,000 Bhosla cavalry left their camp at Bokur, five miles north-east of the city, and approached the residency. The alarm had now spread to the market frequented by the people of the residency, which soon became almost deserted. All classes, both rich and poor, removed their families and property from the vicinity of Sitabuldi.
The resident now knew that an attack on the residency was imminent. He sent orders to Lieutenant Colonel Scott at about 2:00 pm to march immediately from his cantonment at Telankheri. The force arrived near the residency and occupied the twin hills of Sitabuldi. This movement was executed only just in time, as a large group of Arabs, hired as mercenaries by the Maratha army, were awaiting final orders to secure this position. A message was also sent to General Doveton to come immediately with the Second Division of the Army from Berar.

Battleground[edit]
The high ground of Sitabuldi is rocky and devoid of trees, so it was not possible to dig any entrenchments on the two hills in the available time. Choti Tekri, the northernmost of the two hillocks, is lower in height, but was within musket range of Badi Tekri, so securing that ground was considered essential. The suburbs of the city came close to Choti Tekri.

British forces
A brigade of two Battalions of 20 and 24 Madras Native Infantry
Two companies of Native Infantry
Three troops of Bengal Native Cavalry
Four six-pounder guns marines by Europeans of the Madras Artillery
Resident Escorts (British Imperial Army)
Disposition of British troops, 26 November 1817
Chotti Tekri: 24 Battalion Madras Native Infantry with one 6-pounder gun
Badi Tekri: 20 Battalion Madras Native Infantry with two 6-pounder guns
Residency: Resident escorts, three troops of Bangal Native Cavalry, two infantry companies, and one 6-pounder gun
Marathas forces
Infantry: About 18,000 troops
Cavalry: 2000 Maratha Cavalry
Artillery: 26 or 36 guns
Battle[edit]
Badi Tekri was occupied by about 800 men under Lieutenant Colonel Scott. About 300 men of the 24th Regiment under Captain Saddle were posted on Choti Tekri with one 6-pounder gun. On the other side of the hill, the suburbs gave cover to the Maratha troops, especially the Arabs, who throughout the day on 26 November were gathering in large numbers. The Arabs began the battle in the evening by opening fire on Choti Tekri. The engagement lasted until the early hours of the morning, when it slackened somewhat. Several times during the night the Arabs tried to capture the hill. Although they were repulsed, they inflicted heavy casualties. Captain Saddle was shot and killed. As the ranks of 24th Regiment were thinned, reinforcements were sent down from the 20th Regiment, who were occupying the upper hill. At dawn on 27 November, the British troops were still holding on in an isolated position. At 5:00 am, the few remaining men of the 24th Regiment, being utterly exhausted, were withdrawn. Their place was taken by the Residents Escorts, with orders to confine their defence to the summit of the lower hill. The fight continued until 9:00 the next morning, when the Arabs charged and captured the hill. They turned the captured gun against the higher hill position.
The Maratha Cavalry and Infantry closed in from all sides and prepared for a general assault. The Arabs broke into the huts of the English troops and ransacked them. Some Maratha cavalry entered the residency compound. Captain Fitzgerald, in command of three troops of Bengal Cavalry and some horsemen of the resident escorts, had been requesting permission to charge, but his request was repeatedly turned down. Seeing the impending destruction, he made a last request. "Tell him to charge at his peril", Colonel Scott replied. "At my peril be it", said Captain Fitzgerald. He and his troops then charged some of the enemy cavalry, killed some of their supporting infantry, and captured their two guns. When the infantry posted on the hill witnessed this exploit, they became freshly animated. Just then an explosion of ammunition took place amongst the Arabs on the lower hill. The British troops rushed forward and pursued the Arabs down the hill, took two of their guns, and returned to their position. The Arabs rallied with the intention of attempting to recover the lost ground. As they were getting ready to come up, a troop of cavalry under Colonel Smith charged around the base of the hill, attacked the Arabs in the flank, and dispersed them. The British troops now advanced from the hill drove the infantry from the adjoining hills, and by noon the conflict was over. The British lost 367 killed and wounded, including 16 officers.

During the British Raj[edit]
British soldiers who died in the battle of Sitabuldi were buried in graves in the fort. After their defeat in the Indian Rebellion of 1857, Tipu Sultan's grandson, Nawab Kadar Ali, and eight of his associates were hanged on the ramparts of Sitabuldi fort. A mosque is maintained in the fort to mark the location of the hangings. The graves and mosque are maintained by the Indian Army as a mark of respect for the gallantry of all who died. A separate memorial has also been constructed to the soldiers who fell during the colonial period.
Mahatma Gandhi was imprisoned in the fort from 10 April to 15 May 1923. King George V and Queen Mary of the United Kingdom gave audience to the people of Nagpur from the fort during their visit to British India. A pillar to commemorate the event stands in the fort. The royals were greeted by a huge crowd gathered at the area towards the present Nagpur Railway Station.[3]

Current status[edit]
In 2019 118 TA Battalion stationed here was moved to Bhusawal to make place for Uttar Maharashtra and Gujarat (UMANG) Sub-Area Headquarters of the Indian Army. UMANG Sub-Area Headquarters had shifted from Mumbai to Nagpur in 2018. Since then, it was stationed in Command Works Engineer (CWS) office. The CWS unit was shifted to Sitabuldi Fort where 118 TA Battalion was earlier located.

See also[edit]
List of forts in Maharashtra
References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}Ravi Teja Sharma (17 March 2007). "The great Nagpur boom". Rediff. Retrieved 23 November 2008.

^ "Famous Ganesha Temples and Idols in India". Sify. Archived from the original on 23 February 2010. Retrieved 5 December 2008.

^ Jump up to: a b Arya, Shishir (26 January 2008). "Time & History". The Times of India. India. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. Retrieved 20 November 2008.

^ Oct 7, Shishir Arya / TNN / Updated; 2019; Ist, 12:45. "600 jobs to go as 118 Territorial Army unit leaves Sitabuldi Fort | Nagpur News - Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 24 December 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link)

^ Naravane, M.S. (2014). Battles of the Honorourable East India Company. A.P.H. Publishing Corporation. pp. 82–83. ISBN 9788131300343.


.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vteNagpur topicsHistoryIdeology
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
Dalit Buddhist movement
B. R. Ambedkar
Vidarbha
Vidarbha movement
Vidarbha State
Varhadi dialect
Nagpur
Gond
Bhonsle
Nagpur kingdom
Nagpur Province
Central Provinces
Central Provinces and Berar
Sitabuldi Fort
Namantar Andolan
1927 riots
Gowari stampede
Bengal Nagpur Railway
Civic
Nagpur Municipal Corporation
Nagpur Improvement Trust
Nagpur district
Nagpur division
Nagpur metropolitan area
Nagpur Police
Nagpur (Lok Sabha constituency)
Ramtek (Lok Sabha constituency)
LandmarksBuildings
Vasantrao Deshpande Hall
Suresh Bhat Auditorium
IMA Hall
Chitnavis Centre
Old Civil Station
Council Hall Nagpur
Vidhan Bhavan, Nagpur
High Court Nagpur
Raj Bhawan
Forts
Nagardhan Fort
Ramtek Fort
Sitabuldi Fort
Religiousplaces
Deekshabhoomi
Dragon Palace Temple
Balaji Temple
Ganesh Tekdi Mandir
Adasa
Paradsinga
Swaminarayan Temple
Koradi Temple
Hazrat Baba Tajjuddin Dargah
Nav Gazern Ali Baba
Tajabad Sharif
Angelican Cathedrals of Nagpur
Parksand zoos
Seminary Hill
Telangkhedi Garden
Satpuda Botanical Garden
Japanese Garden
Ambazari Park
Dr Babasaheb Ambekar Udhyan
Traffic Park
Maharajbagh Zoo
Kasturchand Park
Sakkardara Lake side garden
Squares
Zero Mile
RBI Square
Shankar Nagar Square
Variety Square
Museums
Narrow-gauge rail museum
Raman Science Centre
Nagpur Central Museum
Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Memorial Museum
Wildlife
Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve
Pench National Park
Nagzira-Navegaon Tiger Reserve
Melghat Tiger Reserve
Bor Tiger Reserve
Umred Pauni Karhandla Wildlife Sanctuary
Geography
Godavari basin
Nag River
Gorewada Lake
Ambazari Lake
Futala Lake
Shukrawari Lake
Khernakala
Khindsi Lake
Zilpi Lake
Sonegaon Lake
Pioli river
Pora river
Culture
Varhadi cuisine
Vidarbha Sahitya Sangh
Dhammachakra Pravartan Din
Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Sahitya Sammelan
Orange City Craft Mela and Folk Dance Festival
Aadim Sanvidhan Sanrakshan Samiti
Nagpur Central Museum
South-Central Zone Cultural Centre
Orange City LGBT Pride March
City areas
Nagpur metropolitan area
Dhantoli
Itwari
Sitabuldi
Mominpura
Dharampeth
Civil Lines
Gandhibagh
Nandanvan
Kalamna
Wardhamaan Nagar
Seminary Hills
Police Line Takli
Mankapur
Pachpaoli
Vayusena Nagar
Ravi Nagar
Byramji Town
Chaoni
Mangalwari
Gaddi Godam
Pratap Nagar
Ajni
Pardhi
Indora
Maskasath
Media
Lokmat
Tarun Bharat
Deshonatti
Maharashtra Times
Punya Nagari
Lokshahi Varta
Sakal
Loksatta
Yugdharma
Nava Bharat
Dainik Bhaskar
Lokmat Samachar
The Hitavada
The Indian Express
Nagpur Today
The Times of India
The Economic Times
Lokmat Times
Vividh Bharati
Radio Mirchi
Red FM
All India Radio
94.3 FM
Gyan Vani
Radio City
Education
Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj Nagpur University
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University
Indian Institute of Information Technology, Nagpur
Indian Institute of Management Nagpur
National Power Training Institute
Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Nagpur
National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and Research
Government Medical College and Hospital
Government College of Engineering, Nagpur
Laxminarayan Institute of Technology
Institute of Management Technology, Nagpur
List of educational institutions in Nagpur
Transport
Nagpur Bus Stand
Nagpur Mahanagar Parivahan Limited
Mumbai–Nagpur Expressway
AH43
Nagpur Junction railway station
Howrah–Nagpur–Mumbai line
Nagpur–Bhusawal section
Bilaspur–Nagpur section
Nagpur–Chhindwara line
Nagpur–Nagbhir line
Nagpur Metro
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar International Airport
MIHAN
Outer Ring Road, Nagpur
Economy
Baidyanath Group
Dinshaw's Ice Cream
Haldiram's
Coca-Cola
Indo Rama
Mahindra & Mahindra
Persistent Systems
Candico
Bajaj Auto
Vicco
Koradi Thermal Power Station
Khaparkheda Thermal Power Station
Western Coalfields
Coal India
Sports
Vidarbha Cricket Association
Vidarbha cricket team
Nagpur Premier League
Nagpur Football Club
Stadiums
Vidarbha Cricket Association Ground
Vidarbha Cricket Association Stadium
Yashwant Stadium
Vidarbha Hockey Association Stadium

vteForts in MaharashtraAhmednagar district
Ahmednagar Fort
Bahadurgad
Bhairavgad
Bitangad
Harishchandragad
Kaladgad
Kharda
Kunjargad
Madan Fort
Manjarsumbha fort
Pabargad
Patta Fort
Ratangad
Akola district
Akola Fort
Balapur
Narnala
Amravati district
Amner Fort
Gawilghur
Aurangabad district
Antur Fort
Daulatabad Fort
Chandrapur district
Chandrapur Fort
Ballarpur Fort
Bhadravati Fort
Manikgad
Dhule district
Bhamer
Laling
Thalner
Kolhapur district
Bhudargad
Gandharvgad
Panhala
Pargadh
Pavangad
Samangad
Vishalgad
Latur district
Udgir
Mumbai City district
Bombay Castle
Dongri Fort
Fort George
Mahim Fort
Mazagon Fort
Riwa Fort
Sewri Fort
Sion Hillock Fort
Worli Fort
Mumbai Suburban district
Castella de Aguada
Madh
Nagpur district
Sitabuldi
Nanded district
Kandhar Fort
Nashik district
Aavandhagad
Achala Fort
Ahivant Fort
Alang
Anjaneri
Ankai Fort
Bahulagad
Bhaskargad
Chandwad
Chauler Fort
Dermal
Dhodap
Hargad
Harihar fort
Hatgad
Indrai
Kanchangad
Kanhergad
Kavnai fort
Kulang
Madangad
 Malegaon
Mangi-Tungi
Moragad
Mulher
Nhavigad
Rajdher fort
Ramsej
Salher
Salota
Saptashrungi
Tankai fort
Tringalwadi
Waghera
Osmanabad district
Naldurg Fort
Paranda Fort
Palghar district
Bassein
Kaldurg
Tandulwadi
Pune district
Anghaai Fort
Bhorgiri Fort
Chawand
Dhakoba
Ghangad
Hadsar Fort
Induri Fort
Jivdhan
Kailasgad
Kawla
Korigad/Koraigad
Lohagad
Malhargad
Manaranjan
Mangalgad
Morgiri Fort
Narayangad
Nimgiri
Purandar
Rajgad
Rajmachi
Rayri Fort
Rohida
Sangram Durg
Sindola Fort
Shaniwar Wada
Shivneri
Shrivardhan
Sinhagad
Tikona
Torna
Tung
Vajragad Fort
Visapur
Raigad district
Agarkot
Avchitgad
Bhimashankar Fort
Bhiwgad
Birwadi
Chambhargad
Chandragad
Dhak Bahiri
Dronagiri
Gadad Bahiri
Ghangad
Ghosalgad
Irshalgad
Karnala
Khaderi
Khanderi
Kondhawi Fort
Korlai
Kothaligad Peb fort
Kulaba
Kurdugad
Lingana
Maangad
Madgad
Malanggad
Mangalgad (Kangori)
Manikgad
Mirgad
Mrugagad
Murud-Janjira
Padargad
Padmadurg/ Kasa Fort
Prabalgad
Raigad
Ratnagad
Revdanda
Sagargad
Samrajgad
Sankshi Fort
Sarasgad
Sarjekot
Songad
Songiri Fort
Sudhagad
Surgad
Talagad
Underi
Vikatgad Peb fort
Ratnagiri district
Aambolgad
Anjanwel
Bankot
Fattedurg
Gopalgad
Govindgad
Gowalkot
Jaigad
Kanakdurg
Mahipatgad
Mandangad
Prachitgad
Prunagad
Rasalgad
Ratnagiri Fort/ Ratnadurg
Sumargad
Suvarnadurg
Yashwantgad
Satara district
Ajinkyatara
Bhairavgad
Bhushangad
Chandan-Vandan
Dategad
Gunavantgad
Jangali Jayagad
Kalyangad
Kamalgad
Kenjalgad
Mahimangad
Pandavgad
Prachitgad
Pratapgad
Sajjangad
Santoshgad
Vairatgad
Vardhangad
Varugad
Vasantgad
Vasota
Sindhudurg district
Aasavgad
Bharatgad
Rajkot Fort
Sanrjekot
Sindhudurg
Vijaydurg
Thane district
Aajobagad
Aasawa
Arnala
Asherigad
Ballalgad
Balwantgad
Belapur Fort
Bhairavgad
Bhandargad
Bhavanigad
Bhupatgad
Chanderigad
Dahanugad
Daulatmandal
Dharavi
Durgadi Fort
Gambhirgad
Ghodbunder Fort
Gorakhgad
Gotara
Jivdhaanigad
Kamandurg
Kelwegad
Kohojgad
Mahuli
Malang gad
Palasgad
Pankot
Tahuli
Segwa
Shirgav Fort
Siddhgad
Tarapur Fort

Coordinates: 21°8′54″N 79°5′6″E﻿ / ﻿21.14833°N 79.08500°E﻿ / 21.14833; 79.08500





