


This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Shaniwar Wada" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR  (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
.mw-parser-output .infobox-subbox{padding:0;border:none;margin:-3px;width:auto;min-width:100%;font-size:100%;clear:none;float:none;background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .infobox-3cols-child{margin:auto}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-header,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-subheader,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-above,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-title,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-image,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-full-data,body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .infobox-below{text-align:center}Shaniwar WadaGate of the Shaniwar WadaLocationPune, IndiaBuilt1732; 290 years ago (1732)Architectural style(s)Maratha imperial architectureOwner
 Maratha Empire (1732–1818)
 United Kingdom (1818–1947)
 Company Raj (1818–1858)
 British Raj (1858–1947)
 India (1947–present)

Shaniwar Wada is a historical fortification in the city of Pune, India.
Built in 1732,[1] it was the great seat of the Peshwas of the Maratha Empire until 1818. Following the rise of the Maratha Empire, the palace became the center of Indian politics in the 18th century.[2]
The fort itself was largely destroyed in 1828 by an unexplained fire, but the surviving structures are now maintained as a tourist site.

Contents

1 History
2 Construction
3 Fort complex

3.1 Gates
3.2 Palaces
3.3 The Fountain


4 Popular culture
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]
  An equestrian statue of Peshwa Baji Rao I, Prime Minister of the Maratha Empire, in the Shaniwar Wada complex. He was the first resident of the fortified palace.
The Shaniwar Wada was normally 
the seven-story capital building of the Peshwas of the Maratha Empire. It was supposed to be made entirely of stone but after the completion of the base floor or the first story, the people of Satara (the national capital) complained to the Shahu(King) saying that a stone monument can be sanctioned and built only by the Shahu(King) himself and not the Peshwas. Following this, an official letter was written to the Peshwas stating that the remaining building had to be made of brick and not stone. Even today if you visit and see the walls carefully, they are partly made of stone and partly by bricks. The Wada was then completed and upon being attacked by the British Artillery 90 years later, all the top six stories collapsed leaving only the stone base, which was immune to the British artillery. Hence only the stone base of the Shaniwar Wada remains and can be seen even today in the older parts of Pune.
By 1758, at least a thousand people lived in the fort.
In 1773, Narayanrao, who was the fifth and ruling Peshwa then, was murdered by guards on orders of his uncle Raghunathrao and aunt Anandibai. A popular legend has it that Narayanrao's ghost still calls for help on full moon nights. Various people, working around the area, have allegedly reported the cries [3][4] of "Kaka mala vachava"(Uncle, save me) by Narayanrao Peshwa after his death.
In June 1818, the Peshwa, Bajirao II, abdicated his Gaadi (throne) to Sir John Malcolm of the British East India Company and went into political exile at Bithoor, near Kanpur in present-day Uttar Pradesh, India.
On 27 February 1828, a great fire started inside the palace complex. The conflagration raged for seven days. Only the heavy granite ramparts, strong teak gateways and deep foundations and ruins of the buildings within the fort survived.[5]
According to Haricharitramrutsagar, a biographical text of Bhagwan Swaminarayan, he had visited Shaniwarwada on the insistence of Bajirao II in 1799.[6][7][8][9][10]

Construction[edit]
  The imposing walls of the Shaniwar Wada, in an 1860 photograph
Peshwa Baji Rao I, prime minister to Chattrapati Shahu, laid the ceremonial foundation of his own residence on Saturday, 10 January 1730. It was named Shaniwar Wada from the Marathi words Shaniwar (Saturday) and Wada (a general term for any residence complex). Teak was imported from the jungles of Junnar, stone was brought from the nearby quarries of Chinchwad, and Lime (mineral) was brought from the lime-belts of Jejuri. Shaniwarwada was completed in 1732, at a total cost of Rs. 16,110, a very large sum at that time.[11]
The opening ceremony was performed according to religious customs, on 22 January 1732, another Saturday chosen for being a particularly auspicious day.
Later the Peshwas made several additions, including the fortification walls, with bastions and gates; court halls and other buildings; fountains and reservoirs. Currently, the perimeter fortification wall has five gateways and nine bastion towers, enclosing a garden complex with the foundations of the original buildings.
It is situated near the Mula-Mutha River, in Kasba Peth.

Fort complex[edit]
Gates[edit]
  Shaniwar Wada palace's Delhi Gate or Delhi Darwaza.
  Shaniwar Wada palace fountain, the Hazari Karanje
  Jharokhas at the Shaniwar wada.
  A hall in the first floor above dilli darwaja (Delhi Gate)
  Gardens of Shaniwarwada
Shaniwar Wada has five gates:

Delhi Darwaza
The Delhi Darwaza is the main gate of the complex, and faces north towards Delhi. Infact, Shaniwar Wada is the only fort structure in India to have its main gate facing Delhi, the mideaval imperial capital of Mughal Empire. Even Chhatrapati Shahu is said to have considered the north-facing fort an indication of Baji Rao's ambitions against the Mughal Empire, and suggested that the main gate should be made of chhaatiiche, maatiche naahi! (Marathi for "of the chests of brave soldiers, not made of mud").
The strongly built Delhi Darwaza gatehouse has massive doors, large enough to admit elephants outfitted with howdahs (seating canopies). To discourage elephants charging the gates, each pane of the gate has seventy-two sharp twelve-inch steel spikes arranged in a nine by eight grid, at approximately the height of the forehead of a battle-elephant. Each pane was also fortified with steel cross members, and borders were bolted with steel bolts having sharpened cone heads. The bastions flanking the gatehouse has arrow-loops and machicolation chutes through which boiling oil could be poured onto offending raiders. The right pane has a small man-sized door for usual entries and exits, too small to allow an army to enter rapidly. Shaniwar Wada was built by a contractor from Rajasthan known as 'Kumawat' belongs to Kumhar Sub-caste, after completing construction they were given the name 'Naik' by the Peshwa.[citation needed]
Even if the main gates were to be forced open, a charging army would need to turn sharply right, then sharply left, to pass through the gateway and into the central complex. This would provide a defending army with another chance to attack the incoming army, and to launch a counterattack to recapture the gateway.
As the ceremonial gate of the fort, military campaigns would set out from and be received back here, with appropriate religious ceremonies.
Mastani Darwaza (Mastani's Gate) or Aliibahadur Darwaja, facing north
This gate was used by Bajirao I's wife Mastani while travelling out of the palace's perimeter wall.
Khidki Darwaza (Window Gate), facing east
The Khidki Darwaja is named for an armoured window it contains.
Ganesh Darwaza (Ganesh Gate), facing south-east
Named for the Ganesh Rang Mahal, which used to stand near this door. It could be used by ladies at the fort to visit the nearby Kasba Ganapati temple.
Jambhul Darwaza or Narayan Darwaja (Narayan's Gate), facing south
This gate was used by concubines to enter and leave the fort. It obtained its second name after Narayanrao Peshwa's corpse was removed from the fort for cremation through this gate.
Palaces[edit]
The important buildings in the palace includes the Thorlya Rayancha Diwankhana (Marathi:The court reception hall of the eldest royal, meaning Baji Rao I), Naachacha Diwankhana (Dance Hall), and Juna Arsa Mahal (Old Mirror Hall).
Since the buildings were destroyed in the fire of 1828, only descriptions of the living areas of the fort are available. All the state halls in the buildings are said to have doorways with exquisitely carved teak arches, with ornamental teardrop teak pillars shaped like Suru (cypress tree) trunks supporting the ceilings, which were covered with beautiful teak tracery, carved creepers and flowers. Exquisite glass chandeliers hung from the ceilings. The floors were made of highly polished marble, arranged in a mosaic pattern and adorned with rich Persian rugs. The walls contained paintings with scenes from the Hindu epics, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata.
The buildings are said to have been designed and constructed by well-known artisans, including Shivaram Krishna, Devaji Sutar, Kondaji Sutar, Morarji Patharwat Bhojraja (an inlay-work expert from Jaipur) and Ragho (a painter).
It is said that the Shaniwarwada complex was seven storeys high. On the top floor was the residence of the Peshwa which was called Meghadambari. It is said that the spire of Jñāneśvar temple at Alandi, 17 km away, could be seen from there.

The Fountain[edit]
The complex had an impressive lotus-shaped fountain: the Hazari Karanje (Fountain of a thousand jets). It was constructed for the pleasure of the infant Peshwa Sawai Madhavrao. It was designed as a sixteen petal lotus; each petal had sixteen jets with an eighty-foot arch. It was the most complicated and intricate fountain of its time.[citation needed]
Shrimant Anandrao Rudrajirao Dhulap-More (an admiral of Maratha navy in 18th century) who visited the Shaniwarwada in 1791 described it as "very magnificent. A hundred dancers can dance here at a time. In one corner is a marble Ganapati statue and the palace is flanked by a fountain and a flower garden.".

Popular culture[edit]
In 2008, Shaniwar Wada was featured on The Amazing Race Asia 3. In the game show, one participant from each team of two had to find the correct pheta (turban) from among those worn by 50 men within the Wada.
It was featured in 2014 Marathi historical drama Rama Madhav.
Shaniwar Wada featured in the 2015 Hindi historical film Bajirao Mastani.
Shaniwar Wada featured in the 2019 Hindi historical film Panipat.
Shaniwar Wada featured in 2019 Marathi TV Series Swamini on Colors Marathi where grand set of Shaniwar wada was constructed in Mumbai Film City.
See also[edit]
New Palace, Kolhapur of the Bhonsle Chhatrapatis
Laxmi Vilas Palace, Vadodara of the Gaekwads
Jai Vilas Palace, Gwalior of the Scindias
Bhor Rajwada of Pant Sachivs
Rajwada, Indore of Holkars
Thanjavur Maratha palace of the Bhonsles
List of forts in Maharashtra
References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit;word-wrap:break-word}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation:target{background-color:rgba(0,127,255,0.133)}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{color:#d33}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#3a3;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}Gajrani, S. (2004). History, Religion and Culture of India. Vol. III. p. 255. ISBN 978-81-8205-062-4.

^ "Shaniwarwada was centre of Indian politics: Ninad Bedekar". Daily News and Analysis. Mumbai,India. 29 November 2011. Retrieved 19 April 2012.

^ Preeti Panwar. "Top 10 most haunted places in India". Zee News. Retrieved 21 July 2015.

^ Huned Contractor (31 October 2011). "Going ghost hunting". Sakal. Retrieved 21 July 2015.

^ "Pune and its ghosts". Rediff. 19 July 2015. Retrieved 21 July 2015.

^ "Pune's iconic Dance Festival held at Shaniwarwada - Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 13 September 2018.

^ "Pune's pride: Shaniwarwada". Times of India Travel. Retrieved 13 September 2018.

^ "Amenities elude visitors at iconic Shaniwarwada - Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 13 September 2018.

^ "Shaniwar Wada to be recreated for 'Panipat' - Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 13 September 2018.

^ Sengar, Resham. "Know why you should avoid visiting Pune's Shaniwarwada Fort on full moon nights". Times of India Travel. Retrieved 13 September 2018.

^ "288 years of Shaniwarwada: No battle cry from this historic Pune fort, only a cry for restoration". Hindustan Times. 23 January 2020. Retrieved 7 November 2020.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shaniwar Wada.

https://www.greatravellers.com/2019/08/top-5-places-to-visit-in-mumbai.html Top 5 Places to visit in Mumbai
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}vtePune topicsHistory
Maratha Empire
2010 Pune bombing
2012 Pune bombings
GeographyHills and passes
Baner Hill
Chaturshringi Hill
Parvati Hill
Taljai Hills
Vetal Hill
Katraj Ghat
Waterbodies
Mutha River
Mula River
Mula-Mutha River
Pavana River
Ramnadi
Peacock Bay
Katraj Lake
Pashan Lake
LandmarksPalaces and forts
Shaniwar Wada
Vishrambaug Wada
Shinde Chhatri
Aga Khan Palace
Balbharati
Lal Mahal
Sinhagad
Temples
Puneshwar
Narayaneshwar
Pataleshwar
Kasba Ganapati
Dagadusheth Halwai Ganapati Temple
Chaturshringi Temple
Dashabhuja Ganapati Temple, Pune
Museums
Raja Dinkar Kelkar Museum
Mahatma Phule Museum
National War Museum
Parks
Bund Garden
Rajiv Gandhi Zoological Park
Shunyo Park
Sarasbaug
Shahid Major Pradeep Tathawade Udyan
Kamala Nehru Park
Pu La Deshpande Udyan
Baner-Pashan Biodiversity Park
Peshwe Park
Others
Bal Gandharva Ranga Mandir
Tilak Smarak Ranga Mandir
Yashwantrao Chavan Natya Gruha
Budhwar Peth, Pune
Civic
Pune Metropolitan Region
Pune Municipal Corporation
Mayor
Pune Cantonment Board
Khadki Cantonment Board
Pune Police
TransportAirCommercial
New Pune Airport
Pune Airport
Gliding
Hadapsar Airport
RailSystems
Pune Suburban Railway
Pune Metro
Pune Monorail
Stations
Pune Junction
Daund Junction
Other stations
RoadMajor roads
National Highway 48 (India)
National Highway 65 (India)
National Highway 60 (India)
State Highway 27 (Maharashtra)
Mumbai–Pune Expressway
Ring Road (proposed)
Bus
Pune Station Bus Stand
Swargate bus station
Rainbow Bus Rapid Transit System
Pune Mahanagar Parivahan Mahamandal Limited
Pune Bus Pravasi Sangh
Other
Shivajinagar Station–Swargate Skywalk
Economy
Mahathma Phule Mandai
Market Yard
Tulshibaug
International Convention Centre
Education
Savitribai Phule Pune University
BMCC
Spicer Adventist University
Symbiosis International University
Bharati Vidyapeeth
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Pune
National Chemical Laboratory
National Defence Academy
Armed Forces Medical College
Deccan College
CACPE
College of Engineering
Fergusson University
ILS Law College
Film and Television Institute of India
Culture
Sawai Gandharva Bhimsen Festival
Vasantotsav
SportsEventsMulti-sport
2008 Commonwealth Youth Games
World championships
2008 BWF World Junior Championships
2009 FIVB Volleyball Men's U21 World Championship
2009 FIBA Asia Under-16 Championship for Women
2011 Roll Ball World Cup
2013 Asian Athletics Championships
Others
Pune Marathon
2009 NECC–ITF Women's Tennis Championships
KPIT MSLTA Challenger
Royal Indian Open
TeamsAmerican football
Pune Marathas
Badminton
Pune Pistons
Cricket
Pune Warriors India
Rising Pune Supergiant
Maharashtra cricket team
Veer Marathi
Field hockey
Pune Strykers
Football
FC Pune City
Pune F.C.
DSK Shivajians FC
Kabbadi
Puneri Paltan
Tennis
Pune Marathas
VenuesStadiums
Shree Shiv Chhatrapati Sports Complex
CAFVD Sports Stadium
Nehru Stadium, Pune
Rajendrasinhji Stadium
Maharashtra Cricket Association Stadium
Pune District Football Association Stadium
Rajendrasinhji Stadium
Others
Poona Gymkhana Ground
Pune Race Course
Deccan Gymkhana Ground
Pune Club Ground
Royal Connaught Boat Club
Mahesh Bhupathi Tennis Academy
PersonalitiesHistory
Shivaji
Balaji Vishwanath
Bajirao
Balaji Baji Rao
Madhavrao Ballal
Narayan Rao
Raghunathrao
Sawai Madhavrao
Baji Rao II
Nana Saheb
Senapati Bapat
Mahadev Govind Ranade
Bal Gangadhar Tilak
Chandrashekhar Agashe
Gopal Ganesh Agarkar
Chapekar brothers
Art and literature
Pu La Deshpande
Babasaheb Purandare
Mangesh Tendulkar
Pralhad Keshav Atre
Sandeep Khare
Music
Bhimsen Joshi
Vasantrao Deshpande
Rahul Deshpande
Saleel Kulkarni
Anand Bhate
Prabha Atre
Sanjeev Abhyankar
Hrishikesh Ranade
NeighbourhoodsvteNeighbourhoods of Pune
Aundh
Balewadi
Baner
Bavdhan
Bhosari
Camp
Chakan
Charholi Budruk
Chinchwad
Dapodi
Dehu Road Cantonment
Dehu
Dhayari
Hadapsar
Hinjawadi
Kalewadi
Kalyani Nagar
Khadki cantonment
Kharadi
Koregaon Park
Kothrud
Karvenagar
Manjri
Nanded
Pashan
Paud
Pimple Gurav
Pimple Saudagar
Pimpri
Rahatani
Ravet
Sangvi
Sant Tukaram Nagar
Shivajinagar
Sus
Swargate
Thergaon
Viman Nagar
Wakad
Wanowrie
Warje
Yerawada

vteForts in MaharashtraAhmednagar district
Ahmednagar Fort
Bahadurgad
Bhairavgad
Bitangad
Harishchandragad
Kaladgad
Kharda
Kunjargad
Madan Fort
Manjarsumbha fort
Pabargad
Patta Fort
Ratangad
Akola district
Akola Fort
Balapur
Narnala
Amravati district
Amner Fort
Gawilghur
Aurangabad district
Antur Fort
Daulatabad Fort
Chandrapur district
Chandrapur Fort
Ballarpur Fort
Bhadravati Fort
Manikgad
Dhule district
Bhamer
Laling
Thalner
Kolhapur district
Bhudargad
Gandharvgad
Panhala
Pargadh
Pavangad
Samangad
Vishalgad
Latur district
Udgir
Mumbai City district
Bombay Castle
Dongri Fort
Fort George
Mahim Fort
Mazagon Fort
Riwa Fort
Sewri Fort
Sion Hillock Fort
Worli Fort
Mumbai Suburban district
Castella de Aguada
Madh
Nagpur district
Sitabuldi
Nanded district
Kandhar Fort
Nashik district
Aavandhagad
Achala Fort
Ahivant Fort
Alang
Anjaneri
Ankai Fort
Bahulagad
Bhaskargad
Chandwad
Chauler Fort
Dermal
Dhodap
Hargad
Harihar fort
Hatgad
Indrai
Kanchangad
Kanhergad
Kavnai fort
Kulang
Madangad
 Malegaon
Mangi-Tungi
Moragad
Mulher
Nhavigad
Rajdher fort
Ramsej
Salher
Salota
Saptashrungi
Tankai fort
Tringalwadi
Waghera
Osmanabad district
Naldurg Fort
Paranda Fort
Palghar district
Bassein
Kaldurg
Tandulwadi
Pune district
Anghaai Fort
Bhorgiri Fort
Chawand
Dhakoba
Ghangad
Hadsar Fort
Induri Fort
Jivdhan
Kailasgad
Kawla
Korigad/Koraigad
Lohagad
Malhargad
Manaranjan
Mangalgad
Morgiri Fort
Narayangad
Nimgiri
Purandar
Rajgad
Rajmachi
Rayri Fort
Rohida
Sangram Durg
Sindola Fort
Shaniwar Wada
Shivneri
Shrivardhan
Sinhagad
Tikona
Torna
Tung
Vajragad Fort
Visapur
Raigad district
Agarkot
Avchitgad
Bhimashankar Fort
Bhiwgad
Birwadi
Chambhargad
Chandragad
Dhak Bahiri
Dronagiri
Gadad Bahiri
Ghangad
Ghosalgad
Irshalgad
Karnala
Khaderi
Khanderi
Kondhawi Fort
Korlai
Kothaligad Peb fort
Kulaba
Kurdugad
Lingana
Maangad
Madgad
Malanggad
Mangalgad (Kangori)
Manikgad
Mirgad
Mrugagad
Murud-Janjira
Padargad
Padmadurg/ Kasa Fort
Prabalgad
Raigad
Ratnagad
Revdanda
Sagargad
Samrajgad
Sankshi Fort
Sarasgad
Sarjekot
Songad
Songiri Fort
Sudhagad
Surgad
Talagad
Underi
Vikatgad Peb fort
Ratnagiri district
Aambolgad
Anjanwel
Bankot
Fattedurg
Gopalgad
Govindgad
Gowalkot
Jaigad
Kanakdurg
Mahipatgad
Mandangad
Prachitgad
Prunagad
Rasalgad
Ratnagiri Fort/ Ratnadurg
Sumargad
Suvarnadurg
Yashwantgad
Satara district
Ajinkyatara
Bhairavgad
Bhushangad
Chandan-Vandan
Dategad
Gunavantgad
Jangali Jayagad
Kalyangad
Kamalgad
Kenjalgad
Mahimangad
Pandavgad
Prachitgad
Pratapgad
Sajjangad
Santoshgad
Vairatgad
Vardhangad
Varugad
Vasantgad
Vasota
Sindhudurg district
Aasavgad
Bharatgad
Rajkot Fort
Sanrjekot
Sindhudurg
Vijaydurg
Thane district
Aajobagad
Aasawa
Arnala
Asherigad
Ballalgad
Balwantgad
Belapur Fort
Bhairavgad
Bhandargad
Bhavanigad
Bhupatgad
Chanderigad
Dahanugad
Daulatmandal
Dharavi
Durgadi Fort
Gambhirgad
Ghodbunder Fort
Gorakhgad
Gotara
Jivdhaanigad
Kamandurg
Kelwegad
Kohojgad
Mahuli
Malang gad
Palasgad
Pankot
Tahuli
Segwa
Shirgav Fort
Siddhgad
Tarapur Fort

vte Forts in IndiaVijayanagara
Gingee
Bangalore
Udayagiri
Vellore
Deccan sultanates
Ahmednagar
Daulatabad
Gawilghur
Golconda
Narnala
Panhala
Gujarat Sultanate
Bhadra
Delhi Sultanate
Aligarh
Bandhavgarh
Hathras
Qila Mubarak
Siri
Tughlaqabad
Salimgarh
Nayak dynasty
Chitradurga
Bekal
Dindigul
Gingee
Tiruchirapalli Rock
Chandragiri Fort
Hosdurg
Malwa Sultanate
Mandsaur
Mandavgadh
Faruqi dynasty
Asirgarh
Laling
Thalner
Rajputs
Achalgarh
Amber
Bhangarh
Chittor
Jaigarh
Jaisalmer
Jalore
Junagarh
Kankwadi
Kumbhalgarh
Nahargarh
Qila Rai Pithora
Taragarh
Lal Kot
Gwalior
Kalinjar
Hinglajgarh
Mehrangarh
Narwar
Senapati fortress
Sabalgarh
Bahu
Kangra
Ranthambore
Bhatner fort
Maratha Empire
Dongri
Harishchandragad
Kolaba
Lohagad
Sudhagad
Sinhagad
Tikona
Panhala
Pratapgad
Vishalgad
Rajgad
Sindhudurg
Vijaydurg
Shivneri
Raigad
Gajendragarh
Gingee
Shaniwar Wada
Jhansi
Hinglajgarh
Manora
Visapur
Sadashivgad
Mughal Empire
Purana Qila
Chanderi
Agra
Allahabad
Fatehpur Sikri
Red
Akola
Hari Parbat
Ramnagar
Jat
Bawana Fort
Gohad
Lohagarh
Nahar Singh Mahal
Kingdom of Mysore
Devanahalli
Palakkad
Bekal
Sankagiri
Siddi
Murud-Janjira
Belapur
Underi
Travancore
Vattakottai
Udayagiri
East
Portuguese
Bassein Fort
Bombay Castle
Mahim
Arnala
Castella de Aguada
Diu Fort
Surat Castle
Fortim do Mar, Diu
Fortim do Mar, Simbor
Emmanuel
Fort Anjediva
Korlai
Madh Fort
St Thomas, Tangasseri
St. Angelo
Pallipuram
Aguada
Fort Tiracol
Anjediva
Cranganore
Ghodbunder
Fortaleza de Chaul
Ponda Fort
Chapora Fort
Fortaleza de São Sebastião de Tivim
Cabo de Rama
Corjuem Fort
Mormugão fort
Rachol Fort
Fort of São Tiago of Banastarim
Sikh Empire
Jamrud
Kamlah
Multan
Harkishangarh
Lahore
British Raj
Anchuthengu
St. George
William
Bombay
Riwa
Worli
Mazagon
Sion Hillock
Sewri
Mahim
Tellicherry
St. David
Sur Empire
Chunar
Rohtasgarh
Munger
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Barabati
Raibania
Ahom dynasty
Talatal Ghar
Kareng Ghar
Rang Ghar
Garchuk Lachit Garh
Kakatiya dynasty
Warangal
Bahmani Sultanate
Bidar
Gulbarga

Authority control: National libraries  
United States

Coordinates: .mw-parser-output .geo-default,.mw-parser-output .geo-dms,.mw-parser-output .geo-dec{display:inline}.mw-parser-output .geo-nondefault,.mw-parser-output .geo-multi-punct{display:none}.mw-parser-output .longitude,.mw-parser-output .latitude{white-space:nowrap}18°31′8.67″N 73°51′19.62″E﻿ / ﻿18.5190750°N 73.8554500°E﻿ / 18.5190750; 73.8554500





